ML 
120 
.  U5 
P54- 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

Boston  Library  Consortium  Member  Libraries 


http://www.archive.org/details/americansongsheeOOwolf 


■PnWnlicd  l>\   I  tij''  \Iinuiis    IJ  trinkl   i1  Si  N"» 


Ai,.i 


.i,'!i  l!<^>  town,  or  a  fine  Summer'*  day, 
u  h,i\).'  p--en.  1  dar  siiy  ; 

■--  .    Wl. ■-.-■,  ,.r    \  on     L'O, 

'  .     :>  -■    i|  ,  1.  a  rouiT  ; 

;,       ■    :i,  i  .       I  Ui  I    r  .1    ,1  V,  l,,|ri, 

!:  ^l    Ofv  witi  c.'  I  L-  > 'HI  to  smile  ; 
^•.vn  as  I  rt';ul  tln'ni  a'oiii;, 
<i;i  !ii.;_t!,(.-r  to  make  up  ir.y  sor-g. 


■Al' 


r 


;  naupt..' 
"  ■•111  l>i 


■  ou* 

■  1  V  ; 


pon  ri  sjiree," 

s-a." 
s  I 'ill  I  ;" 

I'll.av!  ?•• 


'ik  nnii'i 


'  '*noin^ 

■•At  K. 

i-avr  liim'"  "Oa   11. 

A  nliio"'  with  "A  j'^ick'^y  Lat  anii   r-a''!-^r." 

I  ufynu"  *'\Ve  wcru  tiays  anil  t:']-:  -.  :    :-^:'  ■^r," 

e  :it  home  ?"  "ril  l>e  fri>e  anil  u  i-y  ^i  i'!." 

ilil  Ciimirander"  with  "The  ^wonl  of  Hunker  IIIU." 


Tli'jrc  w: 

With  ■■!) 

•■If  y..'ar  |. 

-Atiu  '''A  iiV 

Tlwre  wa^ 

"I  dotrt  th 

"D  .th-y  ihink  of  111 

"Give  lis  b  ick  our  n 

"When  this  Cruel  War  is  over."  "Xo  Iri.-ih  tiecil  np|ily. 

••For,  every  thin;,'  i,s  lovely,  anii  the  Goose  hanss  high." 

"The  Yoniis-  Oal  from  .\'e\v-,Ter.<ev."  ■'Oh  !  wi't  tlmu  be  my  hrlJe  ?  " 

And  "Oft  ii-i  the  .Stilly  Ni^'ht"  "Wi-'ll  alt  take  ,1  lli.ir." 

"Let  me  kiss  him  for  hi3  .Mother,"  '■lie's  a  Gay  Vouns  Garabolier  ;  " 

"I'lO  lioinfT  to  fl;-:ht  niit  ."^i^'el"  and  "Oe  bully  I,a;,'cr-liier." 

'•HiiDki-y  Boy  is  Yankee  Oooille,"  '•When  the  Cannons  loudly  roar  ;  " 

*'We  are  cominfr,  Father  -Mnaham,  six  hundred  thousand  more  '■" 

"III  the  Oayi  when  I  v.a3  liard  up"  with  ••!!¥  5lary  Ann," 

''My  Johnny  was  a  Shoemaker,"  "Or  Any  other  Man  I" 

"The  Capiain  with  lii.s  wliiiiuers"  and  ■•  \nn:e  of  the  Vale," 

Aloni;  will)  '■Old  I'oh  Uiilley,"  "A  riding  on  a  Kail  !'• 

"Kock  nie  to  sleep,  Mather."  "Onins  round  th?  Horn  ;" 

"I'm  not  myself  at  all,"  "Fm  a  Bachelor  forlorn.  ' 

"ilulher,  is  the  Battle  over?''  ''Wii  it  are  the  men  about?" 

"IIow  are  you,  Horace  Greely!"  "Does  your  Wotiier  know  you're  out?'' 

"We  won't  (TO  home  ti'l  morninK,"  with  "The  Hold  Privateer" 
".■\nnie  r.isle"  and  •'Zouave  Johnny"  ••Itiding  in  a  Itai-roail  Kerr; 
•'We  are  ooininir,  Sisler  Mary,"  with  "The  Folks  that  put  in  ,A.ir3." 
•'We  ai-'  niaichiog  f,ion,;"  Willi  '■The  Four-and-Thirty  Stars." 
"On  the  oilier  ti  li-  of  .Ionian"  "Doii't  fly  your  Kite  loo  hi  ;li  I' 
"Jenny's  coininR  n'rr  the  Gree'i."  lo  '•Hoot.  !Io;i  or  die  I" 
"t'ur  linii'Ti's  Siarry  iianifer."  •■'flie  Flai;  i''f  \^'a.•-hin:::ton." 
Shsll  lloat  victorious  o'er  the  land,  from  .Maine  to  Oregon  ! 


AMERICAN  SONG  SHEETS 

SLIP  BALLADS  AND 
POETICAL  BROADSIDES 

1850  - 1870 

A  Catalogue  of  the  Collection 

of 
The  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia 


BY  EDWIH  WOLF  2ND 


Philadelphia 
The  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia 

1963 


PiUti      l4?       (JvuJiJn, 


^i 


i^i'i' 


The  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia  expresses  its  appreciation 
of  the  help  given  in  making  this  publication  possible  by  Elsie  O.  and 
Philip  D.  Sang,  of  River  Forest,  Illinois. 


MUSIC  LIBRARY 

ML 

■IZO 


MSPS^ 


Distributed  by  Kraus  Reprint  Corporation,  New  York,  N.Y. 


Introduction 


A  fad  in  American  life  produced  a  shower  of  song 
sheets,  slip  ballads  and  poetical  broadsides.  Although 
such  sheets  had  been  printed  by  enterprising  publishers 
for  centuries,  it  was  not  until  about  1850  that  it  became 
big  small-business.  Then,  to  meet  a  growing  popular 
demand  sheets,  which  had  once  been  printed  by  the  score, 
appeared  by  the  thousands.    They  were  run  off  in  large 
editions,  sold  wholesale  to  dealers  and  sold  retail  by 
hawkers  and  in  stationery  shops  and  book  stores.  The 
peak  of  their  popularity  was  reached  during  the  Civil 
War  the  issues  and  events  of  which  offered  fertile  seeds 
for  the  flowering  of  poetry,  verse  and  doggerel.  Grad- 
ually after  the  war,  the  rage  for  song  sheets  seems  to 
have  died  down,  although  they  did  appear  in  plainer  and 
cheaper  form  for  years  thereafter. 

To  some  extent  songs  were  expected  to  fill  the  emo- 
tional needs  of  people  during  times  of  tenseness:  patri- 
otic songs  to  march  to,  ballads  of  battle  to  boast  of,  sen- 
timental songs  to  while  away  hours  around  campfires  or 
bring  tears  to  Victorian  eyes,  comic  songs  to  fetch  a 
laugh,  bitter  satirical  songs  to  relieve  feelings,  and  old 
favorites  just  because  people  liked,  and  still  like,  to  sing 
them.  As  a  result  thousands  of  different  song  sheets 
were  printed.  Unlike  sheet  music  designed  for  the  singer 
or  Instrumentalist  who  could  read  the  notes,  song  sheets 
were  for  the  thousands  to  whom  the  tunes  were  familiar- 
one  old  tune  covered  a  multitude  of  songs— but  the  words 
new. 

As  you've  walked  through  the  town,  on  a  fine 

Summer's  day. 
The  subject  I've  got,  you  have  seen,  I  dare  say: 
Upon  fences  and  railings,  wherever  you  go. 
You'll  see  the  penny -ballads  sticking  up,  in  a  row: 

so  began  another  of  those  penny  ballads  ealled  "Song  of 
All  Songs".  The  continuing  verses  give  some  idea  of  the 
ubiquity  and  variety  of  the  song  sheets. 

There  was  "Abraham's  Daughter" 

"Going  out  upon  a  spree," 
With  "Old  Uncle  Snow" 

"In  the  Cottage  by  the  sea." 
"If  your  foot  is  pretty,  show  it" 

"At  Lannigan's  Ball;" 
And  "Why  did  she  leave  him" 

"On  the  raging  Canawl?" 
There  was  "Bonnie  Annie" 

with  "A  jockey  hat  and  feather." 
"I  don't  think  much  of  you" 

"We  were  boys  and  girls  together." 
"Do  they  think  of  me  at  home?" 

"I'll  be  free  and  easy  still." 
"Give  us  back  our  old  Commander" 

with  "The  Sword  of  Bunker  Hill." 
"When  this  Cruel  War  is  over," 

"No  Irish  need  apply." 
"For  every  thing  is  lovely, 

and  the  Goose  hangs  high." 
"The  Young  Gal  from  New-Jersey." 

"Oh  wilt  thou  be  my  bride?" 
And  "Oft  in  the  Stilly  Night" 

"We'll  all  take  a  Ride." 
"Let  me  kiss  him  for  his  Mother," 


"He's  a  Gay  Young  Gambolier;" 
"I'm  going  to  fight  mit  Sigel" 

and  "De  bully  Lager-bier." 
"Hunkey  Boy  is  Yankee  Doodle." 

"When  the  Cannons  loudly  roar;" 
"We  are  coming.  Father  Abraham, 

six  hundred  thousand  more!" 

And  the  songs  poured  out,  if  not  six  hundred  thousand 
more,  at  least  by  the  hundred  score. 

We  have  limited  the  scope  of  this  catalogue  to  the  peak 
years  of  variety,  interest  and  popularity.  Since  very  few 
of  the  sheets  are  dated,  we  have  had  to  rely  upon  internal 
evidence  and  typographical  appearance  in  order  to  keep 
our  entries  within  the  years  1850-70.  We  may  inadvert- 
ently have  slipped  over  the  bounds  on  both  ends,  but  the 
overwhelming  number  of  sheets  listed  herein  were  pro- 
duced during  the  three  decades  of  turbulence,  war  and 
reconstruction.  They  are  crammed  with  informal,  self- 
revealing  comments  upon  the  political,  military,  social 
and  economic  life  of  the  era.  They  are  ephemera  more 
pregnant  with  the  essence  of  the  times  than  most  chron- 
icles. Since  these  song  sheets  have  been  overlooked  or 
neglected  by  all  but  a  very  few  scholars  and  collectors, 
the  Library  Company  has  felt  it  important  to  present 
them  to  a  wide  public  in  a  methodical  catalogue.  It  is 
our  hope  that  they  will  become  known  as  illustrative  of  a 
whole  generation  of  Americans  a  century  ago.  It  is  fur- 
ther our  hope  that  they  will  call  attention  to  the  rich 
Civil  War  collection  of  the  Library  Company  of  Phila- 
delphia. 

The  most  active  publishers  of  these  ephemera  seem 
to  have  been  A.  W.  Auner  and  J.  H.  Johnson,  of  Philadel- 
phia, J.  Andrews,  his  successor  H.  De  Marsan,  Charles 
Magnus  and  J.  Wrigley,  of  New  York,  and  H.  Partridge, 
of  Boston.  There  were,  of  course,  many  others'whose 
pieces  are  represented  here.  During  the  period  covered, 
it  would  seem  likely  that  some  sheets  were  printed  in 
most  of  the  printing  centers  from  New  England  to  Calif- 
ornia.  For  instance,  the  productions  of  D.  Kimball  &  Co. 
and  G.  W.  Griffith,  of  Providence,  only  one  of  which  is  in 
this  catalogue,  are  to  be  found  in  greater  numbers  at 
Brown  University.  Some  local  retailers,  such  as  Astley 
of  New  Bedford  and  Boyd  of  San  Francisco  (who  also  pub- 
lished under  his  own  name),  stamped  their  imprints  on 
pieces  bought  in  lots  from  the  main  supplier. 

The  sheets  flowed  from  the  presses.  Johnson  may  have 
been  a  pioneer  in  the  large-scale  printing  of  songs,  for, 
in  a  broadside  catalogue,  issued  a  few  years  before  the 
Civil  War,  he  boasted:  "My  prices  for  songs  are  lower 
and  my  assortment  is  larger  by  Two  Hundred  Songs  than 
any  other  Publisher."  One  of  his  later  posters,  patriotic- 
ally overprinted  on  a  colored  flag,  announced,  "All  the 
New  and  Popular  Sentimental,  Comic,  Ethiopian,  National 
and  Naval  Songs,"  over  600  different  ones,  and  new  ones 
being  constantly  printed.  At  Brown  University  there  are 
sixteen  bound  volumes  each  containing  a  hundred  sheets 
comprising  the  contents  of  successive  lists  (Nos.  1,  3-6, 
8-18)  published  by  Andrews  and  De  Marsan.  The  latter 
reprinted  hundreds  of  Andrew's  songs  changing  only  the 
border.  Wrigley's  twelfth  list  of  "one  hundred  different 
kinds"  took  his  serially  numbered  sheets  up  to  1,200. 


Some  of  his  gave  double  value,  for  Wrigley  occasionally 
printed  a  song  on  both  recto  and  verso. 

Most  of  the  songs— although  poetical  broadsides  and 
slip  ballads  are  included  in  this  catalogue,  they  are  few 
in  proportion  to  the  song-sheets— were  issued  on  cheap 
paper  within  woodcut  or  type  ornament  borders.  But 
firms  such  as  James  D.  Gay,  J.  Magee  and  Wm.  A. 
Stephens,  of  Philadelphia,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  of  Washington, 
and  Charles  Magnus,  particularly  Magnus,  put  out  sheets 
of  tar  higher  quality,  printed  on  letter  paper  and  almost 
invariably  illustrated  with  a  colored  headpiece.  Since 
the  vignettes,  battle  scenes,  portraits,  views  and  other 
decorations  are  generally  identical  with  those  used  on 
envelopes,  illustrated  song  sheets  have  been  brought  a 
step  out  of  limbo  by  the  philatelic  collectors  of  "patri- 
otic covers",  notably  George  N.  Malpass  and  Raymond 
Marsh.  Malpass,  in  The  Collectors  Club  Philatelist 
(Vol.  XXXII),  listed  211  different  designs  used  by  Magnus 
on  399  sheets. 

We  have  found  and  illustrated  304  different  designs . 
They  include  portraits  of  Lincoln,  Washington  and  many 
Civil  War  generals,  state  seals  (the  possible  permuta- 
tions and  combinations  of  state  seals  and  different  male 
and  female  figures  are  astronomical),  flags,  cannons  and 
eagles,  views  of  cities,  maps  and  battle  scenes. 

We  have  discovered  that  many  of  the  views  and  battle 
scenes,  approximately  three  by  five  inches,  printed  as 
series,  are  actually  overlapping  parts  of  large  panoramic 
plates.  For  instance,  the  twelve  views  of  the  Battle  of 
Gettysburg  can  be  put  together  to  form  a  single  scene, 
and  this  large  print  was  actually  issued  by  Magnus.  The 
techniques  of  combinations  of  two  elements  (as  a  seal 
and  a  figure)  and  of  parvum  ex  magno  enabled  Magnus  to 
provide  a  great  variety  of  headpieces.  He  advertised: 
"Civil  War  Illustrations  (over  1,000  kinds)  printed  on 
Note  Paper,  as  headings  for  Songs  and  on  Envelops 
[sic].  Evidence  of  the  immense  assortment  will  strike 
you  at  once,  if  you  only  look  at  the  100  different  battle 
scenes,  illustrating  that  one  song  "When  this  cruel  war 
is  over'."   (There  are  only  six  of  the  hundred  in  this  col- 
lection.) Malpass  lists  fourteen  different  headpieces  for 
"Yankee  Volunteer"  and  twelve  for  "Home  Without  a 
Mother,"  more  than  half  of  them  from  the  same  series 
of  camp  views.  We  have  noted  a  number  of  decorative 
pieces  used  many  times  and  varied  by  comparatively 
slight  changes  in  the  plate. 

The  illustrations  chosen  by  Magnus  for  his  songs  were 
frequently  apt,  sometimes  merely  colorful.' "Wanted— a 
Substitute"  displays  a  picket  post  at  a  Virginia  farm- 
house, "My  Northern  Boy  to  the  War  has  gone"  a  scene 
from  the  Battle  of  Pittsburgh  Landing,  "Let  Me  Kiss  Him 
for  his  Mother"  a  mother  supporting  her  daughter  and 
an  ai^el  holding  a  dying  (or  sleeping)  soldier,  "Marching 
Along"  cavalry  crossing  the  Rappahannock,  "The  Monitor 
and  the  Merrimack"  quite  appropriately  the  fight  between 
the  ironclads.  Magnus's  battle  scenes  did  yeomen  ser- 
vice; an  illustration,  lithographed  originally  as  part  of 
the  series  of  the  first  Battle  of  Bull  Run,  was  used  for 
the  "Battle  of  Lookout  Mountain"  and  "Battle  of  Gettys- 
burg". 

While  the  ordinary  sheets  were  inexpensive,  the  pic- 
torial note  paper  songs  were  not.  Johnson  sold  his  plain 
ones  for  a  penny  retail,  and  wholesale  "to  dealers  by  the 
1,000,  100  or  Doz.  as  low  as  published  in  the  United 
States."  Hardwick,  whose  songs  were  usually  decorated 
only  with  stock  patriotic  cuts,  advertised:  "Soldiers  can 
receive  14  of  our  beautifully  illustrated  Ballads,  on  re- 
ceipt of  50  cents."  According  to  a  frequently  reprinted 
note  of  Magnus,  ten  of  his  sheets  would  be  mailed  to  any 
address  upon  receipt  of  50  cents,  in  other  words,  the 


price  of  a  good  cigar  or  glass  of  beer  apiece.  Magnus 
also  issued  them  as  pamphlets  in  accordion  form  in  sev- 
eral series  as  "Six  Military  and  Patriotic  Illustrated 
Songs".  These  are  printed  on  light  cardboard  and  the 
individual  songs  bear  no  imprint.  We  have  not  included 
these  printings. 

That  the  songsheets,  particularly  the  illustrated  ones, 
were  collected  at  the  time  is  evidenced  by  Gay's  adver- 
tisement on  a  special  envelope  to  hold  the  sheets:  "Illus- 
trated Army  Songs,  Published  expressly  for  the  use  of 

Soldiers  of  the  Union  Army Over  500  Beautiful 

and  Popular  songs.  Including  Songs  on  all  the  great  bat- 
tles and  different  states,  composed  by  Gay;  Lithographed 
and  Printed  in  good  style,  on  double  sheets  of  best  qual- 
ity note  paper;  .  .  .Price  5  Cents  each.  Persons  getting 
up  a  collection  should  have  the  whole  assortment."   It 
should  be  noted  that  Gay  had  an  arrangement  with  Magnus 
whereby  Gay  was  permitted  to  use  the  latter's  headpieces 
for  his  own  songs.  Henry  De  Marsan  wrote  in  a  letter  of 
April  9,  1864  to  John  A.  McAllister,  Jr.,  an  indefatigable 
contemporary  collector  of  ephemera,  to  whom  the  Library 
Company  owes  most  of  its  Civil  War  material:  "I  have 
published  about  290  different  Songs  that  have  been  pro- 
duced since  the  present  Civil  war  commenced;  they  are 
all  of  a  patriotic  character  according  to  the  two  political 
parties  &  are  connected  with  this  War.  I  would  not  col- 
lect them  and  send  them  at  less  than  50  cts  per  hundred, 
freight  or  postage  not  included."   A  bill  from  the  Phila- 
delphia stationery  firm  of  Harbach  &  Bro .,  dated  thirteen 
days  later,  shows  that  McAllister  paid  three  dollars  for 
"8  doz  Union  Songs".  On  August  2,  1865  (after  the  war 
excitement  was  over),  Geo.  P.  Hardwick  told  the  collector 
that  for  seven  dollars  he  would  send  "five  hundred  as- 
sorted songs  including  one  hundred  Sherman  if  you  like." 
The  Library  Company  acquired  the  McAllister  Civil  War 
Scrapbooks  in  1886. 

So  much  has  been  written  on  the  music  and  words  of 
the  better  known  songs  of  the  period  that  it  would  be  im- 
pertinent of  me  to  attempt  a  survey  in  this  preface. 
Those  interested  in  the  authors,  composers,  and  histo- 
ries of  the  songs  I  refer  to  Irwin  Silber's  Songs  of  the 
Civil  War,  published  by  Columbia  University  Press  in 
1960.  At  the  end  of  his  work  Mr.  Silber  has  included  an 
excellent  bibliography  which  will  lead  the  student  on  to 
even  more  specialized  and  detailed  studies. 

Something,  however,  should  be  said  of  the  aspects  of 
the  songs  not  generally  written  about.  The  aesthetically 
superior  and  more  widely  sung  verses  have  been  dis- 
cussed elsewhere.  Yet,  a  somewhat  different  impression 
emerges  from  the  literally  thousands  of  song  sheets:   tne 
picture  of  what  was  popular  then  (rather  than  what  folk- 
singers  have  made  popular  today),  the  diversity  of  the 
subject  matter  and  the  sheer  quantity  of  doggerel. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  twenty -year  boom  in  song 
sheets,  old  favorites  were  in  the  majority,  sweet  songs 
like  "Annie  Laurie"  and  "Home  Sweet  Home",  patriotic 
songs  like  "Hail  Columbia"  and  "The  Star  Spangled 
Banner",  sentimental  songs  like  "Annie  Lisle"  and 
"What  is  Home  Without  A  Mother",  and  hundreds  of 
others.  In  the  1850s  songs  of  topical  interest  began  to 
appear  with  greater  frequency,  swelling  into  a  torrent  of 
tears,  blood  and  battles  during  the  Civil  War,  and  taper- 
ing off  again  thereafter.  It  was  these  jingles  written  for 
a  moment  in  time  which  seem  most  fascinating  today. 
They  tell  us  more  of  the  plain  people,  what  they  were 
interested  in,  how  they  dressed,  what  their  pleasures 
were  and  why  they  were  pained.  They  are,  in  a  way,  a 
social  history  of  the  times. 

Historical  events  were  reduced  in  the  songs  from 
heroic  images  to  life-size.  The  steady  flow  of  fortune- 


seekers  to  California  in  the  decade  after  the  discovery  of 
gold  was  reflected  in  "The  California  Emigrant",  "The 
Gold  Digger's  Lament",  and  "I'm  Off  to  California". 
The  success  of  Drake's  gusher  in  1859  and  the  subse- 
quent oil  booms  and  busts  were  given  voice  in  "Pa  has 
struck  lie",  "Oil  on  the  Brain",  "Kole  Oil  Tommy"  and 
"Striking  He".  The  subjects  of  popular  journalism  were 
"immortalized"  in  songs.  The  famous  case  of  the  mur- 
der of  the  dentist  Harvey  Burdell  and  the  suspicion  cast 
upon  his  inamorata,  who  produced  a  heir  said  to  be  his, 
were  celebrated  in  1857  in  "The  Bellevue  Baby  Mrs. 
Cunningham  Adopted"  and  "Mrs.  Cunningham  and  the 
Baby".  The  same  year  another  shocker  "The  Murdered 
Policeman,  Eugene  Anderson,  who  was  shot  by  the  Des- 
perate Italian  Burglar,  Michael  Cancemi"  appeared  in 
print.  "The  Killed  by  the  Accident  on  the  North  Pennsyl- 
vania Rail  Road"  is  a  ballad  of  one  of  the  nation's  worst 
rail  accidents,  which  took  place  on  July  17,  1856,  and 
"Sad  Times"  chronicled  the  burning  of  the  steamboat 
New  Jersey. 

Contests  of  any  kind  were  ripe  subjects  for  the  song- 
ster. Political  campaigns  received  top  billing.   "Ninth 
Ward  Song"  was  a  1856  paean  in  favor  of  Fremont.  The 
"Republican  Campaign  Song"  was  used  by  the  Lincolnites 
in  1860  and  1864;  and  "Rally  for  Breckenridge  and  Lane" 
and  "Bell  and  Everett,  and  the  Union"  were  sung  by  Old 
Abe's  opposition  in  the  earlier  election.  If  songs  had 
been  ballots  Lincoln  would  not  have  won  a  second  term. 
A  quick  glance  through  the  sheets  would  seem  to  indicate 
that  for  every  one  speaking  well  of  Lincoln  there  were 
two  which  lauded  McClellan  more  highly. 

As  a  military  figure,  the  general  was  given  his  share 
of  poetical  glory  early  in  the  war.  "Give  Us  Back  Our 
Old  Commander"  was  the  most  frequently  printed  song 
about  him: 

Give  us  back  our  old  Commander, 

Little  Mac,  the  people's  pride; 
Let  the  army  and  the  nation 

In  their  choice  be  satisfied; 


Lincoln's  great  on  Proclamations, 

Stanton  councels  Uncle  Sam, 
Halleck  does  as  their  adviser. 

Generals :  some  -  a  perfect  sham. 

In  the  election  of  1864  this  song  was  revived  and  dozens 
more  composed  praising  "Little  Mac"  and  defaming 
"Honest  Abe".  One  of  the  most  vicious  of  the  latter  was 
"I  am  Fighting  for  the  Nigger": 

Three  for  Honest  Abe, 

he  will  be  a  great  man  yet. 
Though  he  has  loaded  us  with  taxes, 

and  burdened  us  with  debt; 
He  often  tells  us  little  jokes, 

when  pocketing  our  pelf. 
And,  at  last,  has  made  the  nigger 

the  equal  of  himself. 

There  would  seem  to  be  little  connection  between  elec- 
tions and  prize-fighting,  but  John  C.  Heenan,  known  in 
professional  circles  as  "Benicia  Boy",  was  such  a  link. 
As  a  result  of  his  strong-arm  work  in  elections,  he  won 
a  sinecure  in  the  customs  service  and  a  career  in  the 
ring.  His  fight  with  Sayers  in  England  on  April  17,  1860 
was  officially  declared  a  draw,  but  had  been,  in  fact,  a 
victory  for  Heenan.  The  authors  of  "Ballad  in  Answer  to 
Sayers,  England's  Pride",  "The  Fight  for  the  Champion- 
ship", and  "Heenan  the  Champion  of  the  World"  claimed 
the  victory  vehemently.  Other  great  fighters  provided 


material  for  balladeers.  "Rough  and  Tumble"  told  of  the 
match  between  Poole  and  Morrissey;  and  "Bradley  & 
Rankin's  Prize  Fight  for  1,000  dollars  a  Side"  celebrated 
the  bruising  day  of  August  1,  1857  at  Port  Albino,  Canada. 

Fires,  firemen  (each  fire  company  seemed  to  have  its 
song),  and  riots  had  their  share  as  the  subjects  of  sheets. 
The  difficulties  of  the  pre-civil  War  were  echoed  in  such 
songs  as  "Specie,  We  have  Missed  You",  a  dirge  on  the 
depression  of  1857,  and  "Paddy's  Fight  With  the  Know- 
Nothings",  a  record  of  the  brief  but  violent  upsurge  of 
the  nativist  American  party. 

This  brings  us  to  a  phenomenon,  not  sufficiently  recog- 
nized, the  tremendous  influence  of  the  Irish  upon  Amer- 
ican songs  and  ballads  during  the  period.  For  two  dec- 
ades before  1860  the  immigration  of  Irishmen  into  the 
United  States  was  of  vast  proportions.  It  was  then  that 
the  huge  Irish  populations  of  the  large  Eastern  cities 
came  into  being.  "Paddy  on  the  Canal"  and  "Mick  upon 
the  Railroad"  express  the  prompt  use  made  of  the  new 
reservoir  of  cheap  labor.  But,  there  were  growing  pains 
that  a  foreign-born  group  had  to  suffer  in  the  process  of 
assimilation  into  the  American  culture.  The  Irish  were 
mocked  by  their  enemies  and  praised  by  their  friends. 
And  the  sweet  body  of  Irish  songs  was  added  to  the  voice 
of  the  nation. 

It  has  always  been  a  popular  legend  that  nobody  loves 
a  fight  like  an  Irishman,  and  when  the  war  broke  out  the 
Irish  joined  up  by  the  thousands.  It  should  be  noted,  too, 
that  since  most  of  them  were  still  at  a  low  economic 
level  they  could  not  buy  out  of  the  draft,  as  did  many  of 
the  more  affluent  Americans.  In  fact,  the  Irish  more 
frequently  than  others  took  the  bounty  offered  by  those 
seeking  a  substituted  In  April,  1861,  the  69th  New  York 
State  Militia— the  Fighting  69th,  famous  in  many  wars- 
was  mustered  into  service,  and  went  off  to  Arlington 
Heights  to  face  the  Confederates  threatening  Washington. 
A  host  of  songs  celebrating  this  and  other  Irish  regiments 
began  to  appear. 

One  of  the  most  celebrated  and  sung-about  figures  of 
the  day  was  Colonel  Michael  Corcoran,  the  commander 
of  the  69th.  A  true  son  of  Erin,  Corcoran,  in  the  fall  of 
1860  refused  to  parade  his  regiment  on  the  occasion  of 
the  visit  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  New  York.  A  court- 
martial  was  ordered,  but  the  outbreak  of  hostilities  saw 
the  colonel  off  with  his  men  to  war.  The  69th  fought  its 
first  major  battle  at  Bull  Run  as  part  of  Sherman's 
brigade.  It  charged  repeatedly,  bravely,  but  in  vain, 
against  Jackson's  line  drawn  up  on  the  crest  of  a  hill, 
and  finally  was  drawn  back.  In  the  debacle  which  fol- 
lowed upon  McClellan's  retreat.  Colonel  Corcoran, 
wounded  in  the  leg,  was  captured.  He  became  the  hero 
of  "Col.  Corcoran  and  the  Prince  of  Wales,"  "Corcoran 
to  His  Regiment,  Or  'I  Would  not  Take  Parole'  ",  and 
a  score  of  other  ballads,  only  topping  the  stature  of  Cap- 
tain Thomas  F.  Meagher  of  the  Zouaves  by  a  few  verses. 

It  was  Meagher  who  took  the  initiative  to  form  the 
Irish  Brigade  when  the  Union  Army  was  reformed  after 
Bull  Run,  and  thereafter  the  green  regimental  flags  with 
the  golden  harp  and  the  brigade  insignia  of  a  red  sham- 
rock appeared  in  battle  after  battle.  This  may  seem  like 
a  long  explanation  of  the  appearance  of  so  many  Irish 
songs,  but  the  preponderance  of  them  seems  to  have 
been  passed  over  by  many  commentators  on  the  times. 
Heroic,  comic  and  sentimental  Irish  songs  were  printed 
by  the  hundreds— "Banks  of  Sligo",  "The  Boys  of  Kil- 
kenny," "The  Colleen  Bawn",  "Jack  Lannigan's  Wake", 
"The  Irish  Volunteer",  and  no  less  than  seventeen  dif- 
ferent ones  with  "Paddy"  as  the  first  word  in  the  title. 

Even  during  the  war,  however,  the  overtones  of  social 
prejudice  were  heard.  The  bitterness  is  obvious  in  the 
song  "No  Irish  Need  Apply". 


I'm  a  dacint  boy, 

just  landed  from  the  town  of  Ballyfad: 
I  want  a  situation  - 

yis,  and  want  it  mighty  bad. 
I  saw  a  place  advertised  - 

"It's  the  thing  for  me,"  says  I. 
But  the  dirty  spalpeen  ended  - 

"No  Irish  need  apply." 


Ould  Ireland  on  the  battle-field 

a  lasting  fame  has  made; 
We  all  have  heard  of  Meager 's  men, 

and  Corcoran' s  brigade 
Though  fools  may  flout  and  bigots  rave, 

and  fanatics  may  cry. 
Yet  when  they  want  good  fighting  men, 

the  Irish  may  apply. 

Amid  the  patriotic  shouting  the  voice  of  satire  frequently 
came  through. 

It  may  be  that  we  get  a  clearer  picture  of  the  age  from 
the  satire  than  we  do  from  the  obvious  heroics.  All  very 
well  to  encourage  and  uplift  were  the  ballads,  "How 
Sherman's  Veterans  Took  Atlanta",  "How  Sherman 
Whipped  Longstreet",  General  Grant's  Victory  at  Chat- 
tanooga", "Monitor  and  Merrimack",  and  such.  Many 
men  were  concerned  about  the  draft  and  the  obvious  in- 
equity by  which  one  who  could  afford  it  could  buy  out. 
The  violent  draft  riots  expressed  this  feeling,  and  so  did 
the  song  "The  Draft  is  A  Coming". 

Every  body's  feeling  berry  lonesome: 
For,  dey  spec'  de  draft  to  cum; 
For,  when  de  draft  goes  in  operation, 
Dey'll  call  on  ebery  one; 
But  rec'lect  some  had  free  hundred. 
An'  those  dat  hab  got  to  do  de  fighting. 
Are  de  poor  dat  hab  to  go. 

It  seems  strange  in  a  day  when  draft  evasion  is  looked  on 
as  contemptible  to  look  back  a  century  to  the  Civil  War 
and  realize  that  it  was  acceptable  according  to  the  mores 
of  the  1860s. 

To  be  sure  there  was  humor  too.  Frequent  parodies 
were  the  laughing  reverse  of  a  weepy  sentimental  coin, 
characteristic  of  which  was  "Put  My  Little  Shoes  Away". 
"Mickey's  Dead-Broke  at  the  Door"  made  mild  fun  of 
"Brother's  Fainting  at  the  Door".  Drinking  songs  were 
common,  and  liquor  and  the  free-handed  drinking  thereof 
were  subjects  for  laughter.  "Don't  Mix  Your  Liquor, 
Boys  but  Always  Take  it  Neat"  and  "Whiskey,  Your  a 
Villyan"  were  typical.  The  number  of  Irish  dialect 
songs,  as  noted,  was  legion.  There  were  also  some 
which  reflected  the  German  immigration,  up  to  then 
second  in  size  only  to  the  Irish,  such  as  "Johnny 
Schmoker",  "Der  Deltcher's  Dog",  and  "Hans  Dunder 
has  Gone  for  a  Soldier." 

As  now,  even  during  the  Civil  War  "high  style"  evoked 
mirth.  There  were  the  "Red  Petticoat"  and  fancy  bon- 
nets in  "New  Other  Side  of  Jordan,"  an  innovation  in 
"My  Gum  A-Rubber  Boots",  and  great  trailing  bustles  in 
"The  Original  Water-Fall".  "My  Moustache  is  Growing" 
laughed  at  the  teenagers  of  the  1860s.  The  singers,  many 
of  them  the  popular  Ethiopian  minstrels,  sang  their  dit- 
ties to  tremendous  applause— it  was  usually  so  phrased 
—in  the  most  famous  music  halls  of  the  day.  Whatever 
was  liew,  popular,  or  happened  to  strike  the  public  fancy 
was  the  subject  of  a  song,  a  "Visit  to  Barnum's  Museum", 
the  "Tax-Bill",  or,  as  featured  in  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin, 
"Oh,  I'se  So  Wicked".   For  those  who  find  it  difficult  to 
believe  that  there's  nothing  new  under  the  sun  we  cite  a 


things-aren't-what-they-used-to-be  verse  from  "Our 
Grandfathers  Days": 

The  gals  didn't  paint, 

stuff  themselves  up  with  cotton, 
They  didn't  wear  hoops,  patent  bustles  or  stays. 
Didn't  smoke  cigarettes, 

or  drink  cocktails  at  Taylor's; 
That  wasn't  the  style  in  our  grandfathers'  days. 

If  the  war  itself  seems  to  be  passed  over  somewhat 
cursorily  in  these  prefatory  remarks,  it  is  because  this 
aspect  of  song  and  balladry  has  been  so  thoroughly  com- 
mented on  by  others.  Yet,  since  we  did  mention  Corcoran 
and  Meagher,  we  should  note  the  effusion  of  patriotic 
sentiment  which  resounded  through  the  North  upon  the 
death  of  the  gallant,  young,  colorful,  Colonel  Ellsworth. 
When  Ellsworth's  company  of  Zouaves  occupied  Alex- 
andria on  May  24,  1861,  the  commander  saw  the  Confed- 
erate flag  flying  over  the  Marshall  House.  He  entered 
the  building,  tore  down  the  flag,  and,  coming  down  the 
stairs,  was  shot  by  the  proprietor  of  the  hotel.  He  be- 
came the  first  "martyr"  of  the  Union  cause.  "Ellsworth 
Requiem",  "Ellsworth's  Avengers",  "Death  of  Col. 
Elmer  E.  Ellsworth,"  "Ellsworth's  Body  Lies  Moulder- 
ing", and  "Columbia  Mourns  for  Ellsworth"  were  some 
of  the  sheets  which  memorialized  his  death.  Four  years 
later  there  were  no  more  dashing  young  volunteers  in 
red  and  blue  uniforms.  It  was  a  long,  hard,  and  sad  war. 
The  final  burst  of  song  told  of  Sherman's  march  to  the 
sea,  the  assassination  of  Lincoln,  the  capture  of  Jeff 
Davis  and  "When  Johnny  Comes  Marching  Home". 

This  rather  long  dissertation  on  songs  published  in  the 
North  is  not  meant  to  imply  that  there  were  no  Southern 
songs.  There  were,  but  the  Confederacy  did  not  have  the 
printing  houses,  the  paper  or  the  publishers  the  Union 
had.  "Maryland,  My  Maryland",  "The  Bonnie  Blue 
Flag",  and,  of  course,  "Dixie"  were  on  thousands  of 
Southern  lips  throughout  the  war.  And  there  was  a  gen- 
erous exchange  of  songs,  with  words  changed  to  match 
the  allegiance  of  the  singers.  Northern  parodies  of 
Southern  songs  and  vice  versa  were  common. 

Most  of  the  Confederate  songs  were  issued  without  any 
imprint  and  without  the  benefit  of  the  commercial  appeals 
made  by  Gay,  Johnson,  Magnus  and  Wrigley.  A  great 
many  seem  to  have  been  issued  clandestinely  in  Balti- 
more where,  if  not  the  majority,  a  large  minority  favored 
the  rebellion.  As  a  result,  the  largest  collection  of  such 
songs  is  to  be  found  at  Evergreen  House  of  Johns  Hopkins 
University,  a  collection  made  contemporaneously  by  one 
of  the  members  of  the  Garrett  family.  Other  Southern 
sheets  came  off  presses  in  cities  like  Richmond,  and 
one  in  this  collection,  composed  at  a  camp  near  Manas- 
sas, July  5,  1861,  has  the  pencil  note,  "Printed  in  Lee's 
Army' ' . 

Flag-waving,  high  courage,  God  and  country  figured 
prominently  in  most  of  them.  "God  and  Liberty"  is 
typical : 

In  the  name  of  God !  Amen ! 

Stand  for  our  Southern  rights; 
On  your  side  Southern  men. 

The  God  of  battles  fights ! 

In  the  South,  the  invaded  country,  there  were  fewer  ex- 
pressions of  humor.  The  war  was  grim.  The  Yankee 
was  the  aggressor,  the  tyrant.  These  feelings  show  in 
every  line  of  "It  is  I": 

They  come,  they  come,  -  a  motley  crew. 

For  rapine,  rape  and  plunder  met; 
From  different  realms  of  every  hue. 

The  olive,  yellow,  white  and  jet; 


The  princely  loom-lord  and  his  servile  loot, 
By  sea  and  land  they  come  -  on  horse,  on  foot 

Lincoln  was  mocked  and  execrated,  as  in  "Lincoln  on  a 
Rail"  and  "Lines  on  the  Proclamation  Issued  by  the 
Tyrant  Lincoln".   Lee,  Johnston  and  Beauregard,  par- 
ticularly the  last  who  seemed  to  hold  the  hopes  of  the 
Confederacy  in  the  earliest  year  of  the  war,  were  praised 
to  the  skies.  The  dead  were  mourned;  the  victories  cele- 
brated, as  the  first  Battle  of  Bull  Run: 

We  had  a  little  fun, 

at  the  Battle  of  Bull  Run 
Where  the  Yankees  left  the  battle-field  a  sailing. 
Where  acres  of  them  fell, 

for  we  gave  them  merry 

And  sent  them  to  the  happy  Land  of  Canaan. 

Let  us  end  on  a  happy  note,  for  during  all  the  bitter- 
ness happy  songs  were  sung,  too.   Many  delightful  folk 
songs  found  their  way  into  print  through  the  medium  of 
song  sheets.  "Nancy  Till",  "O  Dearest  Dine",  and 
"Swash  Shay,  Hands  Across"  were  some  of  them.  Dan 
Emmett,  the  author  of  "Dixie",  was  responsible  for  the 
minstrel  song  "High  Daddy": 

The  sun's  gone  down  to  take  a  little  sleep, 
I  met  High  Daddy  in  the  morning; 
The  moon's  come  out  to  take  another  peep; 
I  met  High  Daddy  and  I  wont  go  home  any  more, 
any  more. 

And,  there  is  an  overtone  of  beatnik  jargon  in  "Clap  Your 
Hands  Till  Daddy  Comes  Home": 

The  fattest  baby  I  every  saw 

Was  a  baby  that  come  from  Arkansas. 

'Twas  as  fat  and  black  as  a  Thomas  cat. 
Crying  for  his  Daddy  O. 


METHOD 

The  difficulty  in  compiling  this  catalogue  was  in  keeping 
the  descriptions  short,  yet  sufficiently  detailed  to  permit 
easy  identification.  Since  no  similar  material  has  been 
catalogued  in  print  before,  we  have  had  to  evolve  our  own 
method,  which  we  are  fully  aware  will  not  satisfy  the 
most  meticulous,  but  which  hopefully  will  be  adequate 
for  the  great  majority  of  its  users.  The  entries  do  not 
give  full  bibliographical  details.  We  have  used  abbrevia- 
tions and  certain  short-cuts.  This  is  a  brief  catalogue 
of  the  collection  in  the  possession  of  the  Library  Com- 
pany of  Philadelphia,  which  we  do,  however,  believe  is 
as  large  a  collection  of  such  material  as  exists  today. 

A  typical  entry  consists  of  1)  title;  2)  first  line; 
3)  number  of  verses;  4)  air  to  which  sung;  5)  abbreviated 
information  given  in  sub-title,  heading  or  elsewhere  on 
sheet;  6)  ornament  and/or  illustration;  7)  trim  size. 
Variant  titles  are  noted  under  the  main  entry  with  cross- 
references  to  that  entry.  Where  more  than  one  song  ap- 
pears on  a  sheet,  the  second  song  has  a  cross-reference. 
The  information  concerning  author,  singer,  composer 
and  publisher  of  the  music,  copyright  and  advertisements 
has  been  cut  down  to  the  essentials  for  identification.  No 
publisher's  address  has  been  included  in  the  text,  but  an 
index  of  publishers  with  their  variant  addresses,  keyed 
to  the  text  by  numbers,  appears  at  the  end.  Type  orna- 
ment borders,  except  where  two  different  ones  for  an 
otherwise  similar  sheet  require  more  detail,  are  merely 
noted  as  such.  The  woodcut  or  type-metal  borders  of  De 
Marsan  and  Wrigley  have  been  given  identifying  names 
and  are  illustrated.  The  Magnus  headpieces  have  been 


given  numbers  and  are  keyed  to  the  illustrations .  The 
size  is  the  trim  size  of  the  Library  Company  copy.   The 
Confederate  songs  are  at  the  end  with  a  separate  alphabet 
of  their  own. 

The  following  abbreviations  have  been  used: 


A-J 
adv. 


Auner  and  Johnson 
•  advertisement 


cm.  -  centimeter 
col.  -  colored 
cop.  -  copyright 
hdpc.  -  headpiece 
publ.  -  publisher 
t.o.  -  type  ornament 
vs.  -  verse 

That  some  errors  will  have  crept  into  the  text  in  the 
course  of  the  original  description  and  subsequent  typings, 
in  spite  of  the  careful  checking,  we  accept  as  inevitable. 
We  hope  they  will  be  noticed  with  charity  and  reported 
to  us. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

In  compiling  the  catalogue  we  received  help  from 
many  sources.  James  J.  Heslin  and  the  staff  of  the 
New-York  Historical  Society  were  extremely  generous 
of  their  time.  They  reorganized  their  entire  collection 
of  song  sheets  in  order  to  exchange  duplicates  with  us. 
William  A.  Jackson  and  the  staff  of  the  Houghton  Library 
at  Harvard  showed  us  great  courtesy  by  making  available 
their  collection  to  us .  They,  too,  exchanged  duplicates 
with  the  Library  Company.  We  were  also  able  to  increase 
our  holdings  by  exchange  with  Providence  Public  Library, 
through  the  kindness  of  Stuart  C.  Sherman,  and  the  Gar- 
rett Collection  at  Evergreen  House,  through  the  kindness 
of  Elizabeth  Baer,  and  with  the  collectors,  Lester  A. 
Levy  of  Baltimore,  and  Seymour  Moss  of  Philadelphia. 
We  were  permitted  to  examine  the  collection  of  Brown 
University,  which  is  probably  of  a  size  comparable  with 
that  of  the  Library  Company,  and  the  smaller  collection 
of  the  Free  Library  of  Philadelphia.  Harry  M.  Buten  of 
Merion,  a  collector  of  Magnus,  introduced  us  to  the  phil- 
atelic literature  on  that  publisher.  And  Manuel  Kean  of 
Kean  Archives,  who  took  the  photographs  for  the  illus- 
trations in  this  book,  was  helpful  in  a  dozen  different 
ways  with  the  project,  and  was  always  enthusiastic  about 
it. 

Much  of  the  initial  work  on  the  song  sheets  was  done 
by  Elizabeth  Ingerman,  now  at  Winterthur  Museum,  who 
first  became  excited  by  them  and  began  work  on  their 
arrangement,  classification  and  description.  In  succes- 
sive stages,  Gisela  Matteson,  Mary  Lou  Jones  and  Carol 
Elias  did  the  thankless  chores  of  rearranging,  revising 
and  finally  typing  the  manuscript.  Throughout,  Barney 
Chesnick,  the  Curator  of  the  Library  Company,  and 
Lillian  Tonkin  provided  great  assistance  to  all  of  us  who 
were  working  directly  with  the  mass  of  material  herein 
described.  Finally,  the  Library  Company  is  particularly 
grateful  to  Philip  D.  Sang  of  Chicago  through  whose  imag- 
inative generosity  a  portion  of  the  cost  of  publication  was 
underwritten. 


Edwin  Wolf  2nd 


The  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia 
June  1,  1962 


vii 


A  —  De  Marsan  horned  imp 
B  —  Wrigley  Ethiopian 
C  —  Wrigley  horned  imp 
D  —  De  Marsan  Ethiopian 
E  —  De  Marsan  military  cupid 
F  —  Wrigley  military  cupid 


G  —  De  Marsan  kissing  cupids 
H  —  Wrigley  kissing  cupids 
I  —  Auner-Johnson 
J  —  De  Marsan  trapper 
K  —  Wrigley  moon 
L  —  De  Marsan  musical  instruments 


M  —  De  Marsan  eagle  with  drapery 
N  —  De  Marsan  fountain 
O  —  De  Marsan  ship 
P  —  De  Marsan  eagle 


Q  —  Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike 
R  —  De  Marsan  YanJiee  pedlar 
S  —  De  Marsan  comic  heads 
T  —  De  Marsan  clown 


U  —  De  Marsan  harp 


VIVA  L'AMERICA.// 


I7A    ^ 
VIVAL'AMERI 


;  yi-v'r-  'y\~/ — 1 

%  -^'f^^^^ 

Jj^^f^.  yif\  ..-.  _^ 

"/7bI?sI^^''HA 

VIVA  L'AMERICA. 


D*-^ 


MOTHER, 

Isllx    liMllli   (>>.'l   f 


19 


THE  BANNER  OF  THE  FREE. 


GEK.  SCOTT  «   C}.iron\L  JOHXSM, 


20A 


rW,. 


>X     .  >N,  I  >N. 


THEHLS  A  f.nutj  TIME   COMING 

25A 

SOUTHERM  WAGON. 


iniJllif  l>  n.tTkr.Tin.ndt|(  «J 


f  S  ,.-;;^^".-»i<.       *       'jj 


^^S^'"1!SJ*5^ 


^/  WE  ARE  FOR  THE  UNION 


3/ 


answlr  to 
HVho  ivill  tare  fot  ;tttotlirr  nour  J 


^d 


.■^H 


32 

THE  FLAG 


J6 


SDUTHERI«  WAGOfi 


\-^        uiwruni.  B 

^Ahe  glorious  banner.     I 


UNFURL 


ti^p^ro?;^ 


How  to  close  the  War. 


23A 


^^  - 


32A 

?xir,    COMJMHIA. 


TT" 


^o?tr-'  nr  i  mr^ 


* 

■^ 


37 

3  uoiiUi  lioi  t!i:  \n  ^liviiii). 
THAT'S 


^.justsoir^ 


33 


WASHIiGfOM, 


IIUrV)MIIFli\OW 


^r  .iti- 


J'   _Sjx>,~*Je5 


^  € 


iioif    jiirriilan   irliipiitil    lonsstrrrl.        -   ;{^ 


33A 

mmui 

THE  GLORIGl<S  MNNER. 


'2^  -^' 


3dA 


f),. 


TRAITOR, 

SPARE 

4/6     that  FLAG. 


i^\ 


rn 


45 


39 

tflio  Hill  t.itr  fof  )Hoilirr  noii-  { 


ANSWJ:fl   TO 


I 


51 


41;- 


i 


42 

:  lirml.iii    nliiitpril    Xonnottrri. 


39A 


SOFTLY  NOW.  TENOtRLY 

iift    Hiira    iViih    (i',iit. 


ii  nil  ,11        iMivdl    10    111) 


m 


40 

ANSwtR  ro 
tiho  Hill  (arr  foi  VUDilirr  uoir  * 


43 


my  Ror  was  home  achih. 


_ji;L«_r,-..    :  t  ,1. .   rr 


-i».i-r4U- Htl-i 


fHE    SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS, 

INTO.    Q. 


-^         t 


^"■a 


>    A  Mil  V  t  l->'  »  • 


l^lls«m-lirM  Axiiiti-rs.  ^Q 


sUtthrr,  ^rr  come  hiiinr  lo  dir. 


4IA 


iaUPTtie  BOH/l! 


44 

\\m    ^Iiftidan  irliiiipcil    Xonjisttrfl. 


*hrtm.mo  >H.U(Ii  to  thf  *fa. 

■'■"•     50 


W-   '€1 


i'hfnuin'o  '^Hu(h  lo  the  ?fa 


*«* 


7/0  IHE  SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS. 


^ 


WHE.V  S/IOLV  UT  fSBT£0.        ' 


^    p     THE  BILL  POSTLRS  DBtAB^    OR 


*^_^ 
~  i 


IHE    SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS, 


70ti!i-,'.'r-.tnr.iJTLiS«i»Ta,       ""S"^' j 

'^  VlHE"i  C^DLY  IVE  PAKTEO. 


ANSWER  TO 

Itho    trill  CJtr  fat    '-iHothrr   nou 


7r 


HgME  WITHOUT 


78 
K.  MOtHER. 


THE  SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS,  />/ 

INTO.   a.  w/ 


THE  8ILI,-P0STI;RS  DfltAM    OR         -»  ,— 


THE  99 

DRUMMER  OF  ANTIFfAM, 


iVn.r..i.:';    VHjnl!    10    lilt    i<'^   JfQ 


HOME  WITHOliT  O^ 

1  MOTHER. 


O/l       Jiirim.iii  >..   VU.irtIt  lo  the    ?r, 

F 

liliipWiiitiiBiiw! 


Ill  i..'':".jIjIim 


P/       THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  PROVOST. 


^%  ^7  ^AkVA\A\  MDJl      I03l\\t  $attlf-«'r»  of  /utdoia. 


fHE    SONG  OF  ALL  S0»6S, 
ivo    a. 


How  to  close  the  War. 

92  :_.::.;— 


86 


•*'•'"'■•"■"'""  lO^A         1!K'«   80HE 

ir-iiijat't  HfcA«At«A      _        lio  the -^^lll6o[  J\htaham. 


//jc  VftciMii  e'.uMltii   Song, 
1 


,po     MOTHER, 


/Qffi(K\\k  bas  gone  to  the  ootar. 


yr^Q  j^ob  VJiil  i/.rttm   !Uo,;i..  lU.iJ.  /OiC   jiit  sjog  l,w  on '.lir  i;..!!!!!-!!!.™- 


UNION  MABSEH.I.AISE. 

/09 


ff5   ""cCii^AMQER. 


Z^/ 


A  YANKEE       f27 


ritiAvfc;  rioxai, 


13d A,,.., 


^  /69B 
i  Rock 

\     me 

\     TO    SI^KEP 

MOTHER 


/30  ■lrV^  t-'iv— wU{--» 


i 


ji 


5  \  i'.uiui  iiir'1'^lot!r:,"li:ul-,  to  inc.  /ff^ 


_    __  fe^....  <r-aii%" 

-'NT  SHORE. 


ir.il;in||  up  Ujn 


,utrto./w/ 


'•'^*^  FAREWELL  TO  HiS  BRIDE. 


■■   .nfr: 


4^^- 


oa  JBrri    oh  jicff 


FROM  THE  WAR. 


wc   nnr:   COR  THF   llfiinN.     I       *  «»<»<•"  Bi mn  In  Tine  »I  War 


■HIL&S  THE  BANKS 

sosraRiTss. 


236  :  '- 
i       ANNIE  LADRE 


24/      ^^i        247A 


Pa 


*fP        ^^ 


<'^'- 

*' ' 


^■-,.«  -cay. 


II 


i^ffSSO  MBW8  FOR  MS,     ^ '^J^ 

it^,    : -    'W 


SUMMER. 


256 


The  La»t 


k' 


m 


ff^ 


iimMEi.  ' 

'-Ki^is^^  256A 


American  Song  Sheets,  Slip  Ballads  and  Poetical  Broadsides,  1850-1870 


1.  "ABE  LINCOLN  IS  OUR  CHOICE."— The  People  are 
the  monarchs  here  (4  vs.) 

Headed:   "A  Campaign  Song";  dedicated  to  William  H. 
Kern,  Esquire,  President  of  the  People's  Campaign  Club. 

17.3  X  9.9  cm. 

2.  ABE  LINCOLN'S  BATTLE  CRY.— The  Rebels  cheered 
for  Mac,  when  our  army  drove  them  back  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Cop:   1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

a.  By  James  D.  Gay,  the  Celebrated  Army  Song  Publisher 
and  Vocalist. 

T.  o.  border;  bust  of  Lincoln  in  ornamental  frame. 

24.4  X  15  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Union  Battle  Cry";  by  James  D.  Gay,  Army 
Song  Dealer  and  Publisher;  Air:  Battle  cry  of  freedom; 
adv:  Gay's  Army  songs  sent  by  Mail. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  176,  col.  20.3  x 
12.4  cm. 

ABE  LINCOLN'S  UNION  WAGON,  see  OLD  UNION 
WAGON. 

3.  ABRAHAM  LINCOLN.— SadZji  the  lengthening  shadows 
fall  (3  vs.  uneven  length) 

Written  by  Louise  S.  Upham. 

a.  F>ubl.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  7.  20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  mourning  border  added.]  20.5  x  12.6 
cm. 

4.  ABRAHAM'S  DAUGHTER.- O^z.'  kind  folks  listen  to  my 
song,  it  is  no  idle  story  (5  vs.) 

By  Tony  Emmett;  cop:   1861,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa. 

a.  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (2);  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  Emmett's  name;]  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store 
(3);  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  Emmett's  name;]  music  obtained  of  Sep. 
Winner  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  bust  of  girl  within  ornamental  frame. 
20.8  X  11.9  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  Music  obtained  of  Sep.  Winner  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:   Union  Letter  and  Note  Paper,  etc. 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

e.  Music  obtained  of  Sep.  Winner  (2);  print.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc. 

Two  identical  Liberty  figures.  22.4  x  13.5  cm. 

f.  [Without  Emmett's  name  and  copyright;]  music  ob- 
tained of  Sep.  Winner  (3);  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  girl,  floating  hemisphere  with 
flag,  bust  of  woman.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

5.  ABRAHAM'S  DAUGHTER.— Sowe  years  ago,  I  s'pose 
you  know  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21.3  x  15  cm. 


b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.4  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  848;  as  sung  by  Charley  Fox,  of  Hooley's 
Minstrels. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   22.8  x  15  cm. 

6.  ABRAHAM'S  DAUGHTER.  NO.  2. -How  are  you  and  all 
my  friends  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3) 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  749;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20.4  x  12.3  cm. 

c.  [Without  "No.  2"  in  title;]  as  sung  by  Billy  Ward,  at 
the  Kossuth  Concert  Saloon;  publ.  Warren  (1);  to  be  had 
at  H.  Myers';  for  Sale,  Wholesale  &  Retail,  at  Jacob  K. 
Search'. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  16.2  cm. 

d.  [Without  "No.  2"  in  title;]  with  long  lines;  "Fourth 
Edition";  as  sung  by  Ed  Wray,  at  the  Canterbury  Hall, 
N.W.  Corner  Fifth  and  Chestnut;  publ.  Warren  (2);  adv: 
This  Song  and  600  others  can  be  had  at  Jacob  K.  Search. 

T.  o.  border;  man  carrying  adv.  21.4  x  12  cm. 

e.  [Without  period  after  "No"  and  "2";]  sheet  no.  1016; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1) 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

7.  ABRAHAM'S  DAUGHTER.   NO.  Z— When  first  this  war 
through  the  peaceful  North  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  John  Smith;  sheet  no.  1086;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.8  x  13  cm. 

8.  ADAM'S  ALE.— A  glass  of  cold  water  I'll  drink  when  I 
am.  thirsty  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  910;  As  sung  by  Proffesser  [sic]  Nash;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15. 7  cm. 

9.  AN  ADDRESS,  BY  THE  LADIES  OF  LITTLE  EGGHAR- 
BOR,  TO  THE  IRICK  INFANTRY,  OF  LITTLE  EGGHAR- 
BOR.—  Who's  braver  than  Eggharbo>~men  (7  vs.) 

By  Leah  Blackman,  Tuskerton,  June,  1861.   18.7  x 
12  cm. 

10.  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE  PHILADEL- 
PHIA EVENING  JOURNAL.  1859.- Like  a  giant  slain  by 
young  David's  hand  (7  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  woodcut  ornaments,  including 
angel  blowing  trumpet.  44  x  30.9  cm. 

11.  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE  PHILADEL- 
PHIA EVENING  JOURNAL,  TO  THEIR  PATRONS.   1860. 
JANUARY  1ST.   1860. -.4  year  is  dead!  A  year  is  bom 
(20  vs.) 

Notices  of  Fire  Alarm  and  Fire  District,  and  Fare  of 
Hackney  Coaches. 

Wavy-line  border,  with  elaborate  cornerpieces  and 
vignettes  of  Columbia.  46.1  x  30.7  cm. 

12.  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE  SATURDAY 
EVENING  POST,  JANUARY  1,  1865. -Come  to  the  croum- 
ing  of  the  King  (12  vs .) 


With\almanac  below. 

T.  o.  border.  47.3  x  34  cm. 

13.  ADDRESS  TO  THE  JOURNEYMEN  CORDWAINERS 
L.  B.  OF  PHILADELPHIA.— Cordz<;azwers.'  Arouse!  The 
time  has  now  come  (14  vs.) 

By  John  Mcllvaine;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  shield  and  flags.  22.5  x  14.3 
cm. 

14.  ADIEU,  MY  NATIVE  LAND  ADIEU.— Adzew,  my  native 
land,  adieu_{3  vs.) 

Sheet  lio.  965;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 


BOLT."  ORIGINAL.— yl/j.'3)es,  /  remember  that  name 
with  delight  (3  vs.) 

Cop:   1852,  Thomas  M.  Scroggy,  EDPA.;  publ. 
Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  25.1  x  14.9  cm. 

23.  AILEEN  A.-KOOn.— Oh!  welcome,  my  Aileen!  the 
mom.ent  is  blest  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  comma  instead  of  exclamation  point  in  first  line; 
sheet  no.  529;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.5  cm. 


15.  ADM'L  PORTER'S  FLEET  AND  THE  ARMY  OF  THE 
JAMES.— Cowe  all  you  brave  and  gallant  m.en  who  sport 
the  Stripes  and  Stars  (5  vs.  and  chor.)   Tune— The  Goose 
Hangs  High. 

Words  by  Geo.  P.  Hardwick;  copyright  secured;  adv: 
14  illustrated  ballads  [publ.)  Hardwick. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  red  and  blue  ink; 
soldier  with  rifle  and  flag,  sailor  with  flag,  eagle,  cannon, 
etc.  20.2  X  12.9  cm. 

16.  ADOLPHEUS  Si^OW .—  White  folks  listen  to  me  now 
(5  vs.)  Air  -  Blow  ye  Winds,  I,  O. 

Sheet  no.  851;  As  sung  by  Bob  Hart,  at  the  American 
Concert  Hall  444  Broadway;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

ADOLPHUS  MORNINGLORY,  see  THE  DRUNKARD'S 
LONE  CHILD. 

17.  ADVICE  TO  YOUNG  LADIES.— Wfeere  married  you  are 
you  must  learn  to  submit  (2  vs.)  Air— John  Dean. 

By  G.  L.  of  the  F.  D.  S.;  2nd  song:   "Oh,  Say  Not 
Woman's  Heart  is  Bought";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  14.6  cm. 

18.  AFLOAT  ON  THE  OCEAN.— Afloat  on  the  Ocean,  my 
days  gaily  fly  (2  vs.) 

A-J  border;  sailing  ship.  20.3  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

19.  AFRICAN  WOMAN'S  LAMENTATION.— i/eZ^  oh  help, 
thou  God  of  Christians  (11  vs.) 

Headed:   "Morriss'  Prepared  Editions";  publ. 
William  H.  Morriss  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  30  x  12.2  cm. 

AFTER  THE  BATTLE  MOTHER,  see  JUST  AFTER 
THE  BATTLE  MOTHER. 

20.  THE  AGE  OF  PROGRESS.— Tfee  age  of  giant  progress 
(4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.9  x  16.2  cm. 

AGGIE  ASTHORE,  see  BRIGHT  THINGS  CAN  NEVER 
DIE. 

21.  AH!  QUE  J'AIME  LES  MILITAIRES!  (AH!  HOW  I 
LOVE  THE  MILITARY!)  — .A/t.'  que  j'aime  les  militaires 
(2  vs.  with  English  translation) 

From  the  Opera- Bouffe  of  J.  Offenbach  La  Grande 
Ehichesse;  music  at  all  music  stores  in  New  York  City; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

22.  AH!  YES,  I  REMEMBER.  AN  ANSWER  TO  "BEN 


24.  AILEEN  ASTORE.— Ofe.'  blessings  for  ever  on  Aileen 
Astore  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1052;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

25.  AINT  I  GLAD  TO  GET  OUT  OF  THE  WILDERNESS.- 
Way  down  south  in  Beaver  Creek  (6  vs.  and  chor.,  text 
beginning  with  "Music— Turn,  Turn,  Turn,  Turn") 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title.] 
A-J  border.  20  x  13.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16. 5  cm. 

26.  ALABAMA  AGAIN.—/  left  Alabama  a  long  way  behind 
m.e  (4  vs.  and  "Finale")  Air.— Believe  me  if  all  those 
Endearing  Young  Charms. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24x15.3 
cm. 


27.  ALFRED'S  COMPLAINT  BEFORE  LYDIAi-^lZas.' 
the  happy  vision's  fled  (31  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:— "Dandy 
Jim  from  the  Caroline." 

[Print.]  Kendall's  Rotery  Press. 

T.  o.  border;  wine  barrels  and  jug.   30.4  x  22.2  cm. 

28.  ALL  FORWARD!  THE  CELEBRATED  GARIBALDI 
HYMN.— AZ/  Forward!  All  Forward  (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1). 
A-J  border.   19.7  x  13.3  cm.  (cropped) 

29.  ALL  GOING  HOME.— TTe're  all  going  home  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Composed  by  Henry  O.  Upton,  And  sung  with  un- 
bounded applause,  by  the  Howard  Burlesque  Opera  Troupe, 
of  Salem;  print.  J.  H.  Moreland. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  16.4  cm. 

30.  ALL  HAIL,  YE  GALLANT  FREEMEN  TRUE!— AZZ 
hail,  ye  gallant  freem.en  true  (3  vs.)  Tune— "Old  Lang 
Syne." 

For  the  Mass  Meeting  at  Oyster  Bay,  September  20, 
1856.  24.5  X  15.3  cm. 

31.  ALL  TOGETHER  AGADSf.— AZZ  together,  all  together, 
once,  once  again  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  in  the  Public  Schools;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.; 
print.  Johnson  (2).   17  x  10  cm.   (cropped) 


32.  ALL'S  FOR  THE  BEST. -All's  for  the  best!  be 
sanguine  and  cheerful  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  adv:  Ten 
illustrated  songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  184,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  13  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  620;  [without  2nd  chor.;)  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.2  x  15.7  cm. 

33.  AM  I  NOT  FONDLY  THINE  OWN.-Tfoa,  thou  reign'st 
in  this  bosom  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "I'll  Remember  Thee." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.4  x  15.6 
cm. 

34.  [AMERICA]  MY  COUNTRY  'TIS  OF  THEE.— Mji 
country,  'tis  of  thee  (4  vs.) 

a.  With  comma  after  "Country"  in  title. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  20  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  eagle  between  "1776.  1861."  24  x  14.6 
cm. 

c.  Print.  Auner  (longitudinal)  (3).  14  x  8.7  cm. 

d.  Title:  "America";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22.2  x  13.7  cm. 

e.  Title:   "America";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.6  X  17  cm. 

f.  Title:   "America";  [without  3d  vs.;]  2nd  song: 
"Prayer  for  Our  Country";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  600 
different  kinds  of  Songs. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15. 2  cm. 

g.  [Without  3d  vs.;]  sheet  no.  700;  with  exclamation  point 
after  title;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.2  x  15.5  cm. 

h.  Title:  "America";  sheet  no.  736;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  14. 3  cm. 

i.    (As  above;]  Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry 
top,  col.  21  X  13  cm. 

j.    Title:   "Our  Native  Land";  3d  vs.  only. 

Card;  blue  ink;  figure  of  Columbia  with  flag,  col. 
11.2  x8  cm. 

AMERICA,  see  also  HAIL  COLUMBIA. 

[AMERICA]  MY  COUNTRY,  see  STAR  SPANGLED 
BANNER. 


35.  THE  AMERICAN  BOY-"Father,  look  up  and  see  that 
flag  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  (Without  comma  in  first  line;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

Wavy-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   20.6  x  12 
cm. 

c.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  184,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   19  x  12.5  cm. 


d.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  41,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.8  X  13  cm. 

36.  THE  AMERICAN  FLAG.— Brave  Men!  behold  the  Flag 
that's  sold  (4  vs.) 

By  Estwick  Evans;  copyrighted;  dedicated  to  the  Army; 
with  prose  essay  on  the  Flag  below  text;  sold  by  W.  A. 
Tinney.  27.5  x  12.7  cm. 

37.  THE  AMERICAN  GIRL.— Our  hearts  are  with  our 
native  land  (4  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  108;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  UNION 
VOLUNTEERS  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13.6  cm. 

38.  AMERICAN  LIBERTY.— Here  is  true  Liberty  (5  vs.) 
Air— Indian  Hunter. 

Dedicated  to  the  Washington  Glee  Club;  [sold  by] 
Charles  F.  Mayer;  print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  22.3  x  13  cm.   (cropped) 

39.  THE  AMERICAN  STAR.— Come,  strike  the  bold 
anthem,  the  war-dogs  are  howling  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Without  "The"  in  title,  and  without  comma  after 
"Come"  in  first  line;]  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  24  x  15. 5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Edwin  J.  Gibson;  for  sale  at  J.  Rafferty's. 
Orange  paper;  t.  o.  border;  star.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

e.  [Without  "The"  in  title,  and  without  comma  after 
"Come"  in  first  line;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Billheads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

f.  Tune— "Araby's  daughter."  15.7  x  9.7  cm.  (cropped) 

40.  THE  AMERICAN  VOLUNTEER.-7'h2  going  to  leave 
my  native  hills  (6  vs.)  Air:  The  Girl  I  left  behind  me. 

a.  From  the  Stars  and  Stripes  Songster,  publ.   Robert  M. 
De  Witt;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  20  x  10  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  506;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  12  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  742;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.6  x  13.8  cm. 

d.  (As  above;]  Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry 
top,  col.  21.5  X  13  cm. 

41.  ANCIENT  RAMS  NO.  2.  OF  SOUTHWARK.— W'e  are 
the  Ancient  Rams  (9  vs.)  Air— Rocks  of  Sicily. 

By  T.  K.;  publ.  Thomas  M.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  22.9  x  15.5  cm. 

42.  AN  ANGEL  FORM  IN  DREAMS  BEHELD.-A/i  Angel 
form  in  dreams  beheld  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  979;  From  Balfe's  New  Opera  of  Stanella; 
sung  by  Mr.  W.  Harrison;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 


43.  ANGEL'S  WHISPER.— >1  baby  was  sleeping  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Switzer's  Song  of  Home";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

44.  ANNIE  I  HAVE  MISSED  YO\i.— Dear  Annie,  is  it  you 
there,  safe  and  well  alone  (3  vs.)  Air— Willie  we  have 
missed  you. 

By  Frederick  S.  English;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

45.  ANNIE  LAURIE.— Maxwelton  Braes  are  bonnie  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  explanation:  "We  give  below  the  words  of  Annie 
Laurie,  now  the  most  popular  Ballad  in  the  British  Camp 
.  .  .";  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  title  spelled  "Lawrie";  text  varying  slightly; 
music  obtained  at  R.  Astley's;  [publ.]  Astley. 

T.  o.  border.   26.3  x  17.2  cm. 

c.  With  explanation:  "We  give  below  the  words  of  Annie 
Laurie  now  the  most  popular  ballad  in  the  British  Camp 

.  .  .";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  237, 

col.  20.2  X  12.3  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  without  adv.;]  bronze  ink.  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

f.  Advs.:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2),  and 
Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  237a, 
col.   20.4  X  12.8  cm. 

46.  ANNIE  LISLE.  — DowK  where  the  waving  willows  (4  vs. 
and  2  chors.) 

a.  With  title  spelled  "Lile";  advs:  See  the  new  song  of 
"Pennsylvania  Battle  Cry",  and  New  Songs.  Seven  Days 
Fight,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (2).  22.8  x  12.2  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 
Magnus  253a,  col.   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

d.  With  1  chor.  only. 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  14.4  cm. 

47.  ANNIE  OF  THE  VALE.—  The  young  stars  are  glowing, 
their  clear  light  bestowing  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  with  3  vs. 
and  chor.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Figure  of  Columbia  seated  on  a  rock.  21.3  x  12. 5  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  230, 

col.  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;)  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  234, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20  x  12.3  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  frame  border;  hdpc.   Magnus  230,  col. 
20  X  14  cm. 

e.  Words  by  G.  P.  Morris;  music  by  J.  R.  Thomas; 
sheet  no.  833;  music  had  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ. 
Wrigley. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15  cm. 


Sheet  no.  1130. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  15.2  cm. 

ANNIE'S  REPLY  TO  ENOCH  ARDEN,  see  ENOCH 
ARDEN. 

49.  ANNUAL  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE 
MORNING  PENNSYLVANLf^N  FOR  CHRISTMAS  1859 
AND  NEW  YEAR  I860.— Good  morning,  kind  friends!  A 
happy  New  Year  (9  vs.) 

Ivy  vine  border;  woodcut  of  man  offering  drinks; 
Philad'a  Wood  Engraver  Co.  62.1  x  45.8  cm. 

50.  ANNUAL  GREETING  OR  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  OF 
THE  DAILY  NEWS:  TO  THEIR  PATRONS,  JANUARY  1, 
1859.— To  old  and  young,  to  grave  and  gay  (2  columns) 

T.  o.  border;  ornamental  arms  of  Philadelphia. 
45.4  x  30.3  cm. 

51.  ANNUAL  GREETING  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF 
FITZGERALD'S  CITY  ITEM.    CHRISTMAS,  1863. -NEW 
YEAR,  1864:.— Christmas  is  here;  the  bells  ring  clear 
(11  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  with  calender.  30.3  x  23.6  cm. 

THE  ANSWER,  see  JEANNETTE  AND  JEANOT  and 
KATE  KEARNEY. 

52.  ANSWER  OF  KATY  DARLING. -O/i,  in  heaven  will  you 
m.eet  your  Katy  Darling  (2  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  26  x  16.2  cm. 

53.  ANSWER  TO  A  THOUSAND  A  YEAK.-Have  you  heard 
the  strange  news  just  came  down,  Gaffer  Green  (6  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

54.  ANSWER  TO  MOTHER  IS  THE  BATTLE  OVER?- Fes, 
my  boy,  the  battle's  over  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.5 
cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  after  title;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19  x  12.3  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  Title  as  above;  sheet  no.  814;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  16.8  cm. 

e.  By  James  Wakefield;  with  period  at  end  of  title;  sheet 
no.  1088;  publ.  Wrigley. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.6  x  13  cm. 

ANSWER  TO  NO  IRISH  NEED  APPLY,  see  WHAT 
IRISHMEN  HAVE  DONE. 

55.  ANSWER  TO  THE  YOUNG  CONSCRIPT  BY  HIS 
LADY.— O  young  Conscript,  one  and  twenty  (2  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air— Who  will  Care  for  Mother  Now? 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philad'a,  Oct.  1863;  cop:  A.  Ander- 
son, EDPa.,  1863;  [for  sale]  A.  Anderson. 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.3  cm. 


48.  ANNIE  WITH  THE  VEIL.  A  PARODY.-My  love's  a 
bookfolder  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "Annie  of  the  Vale." 


ANSWER  TO  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER,  see 
I  REMEMBER  THE  SAD  HOUR. 


56.  ANSWER  TO  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW? 
—  Quell,  oh!  quell  your  fears  my  darling  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air;   Who  will  care  for  Mother  now? 

Words  by  C.  G.  Streval. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   22.2  x  13.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  De  Marsan  fountain  border.  26.6  x  17.2 
cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border. 
24  X  15.2  cm. 

d.  [Without  Air  and  exclamation  point  in  first  line;] 
"Streval"  spelled  "Ytreval";  music  by  C.  Carrol  Sawyer; 
music  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson;  adv:  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  31,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  33,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.6  X  13  cm.. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  39,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.9  X  13  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  40,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  11.5  cm. 

h.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  77,  bronze  ink;  publ.  Mag- 
nus. 20  X  13  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  194,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

j.    [Probably  as  above,  with  adv.  cropped;]  hdpc.  Magnus 
215,  col.   19.6  X  12.9  cm. 

k.   [Without  exclamation  point  in  first  line;]  with 
"Streval"  spelled  "Ytreval";  music  by  C.  Carrol  Sawyer; 
sheet  no.  1167;  music  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson;  publ. 
Wrigley. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

57.  ANSWER  TO  "WILLIE  WE  HAVE  MISSED  YOU." 
WILLIE'LL  ROAM  NO  MORE.— Fes,  Mary,  I  have  come, 
love,  across  the  dark  blue  sea  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  print. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15.3  cm. 

58.  ANTIETAM.— Ow  the  11  th  of  September  eighteen 
hundred  sixty-two  (8  vs.)  Air:  While  everything  is 
lovely,  and  the  goose  hangs  high. 

By  Col.  Max  Langenschwartz. 

a.  Cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  16,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  74,  bronze  ink;  publ.  Mag- 
nus.  19.5  X  13  cm. 


ANY  OTHER  MAN,  OR  JOHN  BULL,  see  JOHN  BULL, 
OR  ANY  OTHER  MAN. 

59.  ANY  OTHER  MAN.  NO.  2.-Come  listen  to  me,  one 
and  all  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  A  wet  sheet  and  a  flowing 
sea. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.2  x  17.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  "A"  in  Air;]  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no. 
1060;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.1  x  15.6  cm. 


60.  APOLOGY,  NO  TRUST.-///  should  trust  each  time 
I'm.  asked  (6  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.6  x  15 
cm. 

c.  With  period  after  "Apology";  adv:  Hoopland's  Ger- 
man Bitters. 

T.  o.  border.   20  x  13  cm. 

61.  AN  APPEAL  TO  THE  CHARITABLE.- Ke  who  are 
inclined  to  pity  (4  vs.) 

By  George  W.  Avery;  headed  by  a  testimonial  signed 
by  H.  H.  Reynolds,  A.  M.  Low  and  Wm.  H.  Fredenburgh. 
T.  o.  border.   23.1  x  10  cm. 

62.  ARAB  STS.E'D.—Oh!  give  me  but  my  Arab  steed,  a 
shield  and  falchion  bright  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Our  Boy  Is  a  Warrior  Now.";  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

63.  ARM,  SONS  OF  UNION!— Arm  Sons  of  Union!  for  the 
Right  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "A  Wet  Sheet,"  &  c. 

Written  by  Silas  S.  Steele;  cop:  1861,  P.  E.  Abel, 
EDPa.;  adv.  for  King  &  Baird's  publications  on  verso. 

Hdpc.  group  with  flag  at  foot  of  hill  with  monument  of 
Liberty  on  top.  25  x  12.4  cm. 

64.  THE  ARMY  AND  NAVY  FOR  EVER.-Lei  sailors  and 
soldiers  unite  in  this  cause  (3  vs.) 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  160, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  160a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).  20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

65.  ARMY  HYMN.— 0  Thou,  whose  awful  Presence  bow'd 
(3  vs.)  Air:  Old  Hundred. 

Words  by  A.  J.  H.  Duganne;  to  be  sung  in  unison,  or 
as  a  choral;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.I  cm. 

66.  THE  ARMY  HYMN.  NO  2.— Oh,  Lord  of  Hosts! 
Almighty  King  (5  vs.)  Air.   Old  Hundred. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.4  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Army-Hymn";  [without  "Air";]  print  Nesbitt 
&  Co. 

Double-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Liberty  with  flags 
and  bust  of  Washington,  col.  19.5  x  9.4  cm. 

c.  [Without  "No  2"  in  title;]  with  period  and  dash  after 
Air;  by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes;  sheet  no,  812;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.1  x  15.6  cm. 

67.  THE  ARMY  OF  LIBERTY.-Cowe  rally  for  our 
country  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— I'm  glad  I'm  in  this  Army. 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  28.  21.2  x  13.9  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  137,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 


68.  ASSASSINATION  OF  ELLSWORTH,  AT  ALEXANDRIA, 
VA.,  MAY  24TH,  1861.— Now ,  friends ,  I  beg  you  listen,  a 
sad  story  I  will  tell  (7  vs.)  Air— California  Brothers. 

a.  "Ellsworth"  in  square  caps;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  "Ellsworth"  in  scroll  caps;  [publ.  Johnson,  with 
imprint  cropped  off.] 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.5  cm. 

c.  By  Wm.  Sutherland;  with  "Colonel"  added  to  title; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Union  Badges,  Letters,  etc. 

69.  AUGUST  THE  ONE.— fi  was  on  August  the  first  of 
Novimber  [sic]  (8  vs.) 

A  Comic  Song  Sung  with  unbounded  applause  by  M. 
Cox;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.6  x  16  cm. 

70.  AULD  LANG  SYNE.— 0/j,  years  have  flown  since  first 
we  met  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  23.6  x  15  cm. 

71.  AUNT  JEMIMA'S  PLASTER,  OR  SHEEPSKIN  BEES 
WAX  NO.  2.~Aunt  Jemima  she  was  old,  but  very  kind  and 
clever  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.4  x  15  cm. 

72.  AURA  LEE.— WzeM  the  blackbird,  in  the  spring  (2  vs. 
and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  840;  as  sung  at  Bryants'  Minstrels;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

73.  AWAY  DOWN  SOUTH  THERE  IS  REBELLION.-Alua}) 
dovm  South  there  is  rebellion  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— 
"Dixie's  Land". 

By  "Our  Ned";  adv:  McClellan  Campaign  Songster; 
[publ.]  Mason  &  Co. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.1  cm. 

74.  BABYLON  IS  FALLEN. -Z>o>z'f  you  see  the  black 
clouds  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Henry  C.  Work.  J 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  24.1  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  With  additional  verse;  music  obtained  of  Frederick 
Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  22.5  x  13.4  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.6  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  With  title  on  one  line;  [publ.  Johnson,  imprint  cropped 
off.] 

A-J  border.  20  x  13.5  cm. 

e.  As  sung  by  Mr.  E.  Haven,  at  Sanford's  Opera  House, 
Harrisburg,  Pa.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks' 
Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  24.4  x  16  cm. 

f.  Publ.  Johnson  &  Co.;  adv:  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor; 
print.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.1  x  12.8  cm. 


75.  THE  BACHELOR— Tfee  Bachelor  sits  in  his  dreary 
doom   (7  vs.) 

a.  "Bachelor"  spelled  with  "t"  in  title  and  first  line, 
and  "room"  for  "doom";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  Pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.9  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  430;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  COLUMBIA 
THE  HOPE  OF  THE  WORLD  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

76.  BALLAD  IN  ANSWER  TO  SAYERS,  ENGLAND'S 
PRIDE.— t/ofe«  Bull  is  boasting  all  his  m.ight  (8  vs.  and 
chor.) 

By  A.  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  Yankee  Pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:   1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.   25.5  x  16.8  cm. 

77.  A  BALLAD  OF  SmUOn.— Azalea  buds  young  April's 
pride   (35  vs.  printed  on  4  pp.) 

By  a  46th  Ohio  Volunteer.   17.8  x  8.3  cm. 

78.  BALLAD  OF  THE  GREAT  FIGHT,  BETWEEN  THE 
UNION  EAGLE  AND  THE  OLD  ROOSTER,  JEFF.  DAVIS. 
—  Come  volunteers ,  stick  up  your  ears  (11  vs.)  Tune— 
"Yankee  Doodle." 

Headed  "Quipps  &  Go's  Comic  Miscellany— No  XXI"; 
cop:  1847,  Quipps  and  Co.,  EDPa.;  adv.  Newsmen  and 
boys  supplied. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  and  rooster.  39.5  x  11.6  cm. 

79.  BANKS  OF  BRANDYWINE.— Owe  morning  very  early, 
in  the  pleasant  month  of  May   (9  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.7  x  15.4 
cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  421;  printed  and  sold  wholesale  only,  at  404 
Vine,  above  Fourth  St.  .  .  .  Phila. 

T.  o.  border.   20.3  x  13  cm. 

80.  BANKS  OF  SLIGO.— Otz  the  sweet  Banks  of  Sligo  old 
Dennis  did  dwell  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— Kate  Kearney. 

Sheet  no.  783;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

81.  BANKS  OF  THE  BLUE  MOSELLE.— WTien  the  glow 
worm  gildst  the  elfin  flow' r  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  608;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

82.  THE  BANNER  OF  FREEDOM.— W'e'ii  not  give  up  our 
banner  (4  vs.) 

Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.6  cm. 

83.  THE  BANNER  OF  THE  FREE.— i?e  lay  upon  the 
battle-field  (4  vs.)  Air:  The  Sword  of  Bunker-Hill. 

By  Eugene  Johnston. 

a.  [Without  Johnston's  name;]  publ.   De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24.5  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  "The"  in  Air;]  2nd  song:   "O, 
carry  me  Home  to  Die.";  publ.  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay. 

Single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  176  in  oval.  23.8 
X  14.3  cm. 

c.  Publ.  and  for  sale  by  James  D.  Gay;  adv:  orders  from 
Sutlers  and  Stationery  Dealers  filled. 


Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

d.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.)  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  19,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  33,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  13  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  205, 
col.  20.3  X  12.9  cm. 

g.  Sheet  no.  1079;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  DERMOT 
ASTORE  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  15  cm. 

84.  THE  BANNER  OF  THE  SEA.-Ofall  the  flags  that 
float  aloft  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Lee  &  Walker,  music  publishers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
T.  o.  border;  flag.  23  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title  and  period  at  end;]  with  1 
chor.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill 
Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  Music  published  by  Lee  &  Walker;  adv:  Brooks  Ball 
Room  Monitor;  [publ.]  Johnson  (2). 

Sailing  ship.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

85.  THE  BARD'S  LEGACY.- PWiere  in  death  I  shall  calm 
recline  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "The  Lover's  Wish";  print.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.5  x  15.5 
cm. 

86.  BARREL  OF  PORK.— Tz«o  Israelite  brothers  in  New 
York  once  dwelt  (12  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  838;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Mike  and  Pat  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  23.8  x  15.8 
cm. 

87.  BASHFUL  YOUNG  MAN.-  They  say  I  shall  get  over  it, 
but  no,  I  never  can  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.4  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.4 
cm. 

88.  THE  BATTLE  AT  CHARLESTON  HARBOR-On  the 
seventh  day  of  April,  in  eighteen  sixty-three  (3  vs.)  Tune 
as  sung  to  Napoleon's  Grave. 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia,  April,  1863;  print. 
Harris. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

BATTLE  CHORUS,  see  THE  TEMPEST  OF  THE 
HEART. 

89.  THE  BATTLE  CRY  OF  FREEDOM  !-Harfe.'  the  loud 
pealing  bell  now  spreads  the  alarm.  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  A.  Anderson,  late  of  82d  Regt.   P.V.,  May,  1863. 

a.  Headed:   "Philadelphia  Fire  Zouaves,  72d  Regt., 
P.  v.";  sold  at  Gibson's;  print.   Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  13.9  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  and  exclamation  point  in  title;]  Re- 


spectfully Dedicated  to  the  Philadelphia  Fire  Zouaves, 
72d  Regt.  P.  v.;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson  is  now 
publishing.   12.1  x  14.2  cm. 

90.   BATTLE  CRY  OF  FREEDOM,  OR,  WE'LL  RALLY 
ROUND  THE  FLAG  BOYS.— Kes,  we'll  rally  round  the 
flag,  boys,we'llrally  once  again    (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
[By  George  F.  Root.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  motto  "E  Pluribus  Unum". 
23  X  13  cm. 

b.  [Without  commas  after  "Freedom"  and  "Or"  in 
title;  but  with  comma  after  "Flag";]  publ.  Auner  (5); 
4  chors.;  imprint  in  upper  and  lower  case. 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  imprint  in  caps. 
A-J  border.  22.8  x  13.9  cm. 

d.  Title:  "The  Battle-Cry  of  Freedom!";  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.6  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  25.5  x  14.5  cm. 

f.  Title:  "The  Battle-Cry  of  Freedom";  [publ.]  Doyle. 
T.  o.  border  with  spaced  urn  ornaments.  22  x  13.7 

cm. 

g.  Title  as  above;  t.  o.  border  with  heavy  black  line  and 
ornamental  corners.  23.7  x  15. 1  cm. 

h.  [As  above;]  with  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title. 
T.  o.  border  with  lacy  flower  scroll.  22.8  x  15.4  cm. 

i.  [As  above;]  with  period  at  end  of  title;  advs:  Boyd's 
Circulating  Library,  and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale;  2nd  song: 
Battle  Hymn  of  the  Republic. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  12.7  cm. 

j.    Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  [with  FIAG  OF 
OUR  UNION  FOR  EVER  on  recto.] 
T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  16.2  cm. 

k.   Respectfully  Dedicated  to  Wheelock  M.  Gardener, 
Esq.,  of  Boston,  Mass.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc.,  and  Johnson's  New  Catalogue 
of  Songs. 

Triple-line  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  but  with  comma  after  "Flag"  in  title; 
advs:  Brook's  Ball  Room  Monitor,  and  See  the  Song, 
"Our  Native  Land",  etc. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  22.6  x  12.7  cm. 

m.  Title:  "The  Battle  Cry  of  Freedom";  headed: 
"[Introduction]";  2nd  song:  "God  Save  the  State!", 
headed:  "[After  the  Prayer]";  3rd  song:   "Battle-Hymn 
of  the  Republic",  headed:  "[After  the  Pledge]";  4th  song: 
"Initiation  Ode";  5th  song:   "Red,  White  &  Blue!";  publ. 
Johnson  (2).  20.2  x  32.5  cm. 

n.  Title:  "The  Battle-Cry  of  Freedom";  adv:  Ten 
[i]llustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  103,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

o.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  205,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.2  X  12.6  cm. 

p.  Title  as  above;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  121,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

q.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  132,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
18.5  X  12.7  cm. 


r.  .[As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  134,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

s.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  142,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
21.4  X  14  cm. 

t.    Title:  "The  Battle  Cry  of  Freedom";  with  2  chors.; 
music  by  Root  &  Cady,  Chicago,  ovifners  of  the  copyright; 
sheet  no.  838;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  15.7  cm. 

u.  Title:   "Battle-Cry  of  Freedom";  sheet  no.  1125; 
publ.  Wrigley. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

91.  BATTLE  CRY  OF  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  RESERVES. 
—  Ye  sons  of  Pennsylvania  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  Patrick  Lowery,  of  Co.  D,  3d  Reg. 
P.R.V.C.;  published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  [with 
KEYSTONE  BRIGADE  on  verso.] 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  24.7  x  17.4  cm. 

92.  THE  BATTLE  EVE.— To-morrow,  comrade,  we 
(4  vs.) 

Dedicated  to  Edward  Havey,  Wilson's  Zouave. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.7  x  17  cm. 

b.  [Without  '"s"  in  "Wilson's";]  sheet  no.  893;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

93.  BATTLE  HYMN  OF  THE  REPUBLIC. -Mzree  eyes 
have  seen  the  glory  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  (5  vs.  and 
chors.) 

By  Mrs.  Julia  Ward  Howe;  published  by  the  Supervi- 
sory Committee  for  Recruiting  Colored  Regiments. 
Female  figure  with  shield  and  eagle.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

BATTLE-HYMN  OF  THE  REPUBLIC,  see  also 
BATTLE  CRY  OF  FREEDOM 

94.  THE  BATTLE  IS  O'ER.  — The  Battle  is  over,  and  the 
daylight  has  fled  (4  vs.)  Tune.— "Soldier's  Dream." 

By  A.  Anderson,  Dec.  1863;  cop:  1863,  A.  Anderson, 
EDPa.;  [for  sale]  A.  Anderson. 
T.  o.  border.   21.3  x  13.4  cm. 

95.  BATTLE  OF  BULL  RVli.  — Our  gallant  soldiers  they 
are  going  to  leave  their  friends  to  mourn  (8  vs.) 

a.  With  7  vs.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  yellow  paper.  23.3  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  With  7  vs.;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.1  x  14.5  cm. 

o.  With  hyphen  in  title;  Dedicated  to  the  69th  Regiment, 
N.Y.S.M.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  15.2 
cm. 

e.  With  exclamation  point  after  title;  by  F.  Collins; 
Dedicated  to  the  69th  Regt.   N.Y.S.M.;  sheet  no.  577;  sold 
by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15  cm. 

f.  [As  above,  but  without  exclamation  point  at  end  of 
title;]  sheet  no.  822;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.2  X  13.8  cm. 


g.    [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.2  x 
14  cm. 

96.   BATTLE  OF  BULL'S  RUN-  The  Sons  of  Old  Ireland, 
led  forth  in  their  glory   (8  vs.)  Tune— American  Star. 
Composed  by  Arthur  McCann. 

a.  Dedicated  to  the  Glorious  Sixty  Ninth  Regiment. 
T.  o.  border.  21.4  x  12  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Eulogy  on  the  Glorious  69th  Regiment,  that 
bled  at  Bull's  Run";  [without  Tune;]  Copyright  Secured. 

T.  o.  border;  harp  and  flag.  20.8  x  11.3  cm. 


c.   [As  above;  with  Tune.] 
A-J  border;  harp.  20.3 


12.8  cm.   (cropped) 


97.  BATTLE  OF  CEDAR  CREEK,  OCTOBER  19TH,  1864. 
—  Old  Early  camped  at  Fisher's  Hill  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— Old  Dan  Tucker. 

a.  By  C.  A.  Savage,  Co.  "K,"  8th  Indiana;  cop:  1863, 
G.  P.  Hardwick,  DC  D.C.;  adv:  Soldiers  can  receive  14 
of  our  beautifully  illustrated  Ballads. 

Letter  paper;  red  ink;  battle  scene  with  charging 
soldiers.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  Air;]  with  "The"  in  title;  13  vs.  and  3  chors.; 
cop:   1864,  J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  red  and  blue  ink;  double-line  border 
with  two  flags  and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union  Forever". 
20.4  X12.7  cm. 

98.  BATTLE  OF  DECATA,  NEAR  ATLANTA,  GEORGIA, 
JULY  20TH,  1864.— 7<  was  on  the  20th  of  July  Hood  said 
unto  his  m,en  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Published  and  Sang  [sic]  by  James  D.  Gay;  cop:  1865, 
J.  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Battle  of  Decatur,  or  Peach  Tree  Creek,  near 
Atlanta,  Ga.,  fought  by  Joe  Hooker's  Corps,  July  20,  1864"; 
with  quotes  around  Air;  [without  9th  vs.;]  2  chors.;  short 
lines;  published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  cop:   1865, 
James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

Single-line  border;  Union  infantry  preparing  to  charge. 
23.7  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Battle  of  Peach  Tree  Creek,  July  20th,  1864"; 
with  two  additional  vs.;  composed  by  John  Hughes,  Com.E, 
29th  P. v.,  20  A.C.,  Com.  by  Joe  Hooker;  print.  Johnson  (2). 

Star.  23  x  15  cm. 

99.  THE  BATTLE  OF  DRAINESVILLE-0?t  the  twentieth 
of  Becemher  (8  vs.) 

By  Henry  Albert  Setley,  Camp  Pierpont,  Va.  Dec  31 
1861.  28.4  X  12  em. 

100.  THE  BATTLE  OF  GETTYSBURG.— /w  June  of  '63,  I 
suppose  you  all  know   (7  vs.)  Air— While  everything  is 
lovely,  and  the  Goose  hangs  high. 

Written  by  G.  P.  Hardwick;  sold  by  G.  P.  Hardwick 
(2);  cop:  1863,  Mrs.  G.  P.  Hardwick,  DCD.C. 

Letter  paper;  red  ink;  single-line  border  with  flowered 
corners;  figure  of  Justice  between  two  crosses.  20.2 
X  13  cm. 

101.  THE  BATTLE  OF  GETTYSBURG- O/j  when  the 
Rebels  first  advanced  to  take  our  Keystone  State  (7  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

a.  Composed  [and  sold]  by  James  D.  Gay  of  the  Ringgold 
Artillery  of  Reading  Pa.;  cop:  Aug.  1st  1863,  Jas.  D.  Gay, 
EDPa. 


Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.  20.4 
X  12.2  cm. 

b.  Composed,  Published  and  for  sale  by  James  D.  Gay, 
the  celebrated  song  Publisher  and  Dealer;  adv:  orders 
from  Sutlers  and  Stationery  Dealers;  cop.  Aug.  1st,  1863, 
Jas.  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper,  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.  20.8 
X  12.7  cm. 

c.  [Without  Air;]  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  101,  col.  20.4 
X  12.6  cm. 

102.  BATTLE  OF  LOOKOUT  MOUNTAIN.-^ft.' see  where 
the  chief  leads  on  his  stem  band  (2  vs.) 

By  Henry  De  Vilie. 

a.  Adv:  Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.  20.4 
X  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  105,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  107,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
17.6  X  11.4  cm. 

103.  BATTLE  OF  LOOK-OUT  MOUNTAIN. -^wore^sf  the 
changes  heaven  sends  (12  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Nora 
Creina." 

Headed:  "Song  of  the  War";  By  R.  Hill,  a  Discharged 
Soldier,  First  Wisconsin  Heavy  Artillery;  rhymed  adv.  in 
2  vs.:  "Since  Fate  such  luckless  times  can  send." 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  motto  "Victory",  and  troop 
scene  with  two  cannons  and  flag.  26.7  x  19.9  cm. 

104.  BATTLE  OF  PEA- RIDGE  BY  36TH  REGIMENT 
ILLINOIS  VOLUNTEERS.-  The  battle  is  o'er,  the  victory 
won  (11  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  768;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15.4  cm. 

BATTLE  OF  PEACH  TREE  CREEK,  see  BATTLE  OF 
DECATA. 

105.  BATTLE  OF  SPOTTSYLVANIA.-Wee^  not  for  me, 
my  mother  dear  (4  vs.)  Time.— "Peace,  Troubled  Soul." 

By  A.  Anderson;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Send  for  a 
New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.   20.8  x  12  cm. 

106.  THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  WILDERNESS.-Atozo  6031s 
just  listen  while  I  sing  to  you  a  song  sirs  (10  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Composed,  published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  cop: 
1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  53, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus.  24  x  19. 8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  different  Army  hospitals  views. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  117,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   25  x  15  cm. 

107.  BATTLE  OF  WILLIAMSBURGH.-/ do  not  see,  as 


used  to  be,  those  sprightly  lads  in  toum     (8  vs.)  Air:  The 
Land  of  America 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  26  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  By  F.  Collins;  sheet  no.  1001;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.8  x  13  cm. 

108.  BATTLE  OF  WINCHESTER.-ffarjfe/ ffee  muffled 
drums  are  rolling  (4  vs.)  Tune.— California  Brothers. 

By  Capt.  Edson  Gerry,  Company  I,  12th  Penna.  Vol. 
Cavalry;  In  memory  of  our  comrades  who  fell  in  the 
Battle  of  Winchester,  June  15,  1863;  arranged  by  A. 
Anderson. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

109.  THE  BATTLE  OF  WINCHESTER,  SEPTEMBER 
19TH,  1864.— /f  was  September  19th  day  the  battle  it 
began  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  W.  T.  Haroff,  126  O.V.I. ;  Dedicated  to  the 
6th,  8th  and  19th  Army  Corps;  copyright  secured;  publ. 
Hardwick;  adv:  14  of  our  new  songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  eagle  with  flag.  20.4  x  12.6 
cm. 

110.  THE  BAY  OF  BISCAY  O!- Lowd  roared  the  dreadful 
thunder  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   25  x  15  cm. 

111.  BE  A  GOOD  BOY  AND  TAKE  CARE  OF  YOURSELF 
—  When  I  was  at  home,  with  my  father  and  m.other  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  659;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25.3  x  15.6  cm. 

112.  BE  IN  TIM.'E.—  The  voice  of  wisdom,  hear— be  in  tim.e, 
be  in  time  (9  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

BE  KIND  TO  DARLING  SISTER  NELL,  see  WRITE 
ME  A  LETTER  FROM  HOME. 

113.  BE  KIND  TO  EACH  OTHER.- Se  kind  to  each  other 
(3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.5  x  16.8  cm. 

114.  BE  KIND  TO  THE  LOVED  ONES  AT  HOME.— Be  kind 
to  thy  father— for  when  thou  wast  young  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   25  x  14.7  cm. 

115.  BE  MY  MOTHER  TILL  I  DIE.— Ladies,  some  one  be 
my  mother  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Words  and  Melody  by  Elmer  Ruan  Coates;  Arranged 
for  the  Piano  by  Septimus  Winner;  music  published  by 
Winner  &  Co.  (3);  narrative  beginning:   "After  the  fight  at 
Gettysburg." 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  (Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  21.2  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  Adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  25  x  15  cm. 


d.   (Without  "music  published  by  Winner  &  Co.";]  Sep. 
Winner's  Music  Store;  [publ.  Johnson,  cropped  off.) 
A-J  border.  20  x  13.2  cm. 

116.  BE  QUIET  DO,  I'LL  CALL  MY  MOTHER.— ^s  Kate 
was  sitting  in  a  wood  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  685;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

117.  BE  TRUE  TO  OUR  FhAG.-Our  beautiful  flag.  Oh! 
now  we  see  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  21.5  x  12.2  cm. 

118.  BEAUTEOUS  LIZZIE  FANE.-  You  ask  me  why  my 
joy  has  flown  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Bryants'  and  Geo.  Christy's  Minstrels. 

a.  Words  and  Music  by  E.  G.  B.  Holder;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  106;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  MINNIE  CLYDE, 
KITTY  CLYDE'S  SISTER  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

119.  BEAUTIFUL  NELL.-Dore'i  talk  to  me  of  pretty  girls 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Ma[r]san  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16  cm. 


BEAUTIFUL  SALLY,  see  JOHNNY,  I  HARDLY  KNEW 


YE. 


120.  BEAUTIFUL  VE^ICF. .- Beautiful  Venice!  city  of 
song  (1  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Pirate's  Chorus";  3rd  song:   "Drinking 
Chorus";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  15.2  cm. 

BEAUTIFUL  VENICE,  see  also  I  DREAMT  THAT  I 
DWELT  IN  MARBLE  HALLS,  and  PIRATE'S  CHORUS. 

121.  THE  BEECHER  SCANDAL !- T/ze  Beecher  scandal's 
all  the  rage  (5  vs.) 

Sung  by  Dick  Brown. 

T.  o.  border.  25.9  x  11.5  cm. 

122.  THE  BED-BUGS'  SO^G.— Attend  ye  "Bugs"  and 
"Corkers,"  to  a  fact  I  will  relate  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Low  Backed  Car." 

By  T.  M.  Scroggy;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

123.  BEHIND  THE  PARLOR  BLIND.-/  cannot  think  what 
sister  Jane  (5  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

124.  BELL  &  EVERETT,  AND  THE  UNION.-Ai  Baltimore 
the  ninth  of  May  (12  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2).  23.7  x  14.9  cm. 

125.  BELLE  BRANDON.— 'Weaife  a  tree  by  the  margin  of 
a  woodland  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  By  Hutchy;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint 
added. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  point  after  title. 
T.  o.  border.   22.2  x  15.2  cm. 


126.  BELLE  OB  TENNISEE.—  IVfeJte /o/fes,  now  have  pity 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

127.  THE  BELLE  OF  ABERDEEN.— Lo?;e's  dream  is  like 
the  rainbow  (3  vs.)  Air— "Annie  Laurie." 

Print.  J.  H.  Moreland. 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  13.8  cm. 

128.  BELLE  OF  BROADWAY.— Dar  is  a  gal  lives  in  dis 
town   (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Dan  Bryant,  at  472  Broadway,  N.Y.;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

129.  THE  BELLES  OF  THE  'BVS.-T'other  day  I  indulged 
in  an  omnibus  ride  (6  vs.)  Air:   The  Missletow  Bough. 
(The  Old  Oak  Chest.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

130.  THE  BELLEVUE  BABY  MRS.  CUNNINGHAM'S 
ADOPTED.—^  Doctor  of  note  in  New  York  did  dwell 
(4  vs.)  Air,  Villikins. 

By  the  Saugerties  Bard. 

a.  Headed:  "Number  Five";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  Headed:  "No.  5";  with  quotes  around  Air;  publ. 
Auner  &  Johnson. 

T.  o.  border.   20.6  x  12  cm. 

131.  BEN  BOhT.— Don't  you  remember  sweet  Alice,  Ben 
Bolt  (5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.8  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Title:  "The  Original  Ben  Bolt.  Unabridged  and 
Unaltared.";  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15. 2  cm. 

132.  BERDAN'S  SHARPSHOOTERS.— Berdara's  men  are 
in  the  field  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Yankee  Doodle. 

By  S.  G.  Elder. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  24.7  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.3  x  16.3  cm. 

133.  BESSIE  DEAN.— 'Twas  on  a  calm,  m.id-summer' s 
night  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Poor  Old  Slave. 

By  F.  C.  Long;  sheet  no.  950;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

134.  BESSIE  LANE.— 'Tmxzs  a  neat  little  cottage,  where 
my  Bessie  used  to  dwell  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Nelly  Gray. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  24.7  X  16  cm. 

b.  By  Francis  C.  Long;  sheet  no.  895;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

135.  BETTER  TIMES  ARE  COMING.— Tfeere  are  voices 
of  hope  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Horace  Waters,  Music 
Publisher  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  204,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  X  12.6  cm. 


10 


136.  BID  ME  GOOD-BYE,  OR  THE  SOLDIER'S  FARE- 
WELL.—Birf  me  good-bye,  mother,  bid  me  adieu  (3  vs.) 

By  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner). 

a.  [Without  comma  after  "Good-Bye"  in  title;]  with 
comma  after  "Or"  in  title;  Winner  &  Go's.  Music  store 
(3);  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Printed  by  permission  of  the  Publ.  of  the  Music,  Sep. 
Winner  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  25  x  15  cm. 

137.  BIDDY  MAGEE.— /  was  bom  in  the  town  of  Tip,  so 
gay  (9  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  720;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

138.  A  BIG  THING  ON  ICY,.— Flash  sayings  now  are  all 
the  go  (5  vs.)  Air.  — "Bow-wow-wow." 

a.  [Without  quotation  marks  around  Air;]  but  with  colon; 
As  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.3  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no.  1020; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [printed  upside-down]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  14.9  cm. 

139.  THE  BILL-POSTERS  DREAM,  OR  CROSS  READINGS. 
—If  you  walk  through  the  streets  of  New  York  city  (5  vs.) 
Air:   "The  Captain  with  his  Whiskers." 

By  the  popular  author:  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  Adv;  Ten  illustrated  Songs  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  54,  col.; 

[publ.)  Magnus.  21.1  x  13.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  hdpc.   Magnus  60,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   19.9  X  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  imprint  probably  cropped  off;]  hdpc.  Mag- 
nus 65,  col.;  publ.   Magnus.   19.2  x  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above,  but  with  imprint  complete;]  hdpc.  Magnus 
66,  col.;  publ.   Magnus.  21  x  13.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;)  hdpc.  Magnus  87,  col.;  [publ.)  Magnus  (1). 
19.6  X  12.6  cm. 

f.  [Without  comma  and  period  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1178; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

140.  BILLIE  BOY.— Oft.'  where  have  you  been,  Billie  Boy, 
Billie  Boy  (8  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

141.  BILLY  BARLOW.  NO.  2— Good  evening,  kind  friends, 
how  do  you  all  do  (8  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  Ed.  Clifford. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.1  x  17.4  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23.1  x  13.9  cm. 

142.  [NEW]  BILLY  BARLOW.— O,  good  evening  gentlemen, 
how  do  you  do  (7  vs.  and  chors.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Moses  Gibler,  at  the  different 
Concerts;  publ.  Warren  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  11  cm. 

143.  BILLY  GRIMES  THE  BOVKK.- Tomorrow  mom  I'm 


sweet  sixteen,  and  Billy  Grimes  the  rover  (6  vs.) 
Print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

144.  BILLY,  I  HAVE  MISS'D  YOU.   PARODY  ON  "WILLIE, 
WE  HAVE  MISS'D  YOU. "-Oft.'  Billy,  on  the  tight  dear 

(3  vs.) 

Written  by  C.  Sloman  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  sheet 
no.  1011;  publ.Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

145.  BILLY  PATTERSON.— Dar  was  an  old  nigg  dat  got 
hit  wid  a  brick  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Sam.  Sanford's  New  Song 
Books. 

Man  on  horseback,  with  title  "Billy  on  his  road  to 
Town  to  see  the  Sights."  23  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  717;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  As  Sung  and  Danced  at  the  Melodeon. 
T.  o.  border.   16.2  x  11.7  cm.  (cropped) 

146.  BILLY  PATTERSON.  NO.  2-Away  down  South  in 
Beaver  Creek  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  973;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

147.  BILLY  WILSON'S  ZOUAVES.- J5asft  on,  dash  on,  my 
gallant  Zouaves  (4  vs.)  Air:  The  plains  of  Mexico. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  By  M.  J.  Million;  with  period  and  hyphen  after  "Air"; 
sheet  no.  810;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   25.3  x  15.6  cm. 

148.  BINGEN  ON  THE  RHINE. -A  soldier  of  the  Legion 
lay  dying  in  Algiers  (7  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  21.1  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1097;  [without  imprint.) 
Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

149.  THE  BIRDS  OF  A  FEATHER.-Oft.'  life's  a  days 
journey  to  you  I  would  say  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

150.  THE  BIVOUAC— LegTOTJS  of  loyal  hearts  who  battle 
for  the  free  (3  vs.  and  chor.,  with  music  to  1st  vs.) 

[Air]  "Heaven  Helps  the  Brave." 

Headed:  "The  Women  of  America  to  the  Union 
Volunteers";  words  by  Harriet  L.  Castle;  music  by  J.  C. 
Beckel;  cop:  EDPa.;  publ.  and  for  sale  by  L.  Carleton; 
E.  F.  Stewart,  Music  Typographer. 

Soldier.  16.5  x  14.5  cm. 

151.  BLACK  AND  BLUE  EYES.— Tfte  brilliant  black  eye 
(3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

152.  THE  BLACKBIRD.- /t  was  on  one  fine  morning  for 
soft  recreation  (10  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 


11 


153.  BLACK  EY'D  SUSAN.— ^H  in  the  Downs  the  fleet 
was  moor'd  (7  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.6  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Black- Eyed  Susan";  variant  in  spelling  of 
"Downs"  in  1st  line;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpo.   Magnus  213a,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.9  cm. 


THE  BLACK  REGIMENT,  see  THE  SECOND 
LOUISIANA. 


154.   "BLAIR  AND  I  CALLED  ON  OUR  VAN. 
Blair,  you  blunder  (10  vs.) 
28.8  X  16.3  cm. 


-O!  Franky 


155.  BLESS  THE  LIPS  THAT  KISSED  OUR  DARLING. 
ANSWER  TO:  LET  ME  KISS  HIM  FOR  HIS  MOTHER.- 
Bless  the  lips  that  kissed  our  darling  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  J.  A.  C.  O'Connor;  music  by  Mary  E.  C. 
O'Connor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3) 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  ^6.2  x  16.8  em. 

b.  [Without  colon  after  "Answer  To";]  sheet  no.  1157; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

156.  BLEST  ONES  AT  HOME.  A  PARODY  ON  THE  OLD 
FOLKS  AT  HOME.— O'er  on  the  banks  of  life's  pure  river 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Rev.  L.  C.  Lockwood. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

157.  THE  BLIND  MAN'S  APPEAL. -O/i,  ye  whose  eyes 
are  opened  to  (8  vs.)  Tune— "Auld  Lang  Syne." 

Headed:  "To  The  Public";  with  text  beginning:  "The 
bearer  having  lost  his  eyesight.  .  ." 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  10.5  cm. 

BLOW  GENTLE  GALES,  see  THE  GREEN  BUSHES. 

158.  BLOW  YE  WINDS.—/  am  a  clever  darky,  my  nam.e 
is  Shoepeg  Sam.  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "What  Will  The  Neighbors  Say?";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

159.  THE  BLUE  DEVILS  OR  THE  NATIONAL  ZOUAVES. 
—  Now,  soldiers  all,  both  brave  and  true,  com.e  listen  unto 
me  (7  vs.) 

a.  By  W.  H.  P.;  sung  by  Thomas  Burkitt;  publ.  De  Mar- 
san (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  953;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.6  x  14.6  cm. 

160.  BLUE  EY'D  JEANNIE.-O,  the  days  of  long  ago 
(2  vs.  uneven  length) 

a.  Adv:  Programme  presented  Nightly  at  Buckley's 
Highly-Celebrated  Serenaders  .  .  .  Opera  House,  585 
Broadway  and  hear  Mr.  Percival  sing  this  Song;  music 


obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Blue-Eyed  Jennie";  with  chor.  added;  as 
sung  by  J.  L.  Carncross,  of  Carncross  and  Dixey's  Min- 
strels. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

161.  BLUE  EY'D  MARY. -Come,  tell  me,  blue-eyed 
stranger  (6  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.7  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  "Ey'd"  spelled  "Eyed"  in  title;  "blue-eyed"  in  1st 
line  spelled  "blue  ey'd";  two  additional  verses;  sheet  no. 
789;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

162.  BLUE  TAIL  FL,Y.— I  have  sung  about  my  long  tail 
blue  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.— Clar  de  Kitchen. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

163.  BLUE  VIOLETS— BZae  Violets,  blue  violets, 
beautiful  blue  violets  (2  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Charles  Melville,  the  celebrated  Balladist 
and  Tenor  vocalist;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  304;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  FLAG  OF 
THE  REPUBLIC  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

164.  THE  BOAT  SONG— As  gaily  our  boat  glides  o'er  the 
sea  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  taught  in  the  Public  Schools;  by  Mr.  Wheaton; 
print.  Johnson  (2);  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.;  adv:  Brook's  Ball 
Room  Monitor.   19.5  x  11.8  cm. 

165.  BOB  ANDERSON— B06  Anderson,  a  bold  boy  (4  vs.) 
Air— "John  Anderson." 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

166.  BOB  GRAY.— Afy  six  months  now  are  past  (3  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air,  Old  Dog  Tray. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

BOB- TAILED  NAG,  see  CAMPTOWN  RACERS. 

167.  BOBBING  AROUND  NO.  3.-/'j;e  got  a  song  just 
suited  to  the  lines  (5  vs.) 

A  Banjo  Solo,  as  composed  and  sung  by  J.  H.  Bud- 
worth,  at  White's  Opera  House,  with  Tremendous  Ap- 
plause. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  25  x  15.1 
cm. 

168.  THE  BOKER'S  DAUGHTER.— JVof  long  ago  in  Fifth 
Avenue  (4  vs.)  Air— Rat  Catcher's  Daughter. 

Being  the  5th  song  about  John  Dean  and  his  own  Mary 
Ann;  As  Sung  by  Ben  Stevens,  the  Comic  Vocalist. 


12 


a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.5 
cm. 

169.  A  BOLD  BRAVE  CREW.   SONG  OF  THE  SEA. -A 
bold  brave  crew  and  an  ocean  blue  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  633;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  15.1  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Mountain  Wave.";  with  4  chors.  included  in 
text  of  vs.;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  sailing  ship.  23.5  x  15.7  cm. 

170.  THE  BOLD  DRAGOON.— TTzere  was  an  ancient  fair, 
O  she  lov'd  a  nate  young  man  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  267;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.  24.5  x  15.8  cm. 

171.  THE  BOLD  PRrVATEER.-7<'s  0  my  dearest  Polly, 
you  and  I  must  part  (4  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.5  x  15.4 
cm. 

c.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border.  23.3  x  15. 1  cm. 

d.  Long  lines;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  21.7  x  14.8  cm. 

172.  BOLD  ROOSTER  BOY.-O/z,  I  am  a  roving  bold 
rooster  boy  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  simg  by  John  Winans;  print.  Andrews. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

173.  THE  BOLD  SHOEMAKER.-/  am  a  bold  republican, 
Jam.es  Irving  is  my  nam,e  (11  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  906;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

174.  BONAPARTE'S  FAREWELL.- Fareiuen  to  the  land, 
where  the  gloom  of  my  glory  (3  vs.)  Aii :   Captain  O'Kean. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  24.7  x  16.7  cm. 

175.  BONNIE  BLUE  FLAG.— We  are  a  band  of  patriots 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (1),  Music 
Publisher,  owner  of  the  copyright. 

a.  Title:  "Glorious  Old  Flag,  A  Reply  To  The  Bonnie 
Blue  Flag.";  [without  Gordon's  name;]  long  lines;  cop: 
1862,  Marsh,  EDPa.;  Marsh's  Music  Store  (1);  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "Copied  by  permission  of";]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  24  x  15. 1  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Copied  by  permission  of";]  but  with  title: 
"Union  Bonnie  Blue  Flag.";  long  lines;  music  obtained  at 
Marsh's  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  23.8  x  14  cm. 


e.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.  21  x  11.8  cm 

f.  [As  above;]  t.  o.  border.  20.4  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

g.  [As  above;]  adv:  Brook's  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  21.5  x  13.3  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  with  different  adv:  Johnson's  New  Cata- 
logue of  Songs. 

Aj-J  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

i.    Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  19,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

j.    Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  23a,  col.; 
[publ.]  Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

176.   BONNIE  JAMIE.— rfee  twilight  hour  is  stealing  (5  vs.) 

By  James  Robinson;  Respectfully  dedicated  to  Ser- 
geant Wheeler,  U.S.A.;  with  short  explanation  ending: 
"...  intended  for  a  companion  to  Annie  Laurie  and  the 
same  Air;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.9  x  16.5 


177.  THE  BONNY  BOY.— «  was  once  I  loved  a  bonny  boy 
(6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  876;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

178.  THE  BONNY  GREEN  FLAG.— Ttere  was  glorious 
times,  on  St.  Patrick's  day  (4  vs.) 

Written  by  Mr.  Fred  Rouse,  and  sung  by  him,  with 
immense  applause,  at  Harrison's  Assembly- Rooms, 
corner  of  Prospect  and  Jay  Streets,  Brooklyn;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  26  x  16.6  cm. 

179.  BONNY  JEAN.  — Oft.'  the  summer  moon  is  brightly 
blowing  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1). 
A-J  border.  20.2  x  12.8  cm. 

180.  BONNY  JOE.— /«  vain  the  broom,  blooms  fresh  and 
gay  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.    25.9 
X  16.5  cm. 

181.  THE  BOOT  BLACK.— ATow  listen  my  friends   (3  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air:— To  The  West. 

Sheet  no.  716;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  15.8  cm. 

182.  BOSTON  TEA-PARTY.-Once  on  a  time,  old  Johnny 
Bull  got  in  a  raging  fury  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border. 

b.  Written  and  Sung  by  Frank  Spear;  [without  hyphen  in 
title;]  sheet  no.  855;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

183.  THE  BOUNTY  JUMPER.-/n  my  prison-cell  I  stand 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Charley  Rhoades;  publ.  Boyd;  advs:  Boyd's 
Novel  Exchange,  and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border;  bounty  jumper  with  symbols  of  his 
trade.  20.9  x  12  cm. 


13 


184.  THE  BOUNTY-JUMPER.— Mj)  song  is  of  a  fast 
young  man  whose  name  was  Billy  Wires  (8  vs.)  Air:  Joe 
Bowers. 

a.  [Without  "The"  in  title;)  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.9  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  By  J.  Cross  Casten;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.6  x  17  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  22.4  x  14 
cm. 

d.  [Without  hyphen  in  title;]  with  quotes  around  Air;  A 
pathetic  ditty,  written  for  Pony  Smith,  the  favorite 
Ethiopian  Comedian,  by  J.  Cross  Casten;  sheet  no.  934; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   18.5  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above  except  for  publ.;]  adv:   Ten  illustrated, Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  176,  col.  20.5 

X  12.9  cm.  (cropped?) 

185.  THE  BOUNTY-JUMPER.   NO.  2. -Just  before  the 
battle,  m.other  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  13.2  cm. 

186.  BOWERY  GALS.— As  /  was  lumbering  down  de  street 
(6  vs  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

187.  BOWLD  SOGER  BOY.— Ofe,  there's  not  a  trade  that's 
going,  worth  showing  or  knowing  (3  vs.  uneven  length) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  "Sojer"  in  title; 
short  lines;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  soldier.  22.9  x  14.3  cm. 

c.  With  "The"  in  title  and  "Soger"  spelled  "Sojer"; 
short  lines;  adv:  Price  One  Cent.  All  the  New  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  13.6  cm. 

188.  THE  BOY  LAY  ON  THE  BATTLE -PLAIN. -r;ze  boy 
lay  on  the  Battle -plain  (3  vs.)  Air:   The  Kiss  dear  Maid. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and 
500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  126,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

189.  THE  BOYS  OF  COMPANY  E,  198TH  PENNA. 
VOLUNTEERS.  — /7Z  sing  you  a  song  in  m.achine  poetry 
(23  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— "Things  I  don't  like  to  see." 

Headed:  "Song". 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers.  30  x 
22.8  cm. 

190.  THE  BOYS  OF  KILKENNY.-Ofe,  the  boys  of  Kilkenny 
are  brave  roaring  blades  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson  has  600  different 
kinds  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border;  three  comic  figures.  19.3  x  13  cm. 
(cropped) 

191.  THE  BOYS  OF  THE  BOWERY  VYY.—  Iam  sttting  in 
the  Bowery  Pit  amongst  the  gallus  Boys  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Tune.— The  Newsboys. 

By  W.  C;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  16  cm. 


192.  THE  BOYS  OF  UNCLE  SMJlXS'l^.-How  are  you  alii 
Say,  are  you  well  (5  vs.)  Air— The  Hunters  of  Kentucky. 

By  H.  Angelo. 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.)  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  153,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   19.1  x  12.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  163,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
19.2  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  154a,  col.; 

publ.  Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

193.  BRADLEY  &  RANKIN'S  PRIZE  FIGHT  FOR  $1000  A 
SIDE.— Ke  sporting  men  give  ear  to  song,  that  dwell  both 
far  and  near  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Old  Virginia's  Shore. 

At  Point  Abino,  Canada,  August  1,  1857;  By  Sauger- 
ties  Bard;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

194.  BRAVE  AND  SAUCY.— We're  the  boys  that's  gay  and 
happy  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Gay  and  Happy. 

For  sale  at  Doyle's. 

T.  o.  border;  hand  holding  two  flags  with  motto  "God 
and  Our  Native  Land."  23.7  x  15  cm. 

195.  BRAVE  BESSY.  THE  SOLDIER'S  WIFE.- Tfee  swn 
was  sinking  low  when  a  tired  old  soldier  cam.e  (4  vs.) 
Air:  The  Soldiers  Tear. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.; 
adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

196.  BRAVE  BOYS  ARE  ISSn.— Heavily  falls  the  rain 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Dedicated  to  the  Sisters  of  our  Volunteers;  music 
published  by  H.  M.  Higgins;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  11.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.6  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  20.3  x  13.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25 
X  17  cm. 

e.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25.7  x  16.3  cm.  (cropped) 

f.  By  Henry  C.  Work;  Dedicated  to  the  Sisters  of  our 
Volunteers;  adv:  Soldiers  can  receive  14  of  our  illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  G.  P.  Hardwick;  copyright  secured. 

Letter  paper;  brown  ink;  double-line  border;  sailor 
with  flag,  figure  of  woman  beside  column  with  motto 
"Union",  soldier  with  flag  and  rifle.  20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  Title  "Brave  Boys.";  Words  and  Music  by  Henry  C. 
Work;  Published  by  H.  M.  Higgins;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.2  x  14.7  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  21.4  x  12.7  cm. 

i.    Title:  "Brave  Boys";  Words  and  Music  by  Henry  C. 
Work;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  133,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19  x  12.5  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  126,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 


14 


197.  BRAVE  LITTLE  MAC— George  B.  McClellan,  I  hear, 
is  coming  back  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   On  the  road  to 
Brighton. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  21.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21  x  15  cm. 

c.  Written  and  sung  by  J.  H.  Taylor,  the  great  comic 
Banjo  Soloist  with  great  applause;  with  "&c"  after  Air; 
adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  10, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   19.5  x  11.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  134, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  Written  and  sung  by  J.  H.  Taylor,  etc.;  publ.  Wrigley 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.6  x  13,3  cm. 

198.  BRAVE  SOLDIERS  OF  THE  WEST.-Long  raged  the 
fight  at  Winchester  (8  vs.)  Air:  West  sheet  on  the  flowing 
sea. 

Composed  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay  of  Philadelphia, 
Pa. 

a.  Publ.  for  the  Union  Soldiers  by  Gay. 

Letter  paper;  state  emblems  of  Indiana,  Pennsylvania 
and  Ohio,  col.  21  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  eagle  perching  on  flag  with 
bust  of  Washington  within  flag,  col.  20.3  x  12.2  cm. 

199.  BREAK  IT  GENTLY  TO  MY  MOTHER.-See;   e're 
the  sun  sinks  behind  those  hills  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

200.  BRENNEN  ON  THE  MOOR.— It's  of  a  fearless  Irish- 
man, a  long  story  I  shall  tell  (11  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  926;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

201.  A  BRIEF  HISTORY  OF  THE  MARRIAGE  OF  JOHN 
DEAN  AND  HIS  OWN  MARY  ANN.  BEING  THE  FOURTH 
SONG  PUBLISHED  ABOUT  THE  GALLANT  YOUNG 
COACHMAN  AND  THE  CRUEL  FATHER.- Tis  of  a  rich 
merchant  in  New  York  does  dwell  (14  vs.)  Air— "Villikins 
and  his  Dinah." 

With  2-line  "Moral"  at  end  of  vs.;  publ.  Andrews. 
23.5  X  15.5  cm. 

202.  BRIGHT  BLUE  EYES.  — T/wse  bright  blue  eyes—those 
bright  blue  eyes  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  Sung  at  Bryant's  Minstrels,  472  Broadway;  By 
T.  B.  Prendergast. 

a.  Print  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

BRIGHT  STAR  OF  HOPE,  see  ERIN  GO  BRAGH! 

203.  "BRIGHT  THINGS  CAN  NfiVER  DIE."— Bright  things 
can  never  die  even  though  they  fade  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Boyd  (1);  adv:  20,000  Songs  For  Sale;  2nd  song: 
"Aggie  Asthore." 

T.  o.  border.   22.6  x  13.7  cm. 

204.  BRIGHT-EYED  LITTLE  NELL  OF  NARRAGANSET- 


'BAY.—Full  well  do  I  remember  my  boyhood's  happy  hours 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  957;  Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co. 
(l);publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

205.  BRING  MY  BROTHER  BACK  TO  ME.-Bring  my 
brother  back  to  me  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Stephen  C.  Foster;  Music  published  by  S.  T. 
Gordon  (2). 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.2  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.6  x  14  cm. 

c.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  126,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
19.4  X  12.2  cm. 

e.  Adv;  Ten  Illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  186,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   19.3  x  11.8  cm. 

f.  Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).   19.5  X  12.7  cm.  (cropped?) 

g.  Sheet  no.  1154;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

BRING  THY  SHATTERED  HEART  TO  ME,  see 
DARLING  MINNIE  LEE. 

206.  BROADWAY  PANORAMA.— On  Broadway  you'll  see 
som.e  curious  sights  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  originally  Sung  by  Frank  Spear;  sheet  no. 
999;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

207.  BROADWAY  PROMENADE. -O/i,  here  I  am,  white 
folks,  as  you  all  do  see  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  Frank  Spear,  and  Sung  by  W.  S.  Budworth; 
sheet  no.  858;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

208.  THE  BROGVE.— When  I  came  to  this  country  'twas 
late  in  the  fall  (9  vs.) 

a.  Written  by  James  Kiernan;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  270;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  MONKEY'S 
WEDDING  on  verso.) 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

209.  THE  BROKEN  HEARTED  LOVER'S  FAREWELL.— 
Farewell  to  those  hopes  that  I  once  loved  to  cherish  (8  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

210.  BROOKLYN  13TH  REGIMENT.- Wiere  our  Country 
needed  men  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  A  Life  on  the  Ocean 
Wave. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  flag  border  with  central  star,  col.  25.3 
X  16.6  cm. 

b.  By  Albert  F.  Dawson;  sheet  no.  805;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 

21.2  X  13  cm. 


15 


211.  BROOKS'S  CANADA  SONG. -To  Canada  Brooks  was 
asked  to  go  (6  vs.)  Air— The  Cork  Leg. 

From  The  Evening  Post;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  14.6  cm. 


Headed:   "Captain  Dan  Rice,  The  Nation's  Humorist, 
on  .  .  .  ";  as  sung  in  Washington  City  by  Dan  Rice,  March 
4th  1857;  publ.  by  Permission;  publ.  Joshua  Peckham  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   34  x  14.4  cm. 


212.  BROTHER,  TELL  ME  OF  THE  BATTLE. .- Br  other , 
tell  me  of  the  battle  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Root  &  Cady  (2),  Music 
Publishers. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  165,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

213.  BROTHER'S  FAINTING  AT  THE  TlOOR.-Yonder 
comes  a  weary  soldier  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  E.  Bowers;  Music  by  P.  R.  Isaacs;  music 
obtained  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.5  x  17  cm; 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.2 
cm. 

c.  (Without  "music  obtained  .  .  .  ";]  music  by  P.  B. 
Isaacs;  [publ.]  Firth,  Son  &  Co. 

A- J  border.  18  xi3.3cm.  (cropped) 

d.  With  "Music  Published  by  Firth,  Son  &  Co'.';  [publ.] 
Doyle  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   21.6  x  13.2  cm. 

e.  With  "Music  published  by  Firth,  Son  &  Co.";  [publ.] 
by  P.  B.  Isaacs;  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor; 
publ.  Johnson  (2)  [in  bold  face  type]. 

A-J  border.  24  x  16.2  cm. 

f.  [As  above,  but  imprint  in  thin  type  and  without  adv.] 
A-J  border.  20.5  x  13.3  cm. 

g.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  195,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

h.   Music  by  P.  B.  Isaacs;  sheet  no.  1200;  publ.  Wrigley. 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15. 2  cm. 

214.  BROWNELL,  THE  GALLANT  ZOUAVE.- YoM  may 
talk  of  your  warriors  of  old  (8  vs.)  Air— Rosin  the  Bow, 
or  Old  Tippecanoe. 

Composed  by  William  Sutherland,  and  respectfully 
dedicated  to  the  New  York  Fire  Zouaves;  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

Multi-line  border;  Zouave  holding  flag  and  sabre, 
standing  on  Confederate  flag.  23.6  x  14.8  cm. 

215.  BRUCE'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  ARMY.— Scofs,  who  hae 
wV  Wallace  hied  (3  vs.) 

a.  Title:  "Robert  Bruce's  Address  to  His  Army";  6  vs. 
with  second  version;  by  Robert  Burns;  with  narrative  be- 
ginning: "[Syme  of  Ryedale  states  that  this  fine  ode  was 
composed  during  a  storm  .  .  .  ";  print.  Johnson  (2).  23.5 
X  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  606;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  WHEN  THIS 
CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.3  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  song  on  verso.]   24  x  15.5  cm. 

216.  BUCANIER'S  BRIDE.— AM)a>i,  away  o'er  the  boundless 
deep  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.7  x  16. 1  cm. 

217.  BUCHANAN'S  CABINET. -/'»z  staying  for  a  while  at 
the  Marble  Front  Hotel  (9  vs.)  Tune— The  Favorite  Air  of 
"Root  Hog  or  Die." 


218.  BUCK  GOATS,  NO.  \.  —  As  the  Buff:  was  going  up 
Walnut  Street  (11  vs.) 

Composed  by  one  of  the  boys;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  12.2  cm. 

219.  THE  BUCKTAIL  BOYS.— When  first  our  Country  was 
beset  (12  vs.) 

By  Jacob  Creamer,  Camp  Pierpont,  Oct.  31,  1861; 
print.   Polkinhorn. 

T.  o.  border.  26.4  x  11. 9  cm. 

220.  BULL  DOG  AN'  DE  BABY.— /'w  gwine  to  sing  de 
song  what  I  fotch  from  Warginny  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed,  and  sung  nightly  with  thunders  of  Applause 
by  Old  Dan  Emmit,  at  White's  Melodeon,  53  Bowery,  N.Y.; 
print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15.1  cm. 

221.  BULLY  FOR  ALL.— To  sing  a  bully  song  I'll  try 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  Dan  Bryant,  at  Bryants'  Minstrels;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3)  [with  "str."  in  imprint]. 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  22      14.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  but  with  "Street"  in  imprint.]  25  x  16.3 
cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  written  by  H. 
Angelo,  and  Sung  by  Dixey,  at  Sandford's;  Music  had  of 
W.  H.  Coulston,  Music  Publisher;  [adv:  Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill- Heads,  etc.  and  publ.  Johnson  cropped  off.] 

A-J  border.  20.5  x  14.2  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Bully  for  You";  written  by  H.  Angelo,  and 
Sung  by  Dixey,  at  Sandfords;  music  had  of  W.  H.  Coulston, 
Music  Publisher.  21  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

222.  BULLY  FOR  US.— >1  little  song  I'm  going  to  sing 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Harry  Fox,  the  Popular  Negro 
Comedian,  at  Hitchcock's  National  Concert-Hall,  New 
York;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

IJ,e  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

223.  BULLY  FOR  YOV.— There  is  a  song  we  all  should 
know  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  expressly  for  J.  H.  Johnson,  by  John  L. 
Zieber;  cop:  1861,  J.  H.  Johnson,  EDPa. 
A-J  border.   20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

224.  BULLY  NIGGER  AMOS.-i'd  hab  you  all  to  know 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  S.  S.  Purdy. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1345;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  xi5  cm. 

225.  BUMMERS,  COME  AND  MEET  VS.—McClellan  is 
our  leader  now,  we've  had  our  last  retreat  (7  vs.  and 
chors.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.    25  x  is. 3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4).  25.1  x  16.7  cm. 


16 


c.  Sheet  no.  721;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  12.2  cm. 

226.  BUNCH  OF  BLUE  RIBBONS.— O,  dear,  what  can  the 
matter  be  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  oupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  298;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  WHACK  ROW 
DE  DOW  NO.  2  on  verso.) 

Wrigley  kissing  oupids  border.  25.5  x  14.2  cm. 

227.  BURIAL  OF  SIR  JOHN  UOOR'E.-Not  a  drum  was 
heard  nor  a  funeral  note  (4  vs.) 

a.  De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Title;  "Soldier's  Burial";  divided  into  8  vs.;  Air- 
Burial  of  Sir  John  Moore;  by  Wolfe;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  14.6  cm. 

228.  THE  BURNING  BUSH,  AN  EMBLEM  OF  THE 
PRESENT  WAR.   OUR  STATE  AND  CONDITION.- WTjere 
Moses  the  bush  did  discover  (7  vs.) 

Composed  by  Maria  L.  Davis,  (Widow.)  Philadelphia, 
July,  1864.  29  x  12  cm. 

229.  THE  BUTCHER  BOY.-/«  Jersey-City  where  I  did 
dwell  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26  x  16. 1  cm. 

230.  BUTTERMILK  AND  PRATIES.-  Ye  may  talk  about 
your  suppers  grand  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air,— The  Quilting 
Party. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1160;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.5  x  15.7  cm. 

231.  BY  THE  SAD  POTOMAC  SHORE,  OR  THE  DEATH 
OF  COL.  BAKER.-  Doum  along  the  sad  Potomac  (6  vs.) 

Music  composed  by  David  A.  Warden;  Music  obtained 
for  Fifteen  Cents  Each  [of]  D.  A.  Warden  (1);  publ.  Auner 
(3). 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  "Or  the  Death  of  Col.  Baker"  in 
title;]  with  "Philadelphia"  in  imprint. 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  13.2  cm. 

232.  BY  THE  SAD  SEA-WAVE. -By  the  sad  sea -waves 
(2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  463;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  GALLANT 
SONS  OF  ERIN  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23.6  x  15.6  cm. 

BY-GONE  DAYS,  see  MOTHER,  DEAR,  I'LL  COME 
HOME  AGAIN. 

233.  CALIFORNIA  EMIGRANT.-/ come /rom  Quakerdelfy 
(4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune,  "Oh  Susannah." 

Adv:   Price  One  Cent.  All  the  New  Songs  constantly 
on  hand. 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  13.7  cm. 

234.  CALIFORNIA'S  GOLDEN  SHIELD.-/'m  going  to  sing 
of  warriors ,  and  noble  statesmen  too  (3  vs.)  Air— Castles 
in  the  Air. 

By  Hugh  Robison;  publ.  Wm.  Cohen;  print.  Calhoun. 
T.  o.  border;  flag.  26.7  x  11.3  cm. 


235.  CALL  ME  NOT  BACK  FROM  THE  ECHOLESS 
SHORE,  IN  REPLY  TO  "ROCK  ME  TO  SLEEP."- W^y  is 
your  forehead  deep  furrowed  with  care  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Words  by  Chas.  Carrol  Sawyer;  Music  by  Henry 
Tucker;  music  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpo.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1108;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

236.  CALL  THE  BOYS  OF  "16.— Now  the  ball  begins  to 
open  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  Teddy  Regan. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.5  x  16. 3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  741;  publ,  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   21.9  x  12.2  cm. 

237.  CAMP  GALS.  — 0,  don't  you  see  the  camp  girls 
running  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Year  of  Jubolo. 

[By]  J.  Scott. 

a.  [Without  author's  name;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  22.8  x  14. 2  cm. 

b.  Composed  by  I.V.T.V.J.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.  19.8  x  12.1  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitors, 
and  Kromer's  (Upham's)  Hair  Dye. 

A-J  border.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

d.  Composed  by  I.V.T.V.J.;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   20.2 
X  11.5  cm. 

e.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  13.8  cm. 

238.  CAMP  SG^G.—Now  we  have  joined  the  Cavalry  (4  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— "This  Night  we'll  joint  the  Revelry." 

By  Corporal ;  dedicated  to  Col.  R.  Butler  Price, 

of  the  Second  Pennsylvania  Cavalry.  21.5  x  13.2  cm. 

239.  THE  CAMPTOWN  RACERS,  OR,  GWINE  TO  RUN 
ALL  aiCKT .— Camptown  ladies,  sing  dis  song  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Bob-Tailed  Nag";  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  13. 3  cm. 

240.  THE  CANADIAN  BOAT  SOHG .— Faintly  as  tolls  the 
ev'ning  chime  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.5  x  16.8  cm. 

241.  CAPTAIN  CLACKIT.— Lec<Mrerf  by  pa  and  ma,  o'er 
night  (5  vs.)  Air— "Biddy  the  Basket  Woman." 

Sheet  no.  674;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

242.  CAPTAIN  FITZEASY.— Wftra  /  lived  at  home  with  my 
father  and  mother  (6  vs.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  G.  W.  Anderson,  the  Irish 
Vocalist;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15. 1  cm. 

243.  THE  CAPTAIN  OF  THE  PROVOST.   (PARODY.)- vis 
/  walked  down  the  street  I  heard  the  band  play  (4  vs.  and 
chors.) 


17 


As  originally  sung  by  George  R.  Edeson,  the  popular 
comedian  and  comic  vocalist,  at  Canterbury  Hall,  Wash- 
ington, D.C. 

a.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs  [pub!.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpe.   Magnus  91,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus.   21  x  13.1  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpe.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.1  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpe. 
Magnus  229.   19  x  12  cm. 

244.  THE  CAPTAIN  WITH  THE  WHISKERS,  (title  printed 
sideways)— As  they  marched  through  the  town  with  their 
banners  so  gay  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  head  of  man  with  razor.  20.9  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  man.  20.6  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  Johnson's  address  in  two  lines.  24.1 
X  15.5  cm. 

245.  THE  CAPTAIN  WITH  HIS  WHISKERS.-Ofe,  /  crept 
to  the  window  to  hear  the  band  play  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

As  sung  by  Mrs.  W.  J.  Florence. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpe.   Magnus  138,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

246.  CAPTURE  OF  JEFF.  OAVIS.-White  folks  now  I'll 
sing  a  ditty,  if  you'll  listen  to  my  song  (5  vs.) 

Composed  &  sung  by  John  Forbes  at  Long's  Varieties 
758  South  Third  St.,  Below  German,  Philadelphia. 

a.  Publ.  Aimer  (5). 

A-J  border;  soldier  chasing  Davis.  23.2  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Auner's  initials  in  both  imprints. 
20.9  X  12.8  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  man  with  pistol  and  lantern.  24.5  x  15.5 
cm. 

247.  THE  CAPTURE  OF  JEFF.  DAVIS.- ifasie,  haste  and 
eat  your  breakfast,  boy  (7  vs.) 

Vs.  headed:  "Say,  Does  He  Fancy  He  Does  See  That 
Horrible  'Sour  Apple  Tree'?";  [signed]  De  Wolfe. 

Lightning  striking  a  wolf,  and  a  mounted  messenger. 
20.6  X  11.5  cm. 

248.  THE  CAPTURE  OF  JEFF  DAVIS— Poor  Jeffs  career 
is  at  an  end  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  The  Quilting  Party. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16.9  cm. 

c.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  1312;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  14.1  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5 
x  13.6  cm. 

249.  CAPTURE  OF  NEW  ORLEANS.-Come  all  you 
Union-loving  men,  wherever  you  may  be  (20  vs.) 

Composed  by  Wm.  Densmore,  U.S.  Ship  Brooklyn. 
T.  o.  border;  ship.  42.2  x  12  cm. 


250.  CAPTURE  OF  RICHMOND  AND  PETERSBURG- 
We'll  sing  the  doom  and  the  final  fall  (9  vs.  and  chors.) 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac . 
By  the  Author;  Words  by  G.  P.  Hardwick;  advs;  Copies  of 
this  Poem  sent  by  G.  P.  Hardwick,  and  Discharged  sol- 
diers can  procure  our  circular  of  Prices;  cop:  1865,  G.  P. 
Hardwick,  DCD.C. 

Double-line  border;  red  and  blue  ink;  regimental 
insignia  and  two  battle  scenes.  33.5  x  21.5  cm. 

251.  CAPTURE  OF  SALLY  DAVIS.-O  Ladies,  have  you 
seen  Jeff  Davis  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Kingdom  Coming. 

Written  by  John  P.  Larkin. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.9  x  is. 8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

252.  CAROLINE  OF  EDINBURG  TOWN.-Cowe  all  young 
men  and  maidens,  attend  unto  m.y  rhyme  (11  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.6  x  15  cm. 
CARRIE  LEA,  see  CARRIE  LEE  NO.  2. 

253.  CARRIE  LEE.— PWjere  the  babbling  brook  does  flow 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  947;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

254.  CARRIE  LEE.  NO.  2.— They  made  her  a  grave  in  the 
wild  wood  shade  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  (Without  "No.  2"  in  title;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  hdpe.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).  20.1  X  12.7  cm. 

c.  Title;  "Carrie  Lea";  words  slightly  varying;  headed: 
"Second  Edition";  Written  by  Walter  Warren,  and  sung 
by  the  Grotto  Minstrels,  at  the  New  Grotto  Concert  Hall, 
N.W.  Corner  Fifth  and  Chestnut  Sts.;  publ.  Warren  (1). 

T.  o.  border;  woman  with  sewing  machine.  21.6  x  15 
cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  983;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15. 1  cm. 

255.  THE  CARRIER  DOVE.— FZji  away  to  my  native  land, 
sweet  Dove  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.6  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24.3  x  25.1  cm. 

c.  2nd  song:  "  'Tis  Midnight  Hour." 
T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  15.3  cm. 

256.  CARRIERS  ADDRESS.— AwM^zf,  Old  Year!  Go,  with 
thy  load  of  death  (24  vs.) 

Engraved  by  Wm.  Howland;  print.  J.  F.  Trow. 

Elaborate  oval-shaped  woodcut  border,  with  Columbia 
chasing  Slavery  at  the  top,  and  "January  1,  1862"  at  the 
bottom.  63.2  x  44.5  cm. 

257.  CARRIERS  ADDRESS  1860  TO  THEIR  PATRONS. 
PHILADELPHIA  DAILY  NEWS.— Z>ost  mark  that  ceaseless 
ruthless  wanderer.  Time  (2  vs.) 


18 


Signed:   P.  S.  W. 

Printed  in  red  and  blue;  t.  o.  border;  woodcuts  of 
"Plan  of  the  Proposed  Alterations  of  the  County  Buildings" 
and  "Proposed  Monument  to  the  Thirteen  States."  40.5 
X  33.3  cm. 

258.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  FOR  THE  CHRISTIAN 
INSTRUCTOR.   1864:.— Still  in  the  midst  of  tempest  and  of 
strife  (2  columns) 

With  calender;  print.  Wm.  S.  Young. 
T.  o.  border,  with  floral  comers;  woodcut  of 
Washington  Monument.  45.8  x  30.3  cm. 

259.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  EVENING  BULLETIN 
FOR  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR,  1858  AND  1859.-^ 
twelvemonth  gone!  The  sam.e  old  tale  to  tell   (6  vs.) 

With  calender. 

Printed  in  red  and  black;  t.  o.  border  with  pointed 
top.  40.1  X  28.4  cm. 

260.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  EVENING  BULLETIN 
FOR  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S,  1859  &  ISBO.-Tfee 
Century  is  growing  old  (Y  vs.) 

With  calender;  print.  McLaughlin  Brothers. 
Double-line  border;  woodcut  of  Father  Christmas 
and  the  New  Year.  46  x  32  cm. 

261.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  EVENING  BULLETIN 
FOR  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S,  1860  -  61.— T/je 
Carrier's  Address  we  leave  at  your  door  (2  columns) 

With  calender;  print.  McLaughlin  Brothers. 
Double-line  border;  woodcut  of  feast  scene.  45.7 
X  35  cm. 

262.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  CHRISTMAS,  1861.   NEW 
YEAR,  1862.  THE  EVENING  BULLETIN.— Ha^/)3) 
Christmas ! fathers ,  mothers,  brothers,  sisters,  great 
and  small  (2  columns) 

With  calender;  print.  M'Laughlin  Brothers. 
T.  o.  border,  with  floral  corners;  woodcut  of  battle 
scene.  46.7  x  32  cm. 

263.  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  THE  EVENING  BULLETIN 
1862-  '63.— Peculiar  joy  and  blessing  {H  vs.) 

With  calendar;  print.  M'Laughlin  Brothers. 
Two  multiple-line  borders;  ornamental  arms  of 
Pennsylvania.  31.1  x  24.3  cm. 

264.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  NEW- YORK  DAILY 
TIMES.— Kind  Friends  and  Patrons!  That,  I  think's,  the 
way  (21  vs.) 

With  date  "1856"  at  top;  print.  Baker  &  Godwin  (1). 
Red  and  blue  ink;  border  of  elaborate  floral  ornaments, 
at  top  figure  of  Enterprise.  61.2  x  48.4  cm. 

265.  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  PENNSYLVANIA 
INQUIRER,  CHRISTMAS,  1858.   NEW  YEAR,  1859. -«0M) 
fleetly  pass  the  hours  (41  vs.) 

With  calendar. 

T.  o.  border;  ornamental  arms  of  Philadelphia.  44.9 
X  33  cm. 

266.  THE  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF 
THE  CHRISTIAN  INSTRUCTOR.   DECEMBER  25,  1861.- 
Gray  centuries  of  eld  return  (10  vs.) 

Print.  Dickerson  &  Wagenseller. 
Blue  ink;  t.  o.  border,  with  floral  corners.   35.6  x 
21.8  cm. 

267.  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF  "THE 
PRESS."  THE  PRESS.— God  said-  "Let  there  be  light" 
(7  vs.) 


By  Ebenezer  Elliott,  January  1,  1859;  print.   Press 
Job  Printing  Office. 

Red  and  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border.   34.5  x  25.9  cm. 

268.  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF  THE 
SUNDAY  TRANSCRIPT,  JANUARY  1ST,  1859.-When 
night's  shadows  gather  slowly  (10  vs.) 

Two  single-line  borders,  inclosing  arms  of  Philadel- 
phia, Indian  Squaws  and  corner  pieces.  42.1  x  28.2  cm. 

269.  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF  THE 
SUNDAY  TRANSCRIPT,  JANUARY  1ST,  1860.  THE 
DYING  YEAR.  AN  OLD  MAN'S  STORY.— The  loud  laugh 
rings  in  the  good  old  home  (9  vs.) 

Red  ink;  two  single-line  borders,  inclosing  arms  of 
Philadelphia,  Indian  Squaws  and  corner  pieces.  42.9  x 
30.3  cm. 

270.  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  TO  THEIR  PATRONS,  FOR 
CHRISTMAS  &  NEW  YEAR,  1859  and  1860.  NORTH 
AMERICAN  AND  U.S.  GAZETTE. -Bacfe  to  your  door 
uiith  annual  pleasure  hies  (10  vs.) 

Blue  ink;  floral  metal-cut  border  in  red;  eagle  with 
symbols  of  American  industry  at  top,  and  comic  scene  at 
foot,  col.  40.8  X  33.2  cm. 

271.  CARRIER'S  ANNUAL  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS 
OF  THE  DAVENPORT  GAZETTE  FOR  JANUARY  1,  1864. 
—Time  sweeps  along  from  shore  to  shore  (30  vs.) 

Two  double-line  borders  enclosing  brief  sentiments, 
ornamental  corners.  41.1  x  24.6  cm. 

272.  THE  CARRIER'S  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW- YEAR 
RHYMES  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF  THE  AMERICAN  VSE&- 
BYTF.RSA'H.- Another  year  of  human  life  (4  vs.  uneven 
length) 

T.  o.  border;  supporters  of  arms  of  Philadelphia  with 
"1864  -  65"  in  shield,  and  figures  of  a  farmer  and  Plenty 
below.   35.5  x  21.8  cm. 

273.  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE  SUNDAY  DISPATCH,  TO 
THEIR  PATRONS.   CHRISTMAS,  AND  NEW  YEAR,  1859. 
—The  shades  of  night  were  lightening  fast  (9  vs.) 

With  calendar. 

T.  o.  border.  25.5  x  30  cm. 

274.  CARRY  ME  BACK  TO  OLE  WlRCmi^Y .— De  floating 
scow  ob  ole  Virginny  (3  vs.) 

Sung  Nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands;  print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.9  x  15.2  cm. 

275.  CARRY  THE  NEWS  TO  MARY.— Oh!  Martha  wept 
and  Mary  cried  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  publ.  by  R.  Wittig;  Words  by  Charley  Howard; 
Music  by  Walter  Bray;  Arranged  by  Eddie  Fox;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

276.  THE  CARTE-DE-VISITE  AhBVU.-Of  noveUy  this 
is  the  age  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Chanting  Benny. 

A  Comic  Song  written  for  Tony  Pastor;  [publ.)  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.4  x  16  cm. 

277.  THE  CAVALIER.— 'TMias  a  beautiful  night,  the  stars 
shone  bright  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  Miss  Agatha  Mandeville. 

a.  Title:  "The  Gay  Cavalier";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  (As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.5  x  16  cm. 


19 


c.  With  "At  Jenkin's  Concert  Saloon,  Seventh  &  Chestnut 
Sts."  following  singer's  name;  publ.  Zieber;  print.  Harris. 

T.  o.  border.  19.1  x  13  cm. 

d.  With  "Gay"  in  title;  sheet  no.  441;  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  FAIRY  BELLE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

278.  CAVALRY  SONG.— £//),  up,  brave  comrades!-  to 
horse,  to  horse  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By]  Schiller. 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  95,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   19.3  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  163,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  172,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.1  X  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  black  ink.  20  x  12.5  cm. 

279.  CHAMPAGNE  CHARLIE.— /'I'e  seen  a  deal  of  gaiety 
throughout  my  noisy  life  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  738;  music  publ.  W.  H.  Boner  &  Co. 
T.  o.  border.   19.2  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

280.  CHAMPAGNE  CHARLIE.  NO.  2.— Some  time  ago,  I 
had  a  beau,  and  Charlie  was  his  nam.e  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  had  of  C.  H.  Ditson  &  Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.6  x  17.1  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Champagne  Charlie  was  His  Name!";  short 
lines;  sheet  no.  1034;  As  sung  by  Billy  Morris,  of  Morris 
Bros.  Minstrels;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.  20.1  x 
12.7  cm. 

281.  CHANGE  OF  SONG  OF  THE  PRESENT  TIMES.— 
This  world's  seen  many  changes,  sirs,  since  it  was  first 
created  (6  vs.)  Air— "Bow,  wow,  wow." 

Headed:  "Zieber's  Popular  Editions";  adv.  above 
title:  Wholesale  agents:  T.  M.  Scroggy  (1)  and  H.  K. 
Logan;  by  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  Zieber;  adv:  Buy 
"Yellow  Tom  Cat",  etc. 

Yellow  paper;  t.  o.  border.   20.6  x  14  cm. 

282.  LE  CHANT  DU  DEPART.— La  victoire  en  chantant 
nous  ouvre  le  barriere  (  7  vs. ) 

Hymne  de  Guerre  [Juillet  1794]  par  Marie- Joseph  de 
Chenier;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.1  x  16.4  cm. 

CHARCOAL  MAN,  see  THE  PEANUT  GAL. 

283.  THE  CHARGE  AT  ROANOKE.- O/j.' see  yow  not, 
yonder,  the  Foe  in  his  might  (3  vs.)  Air:  Star-Spangled 
Banner. 

By  the  Hawkins'  Zouaves,  Feb.  8th,  1862. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.8  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  23  x  14  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  948;  by  S.  G.  Elder;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

284.  CHARMING  EMMA  SNOW. -Way  down  in  Alabama 
(3  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune:— Dearest  Mae. 


a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.5x15.4 
cm. 

285.  CHARMING  JANE  LOUISA.— /<  was  in  the  merry 
m,onth  of  June,  when  woods  and  field  were  flowery  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  763;  publ.  Wrigley  [printed  upside-down]. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

286.  CHARMING  LOVELY  NELL.— /f  was  down  in 
Louisiana  State  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

287.  THE  CHARMING  WOMAN.— So,  Miss  Myrtle  is  going 
to  m.arry  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  I6.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  sheet  no.  633;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.9  x  15.5  cm. 

288.  THE  CHARMING  YOUNG  LADY  I  MET  IN  THE 
RAIN.— O/;.'  listen  to  m.e,  and  a  tale  I  will  tell  you  (6  vs.) 
Air:  Jenny  Jones. 

By  J.  G.  Peters. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  after  title;]  sheet  no.  1318;  publ. 
Wrigley  [imperfectly  printed]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

289.  THE  CHARMING  YOUNG  WIDOW  I  MET  IN  THE 
TKh.'Si.— Whilst  in  New-Jersey,  a  letter  was  sent  to  me 
(5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.4  x  16. 8  cm. 

b.  Air:  Jenny  Jones;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.2  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  With  "IN"  in  place  of  "ON"  in  title;  Air-"Jenny 
Jones";  sheet  no.  1017;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

Multi-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.  20.2  x 
12.6  cm. 

290.  CHEER  BOYS,  CHEER.— Cfeeer  boys,  cheer,  no  more 
of  idle  sorrow  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Billheads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

291.  CHEER!  BOYS,  CHEER !-Cfeeer.'  boys,  cheer! 
yield  not  to  idle  sorrow  (2  vs.) 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  153,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  176,  col.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

292.  CHEER,  BOYS,  CHEER  FOR  NEXT  NOVEMBER.- 
Cheer  boys,  cheer  for  next  November  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air.— When  this  Cruel  War  is  over. 

By  "Our  Ned." 


20 


a.  Adv:  Dealers  and  Clubs  can  be  supplied  with  Cam- 
paign Songs  [by]  Mason  &  Co.;  Copyright  Secured. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  McClellan.   23.5  x  15.'2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  double-line  border;  floating  hemisphere 
with  flag  and  motto  "Our  Country".   24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

293.  CHEER  FOR  THE  PILOTS!  — Tfee  sturdy  Pilots  put 
to  sea  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners,  col.   26  x  16.4  cm. 

294.  CHEER  UP,  AND  BE  A  BKi.CK.—  Fellow  Sporters! 
don't  you  know  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.5  x  16. 6  cm. 

295.  CHEER  UP  SAM,  OR  SARAH  BELL.-Ofe.'  down  in 
Alabama  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  published  and  sold  by  Robinson  &  Son;  publ. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  With  comma  after  "Up"  and  exclamation  point  after 
title. 

A-J  border.  20.1  x  13. 1  cm.   (cropped) 

296.  A  CHEERFUL  SONG.  AMEBIC  AN.- High  feasting 
makes  us  earthly  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  204,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

297.  THE  CHESTNUT  STREET  BEAU.— A  sight  for  the 
tailors  was  Jonathan  Spring  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Printed  &  sold  at  the  S.E.  cor.  4th  &  Vine,  Phila. 
[George  S.  Harris] 

Multi-line  border.  20.6  x  10.6  cm. 

298.  THE  CHICKAHOMINY.— Dirf  yoM  see  the  bloody  fray 
(7  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "The  Happy  Land  of  Canaan." 

Respectfully  Dedicated  to  Brig.  Gen.  Grover  and  his 
gallant  Brigade;  by  W.  F.  S.;  print.  King  &  Baird. 
T.  o.  border.   30.5  x  23.3  cm. 

THE  CHILD  OF  THE  REGIMENT,  see  MONEY  IS 
YOUR  ONLY  FRIEND. 

299.  CHILDREN  IN  HEAVEN!  I-AroMJzd  the  throne  of  God 
in  Heaven  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Sabbath  Schools  supplied  with 
Hymns  at  wholesale  Prices. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.6  cm. 

CHILDREN'S  INVITATION,  see  WILLIE  AND  I. 

300.  THE  CHOICE.— >1  maiden  lovely  as  tbe  [sic]  spring 
(9  vs.)  Air:   The  Memory  of  the  Past.  [Maritana.j 

Words  by  Edward  E.  Rogers;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

CHOICE  OF  A  WIFE,  see  OH  BREATHE  NOT  HER 

NAME. 

CHRIST  BLESSING  THE  CHILDREN,  see  AN  ORIG- 
INAL POEM. 


301.  THE  CHRISTIAN  SAl'LO'R.— What  vessel  are  you 
sailing  in  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Lilly  Dale,  or  any  Long 
Metre  Tune. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

302.  THE  CHRISTIAN  SOLDIER.— T/jere  will  he  own  my 
worthless  nam.e  (9  vs.) 

Sold  by  Jas.  Miller;  [publ.  Johnson,  imprint  cropped.] 
A-J  border.  21.5  x  14. 9  cm. 

303.  THE  CHRISTIAN  SOLDIER.— We  lost  way  down  at 
Fredericksburg  (8  vs.) 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  John  Lorence,  who  lost  both 
legs,  at  the  Battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  North  Carolina, 
February  8th,  1862;  cop:  1864,  J.  Lorence,  EDPa. 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  motto  "Our 
Country".  23.7  x  13.8  cm. 

304.  CHRISTMAS  &  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS,  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  FITZGERALD'S  CITY  ITEM  TO  THEIR 
PATRONS,  DECEMBER  25,  1857,  AND  JANUARY  1,  1858. 

—  The  old  year  is  fleeting,  what  a  tale  it  doth  tell  (12  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.   33.8  x  24.3  cm. 

305.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER.  DECEM- 
BER 25,  1856,  AND  JANUARY  1,  Wil.—As  the  carrier- 
dove  from,  a  distant  shore  (24  vs.) 

Print.  J.  S.  McCalla. 

Several  elaborate  t.  o.  borders,  with  floral  ornaments. 
40.5  X  33  cm. 

306.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER.   DECEM- 
BER 25,  1860,  AND  JANUARY  1,  imi.—  Harkl  the  loud 
bugle-note,  emphatic,  clear  (2  colixmns) 

Double  t.  o.  border.  46.1  x  30.9  cm. 

307.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER.  DECEM- 
BER 25,  1861,  AND  JANUARY  1,  18(,2 .— Revolving  years 
are  measured  out  to  Earth  (2  columns) 

T.  o.  border,  with  floral  cornerpieces.  48.2  x  30.6 
cm. 

308.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER.   DECEM- 
BER 25,  1862,  AND  JANUARY  1,  1863.-  The  tramp  of 
Time!  not  like  the  martial  clang  (2  columns) 

Print.  J.  S.  McCalla. 

T.  o.  border.  48.2  x  30.7  cm. 

309.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER.  DECEM- 
BER 25,  1863,  AND  JANUARY  1,  1864.-  The  morning 
breaks  on  the  tented  field  (4  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  33.3  x  20. 8  cm. 

310.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPAL  RECORDER,  DECEM- 
BER 25TH,  1865,  AND  JANUARY  1ST,  1866. -^s  we 
stand  upon  the  threshhold  (10  vs.) 

Print.  McCalla  &  Stavely. 

Two  t.  o.  borders,  with  floral  cornerpieces.  47.7  x 
30.5  cm. 

311.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE 
CARRIERS  OF  THE  EPISCOPALIAN,  JANUARY  1,  1867. 

—  "Set  ye  up  Waymarks,"  saith  the  Sacred  word  (10  vs.) 

Blue  ink;  two  t.  o.  borders.  43.1  x  27.8  cm. 


21 


312.  CHRISTMAS  AND  NEW  YEAR'S  ANNUAL  OF  THE 
NORTH  AMERICAN  AND  UNITED  STATES  GAZETTE 
1864.  1865.—^  New  Year's  greeting  to  our  patrons  all 
(11  vs.) 

Print.  Duross,  Bros. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  and  bust  of  Washington.  48.5  x 
30.7  cm. 

313.  THE  CITY  BEAU.—  You'll  see  a  creature  on  the 
street  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Comic  Song,  as  sung  by  Cool  White;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

314.  THE  CITY  WATCHMAN'S  ADDRESS  AND  SONG.- 
To  our  kind  friends  and  patrons,  this  day  we  appear  (10 
vs.,  and  1  vs.  and  chor.)  Headed:  "1851.  Christmas. 
1851.";  list  of  police  stations  below;  print.  King  &  Baird 

T.  o.  border,  vrith  arched  top,  incorporating  eagle, 
seals,  portraits,  figures  and  Christmas  scenes.  47.8  x 
30.6  cm. 

315.  CLAP  YOUR  HANDS  TILL  DADDY  COMES  HOME. 
—I  am  a  darkey  from  the  Country  0  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  934;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.1  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  LAs  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.6 
cm. 

316.  CLARA  DAY.— r/ze  moon  is  shining  bright  and  clear 
(3  vs.) 

Words  by  I.  P.  Anderson;  music  by  M.  H.  Frank;  cop: 
1864,  J.  Marsh,  EDPa.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:  J.  Marsh 
(1)  All  the  new  and  popular  sheet  music,  and  Prof.  Brooks, 
Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  24.1  x  12.6  cm. 

317.  CLARE'S  DRAGOONS.— Wtew,  on  Ramillies'  bloody 
field  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.5  x  17  cm. 

318.  CLAY  AND  FRELINGHUYSEN.— Cowe  boys,  and 
help  me  sing  my  song  (14  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— Yankee 
Doodle. 

Headed:  "Whig  Songs";  publ.  J.  Torr  (2);  [with 
PHILADELPHIA  RIOTS  on  recto.]  22.5  x  12.2  cm. 

319.  CLIME  BENEATH  WHOSE  GENIAL  SVH.— Clime, 
beneath  whose  genial  sun  (3  vs.)  Air:   Soots  Wha  Hae  wi' 
Wallace  Bled. 

Headed:  "National  Song";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25  x 
16.4  cm. 

320.  CLING  TO  THE  UNION.- T/zere  is  a  right  and  wrong 
in  parties  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  628;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

321.  CLING  TO  THOSE  WHO  CLING  TO  YO\J.— There 
are  many  friends  of  sum,mer  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1139;  As  sung  by  Buckley's  Serenaders, 
Morris  Bros.  Minstrels;  Gus  Williams,  Rollin  Howard.  .  . 


and  other  distinguished  artists,  with  great  applause; 
written  by  Dexter  Smith  &  Perry,  publishers  of  the  music 
in  sheet  form;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  25.5  x  15.1  cm. 

322.  CLOSE  THE  SHUTTERS,  WILLIE'S  DEAD.-Ciose 
the  shutters  — Willie's  dead  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  James  E.  Stewart;  advs:  by 
sending  Johnson  (4)  30  cts.,  and  The  Book  of  500  Curious 
puzzles;  publ.  Johnson  (4).  21  x  12  cm. 

323.  THE  COAL  BLACK  STEED.- Tfee  Knight  is  on  his 
steed  again  (3  vs.) 

An  Original  Glee;  words  by  John  Moore;  (Copy-Right 
Secured;)  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

324.  COL.  CORCORAN  AND  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.— 
On  the  11th  of  October ,  Eighteen  hundred  and  Sixty  (8  vs.) 
Air:  The  Merry-man  going  to  his  grave. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.6  x  17.1  cm. 

b.  [Without  Air,  and  period  after  title;]  sheet  no.  913; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

325.  COL.  GOSLINE'S  ZOUAVE  VOLUNTEERS.-Come 
listen  to  my  story,  all  (6  vs.) 

Composed  by  William  H.  Murphy,  of  Company  C; 
print.  Auner  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  13  cm. 

326.  COL.  OWENS'  GALLANT  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS.- 
Come  listen  to  m.y  story,  all  (6  vs.)  Air— Irish  Volunteer. 

By  Arthur  McFadden,  Co.  B.  69th  Regt.  P.  V.;  re- 
spectfully dedicated  to  the  Gallant  69th  P.  V.  Regiment. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Mc"  in  author's  name;]  with  Time  in  quota- 
tion marks;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads, 
Circulars,  etc.  24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  but  with  period  after  title  and  with  differ- 
ent adv:  New  Songs.  Yankee  Boys  so  Handy,  O!,  etc. 
23.1  X  13.1  cm. 

327.  COLLEEN  BAWN— 'Tzoas  on  a  bright  morning  in 
sumnner  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song;  "Woodpecker";  sheet  no.  787;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

COL[L]EEN  BAWN,  see  also  THE  WOODPECKER. 

328.  THE  COLOR  BEARER.— T/ze/Za^  of  my  Country  I 
hold  in  my  hand  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— Marching  along. 

Sheet  no.  744;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

a.  With  sheet  no.  printed  in  righthand  corner. 
T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  12.3  cm. 

b.  With  sheet  no.  printed  in  lefthand  corner. 
T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  15.5  cm. 

329.  THE  COLORED  BRIGADE.— OW  Uncle  Abraham 
wants  us,  and  we're  com.ing  right  along  (6  vs.  and  chors.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co. 


22 


a.  Title:  "A  Soldier  in  the  Colored  Brigade";  publ. 
Auner  (4). 

A- J  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Title  as  above;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New 
Catalogue. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 
A-J  border.   13  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   21  x  12  cm. 

330.  COLORED  CAVALIER.— O/z.'  listen  a  while,  a  story 
I  will  tell  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan  SDN.Y.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  718;  as  sung  by  Frank  Sinclair  -  Ethiopian 
Comedian;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

331.  COLORED  GEMMAN  IN  DE  ARMY.— Come  listen  to 
me  white  folks,  I'se  gwan  to  sing,  Oh!  Lor  (3  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air— Hoist  Up  the  Flag. 

By  Harry  S.  May;  publ.  Harry  S.  May. 
T.  o.  border.  20.7  x  12.3  cm. 

332.  THE  COLORED  SOLDIER  BOY!  — Mji  poor  old 
mother  and  I  did  part,  when  I  was  very  young  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

By  Samuel  Nickless,  late  Corporal  Company  I,  24th 
Regiment  U.S.C.T.;  print.  Johnson  (2).  20.4  x  10. 9  cm. 

333.  COLORED  VOLUNTEER.— Fremowf,  he  boldly  told 
us  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Tom  Craig. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  22.7  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

A-J  border.  23.8  x  15.3  cm. 

c.  Title:  "A  Song,  dedicated  to  The  Colored  Volunteer"; 
[without  author's  name;]  publ.  by  the  Supervisory  Com- 
mittee for  Recniiting  Colored  Regiments.  23.8  x  15.1  cm. 

334.  (THE  NEW  VERSION  OF)  THE  COLORED  VOLUN- 
TEER.— When  the  Twenty -fourth  Regiment  first  began  to 
form  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  Dedicated  to  the  24th  Regiment,  U.S.C.T. 
By  Corporal  Sam'l  Nickless,  Co.  I. 

a.  With  sans  serif  caps  in  first  line  of  title;  print. 
Johnson  (2).   24.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  more  compact  caps  with  serifs  in  first  line  of 
title.   17.5  X  10  cm.  (cropped) 

335.  THE  COLORED  VOLUNTEERS.- Fre»no?j<  toU  us, 
when  this  war  was  first  begun  (4,  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2);  with 
line  between  adv.  and  text. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  221,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;   without  line  between  adv.  and  text.]  20.2 
X  12.6  cm. 


336.  COLUMBU  MOURNS  FOR  ELLSWORTH.- Tftey 
crossed  the  sundy  [sic]  Potomac,  brave  Ellsworth  and  his 
men  (14  vs.) 

Composed  by  George  G.  B.  De  Wolfe;  print.  J.  W.  Du 
Bree. 

Mourning  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

337.  COLUMBIA!  OUR  COUNTRY  FOREVER.-Co^Mmfiia.' 
our  country  forever  (3  vs.)  Air.— The  Red,  White  and  Blue. 

By  M.  L.  Hofford;  music  published  by  Lee  &  Walker; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

338.  COLUMBIA  RULES  THE  SEA.— T/ze  pennon  flutters 
in  the  breeze  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  23  x  14  cm. 

339.  COLUMBL\  SHALL  BE  Y-SS.Y.\  — What  joyful  sound  is 
that  I  hear  (7  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.2  x  17  cm. 

b.  With  period  after  title;  by  Henry  Nelson  Hanna;  sheet 
no.  1077;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.8  x  13  cm. 

COLUMBIA,  THE  GEM  OF  THE  OCEAN,  see  RED, 
WPUTE  AND  BLUE. 

340.  COLUMBIA,  THE  HOME  OF  THE  WORLD— //ai7  to 
Columbia,  fair  Queen  of  the  ocean  (4  vs.) 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  52,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus.  21.3  x  13  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  IVIagnus  54,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus. 
20.7  X  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   IVIagnus  64,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

341.  COLUMBIA!  THE  HOPE  OF  THE  ^OKLQ.-Columbial 
we  love  thee.  .  and  justly  are  proud  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Maurice  Bingham;  music  by  Emil  Stadler; 
published  at  Burnton's;  As  sung  by  Mr.  E.  H.  Harding. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  exclamation  point  in  title;)  sheet  no.  1066; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  BACHELOR  on  recto.) 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  song  on  recto.) 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.8  x  16  cm. 

342.  COLUMBIA'S  GLORIOUS  BANNER-0;i.'  the  Banner 
of  Columbia's  glorious  land  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  by  Wm.  Sutherland;  music  by  Jos.  Paramore; 
cop:  1863,  Winner  &  Co.,  EDPa.;  music  publ.  Winner  & 
Co.  (3);  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  With  period  after  title;  headed:  "Song.";  Written  by 
William  Sutherland;  Sung  with  great  applause  by  Charles 
Swain;  publ.  Warren  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  12.5  cm. 


343.  COLUMBIA'S  GLORIOUS  RULLING  [sic]  LIBERTY. 
—  Columbia!  her  fertile  shades  out  spreading  far  (4  vs.) 
Air:    Burns'  Farewell. 

By  Hugh  O'Neil;  sheet  no.  1126;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

a.  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  NAPOLITAINE  on  verso.]   23  x  15.6 
cm. 

344.  COLUMBIA'S  GLORY.— T/ze  sea  is  Columbia's  glory 
(3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25  x  16.5 
cm. 

345.  COLUMBIA'S  GREATEST  GUiRYX- Columbia's 
greatest  glory  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  656;  as  sung  by  James  R.  White;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

346.  COLUMBIA'S  HARDY  SEAMEN. -GayZj),  lads,  our 
friends  we're  leaving  (6  vs.)  Air— The  Little  Roving 
Sailor. 

Adv:  500  niustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  128,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  13  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  199,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

347.  THE  COMBINATION  SONG.— "We  are  coming 
Father  Abram,"  "When  this  cruel  War  is  o'er"  (4  vs.) 
Air.— The  Captain  with  his  Whiskers. 

Arranged  and  sung  by  A.  Anderson,  Dec.  1863;  [sold 
by]  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

348.  COME  BACK,  MASSA. —Smce  Massa  went  to  war  the 
deuce  has  been  to  pay  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  Published  by  Wm.  Hall  &  Son  (1),  owners  of  the 
copyright;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball 
Room  Monitor. 

a.  With  "Philadelphia"  in  imprint. 
A-J  border.   23.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  "Phila."  in  imprint. 
A-J  border.  22  x  12.8  cm. 

349.  COME  BACK,  STEB'E^.— Good  news,  Steben  -good 
news  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "Good  Old  Hut  At  Home". 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

c.  With  2nd  song:  "Walk  in  Joe". 
A-Jborder.   20.2  x  12.4  cm.  (cropped) 

350.  COME  CHEERFUL  COMPANIONS.— Come,  cheerful 
companions ,  unite  in  this  song  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

Revised  and  Printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  24.8  x  15  cm.  (cropped) 

351.  COME,  GANG  AWA'  WI'  UK.— Oh!  come  my  love, 
the  moon  shines  bright  (3  vs.) 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.7  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  "Come"  spelled  "Com";  sheet  no.  381;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1);  [with  RICHMOND  JAIL  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  22.3  x  13. 7  cm. 

352.  COME,  HASTE  TO  THE  WEDDING.— Come,  haste  to 
the  wedding,  ye  friends  and  ye  neighbors  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.2  X  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border, 
col.  25.5  X  15.8  cm. 

353.  COME  HOME,  FATHER.— Faf/zer,  dear  father,  come 
hom.e  with  m.e  now  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Root  &  Cady  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan 

(4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.3  x  16.7  cm. 

354.  COME  IN  OUT  OF  THE  DRAFT.— As  it  was  rather 
warm.,  I  thought  the  other  day  (6  vs.) 

Words  by  Ednor  Rossiter;  music  by  B.  Frank  Walters. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4);  adv:  Lee  &  Walker,  Music  and 
Musical  Instruments. 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

A-J  border.   23.7  x  15.5  cm. 

355.  COME  INTO  THE  GARDEN,  MAUD.- Come  into  the 
garden,  Maud;  for  the  black  bat^night  has  flown  (2  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

356.  COME,  JEFF,  COME  OR  FORT  DONALDSON  IS 
TAKY^^.— Fort  Donaldson  is  taken  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air- 
Annie  of  the  Vale. 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

357.  COME,  LANDLORD,  FILL  A  FLOWING  BOWL.- 
Come,  landlord,  fill  a  flowing  bowl  (5  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

358.  COME,  MAIDEN,  WITH  ME.— Come,  maiden  with  me, 
o'er  the  silvery  sea  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "Invitation  to  the  Grove";  publ.  De  Marsan 

(!)■ 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  678;  music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co. 
(1);  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

359.  COME,  OH!  COME  WITH  ME.— Come,  oh!  come 
with  me,  the  moon  is  beaming  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

2nd  song:  "My  Skiff  is  by  the  Shore." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  477;  [without  2nd  song;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  KISS  ME  GOOD- NIGHT  MOTHER  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 


24 


360.  COME  PLUNG  GUM.—/  like  to  see  the  growing  grass 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  818;  As  Sung  by  Ben  Cotton;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

361.  COME  SIT  THEE  DOWN.  — Cowe  sit  thee  down,  my 
bonny,  bonny  lass  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.7  x  18  cm. 

362.  COME,  WAKE  UP,  MY  LADY  LOVE  !-Come,  lend 
an  ear,  my  lub,  to  me  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

363.  COME  WHERE  MY  LOVE  LIES  DREAMING. -Come 
where  my  love  lies  dreaming  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  854;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

364.  "COME  'WHOAM'  TO  THI'  CHILDER  AN'  ME."- 
Aw've  just  mended  th'  fire  wi'  a  cob  (6  vs.) 

By  Edwin  Waugh. 

T.  o.  border.  27.8  x  11  cm. 

365.  COMIC  KATEE  DARLING.— O^z,  they  tell  me  you  are 
fast  asleep,  m.y  darling  (3  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'. 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15.5  cm. 

366.  COMIC  PARODY.— 'Tzs  of  a  rich  Dutchman  in  Niew 
Yorck  did  live  (8  vs.)  Tune,  "Villikins  and  his  Dinah." 

By  Snyder skype. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.3x15.7 
cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  346;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  CORCORAN 'S 
IRISH  LEGION  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.4  x  14.3  cm. 

367.  COMIN'  FROM  THE  WAR.— //a  body  meet  a  body 
(3  vs.)  Air.— Comin'  through  the  Rye. 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  185,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x   12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  190,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

368.  COMING  HOMY,.— Hark!  the  boys  are  coming  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   22.4  x  14  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1332;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

369.  COMIN'  THRO'  THE  RYE!-//a  body  meet  a  body 
comin'  through  the  rye  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Print.   Harris. 

T.  o.  border;  bust  of  woman  within  oval  frame.    20.5 
X  11.8  cm. 

COMIN  THRO  THE  RYE,  see  also  THE  STAR  OF 
GLENGARY. 


370.  COMING  THROUGH  THE  CAMP. -If  a  soldier  meet 
a  lady  coming  through  the  camp  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  A.  Anderson,  late  of  the  45th  Regt.,  P.V.M.;  print. 
Harris. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.2  cm. 

371.  COMMENCE  YOU  NIGGERS  AhL.-White  folks ,  I  am 
goin'  to  sing  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  14.6  cm. 

372.  THE  COMMERCIAL  UA^.— Hey  for  fun  and  jokery 
(5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:    "Strike  for  Tyrol  and  Liberty." 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

373.  COMRADES!  JOIN  THE  REVEILLE. -Come,  com- 
rades, join  the  Reveille  (4  vs.) 

Cop:  1861,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa. 

a.  Title:   "The  Reveille";  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (2). 
A-J  border.  20  x  12.9  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Title  as  above;  cop.  dated  1862;  Winner  &  Go's  Music 
Store  (3);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  Title:  "The  Soldier's  Reveille";  Sep.  Winner  (2);  2nd 
song:   "Volunteer's  Song";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Soldiers 
in  the  Field  sending  25  cts.  will  receive  100  Union  Songs. 
24  X  14.5  cm. 

d.  Revised  and  published  expressly  for  the  use  of  the 
Public  Schools,  and  taught  by  Mr.  T.  Myers,  the  Blind 
Teacher;  Music  publ.  by  Winner  &  Co.  (3);  adv:  Johnson's 
New  Catalogue;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

e.  Title:  "The  Reveille";  Revised  and  Printed  expressly 
for  the  Public  Schools,  by  permission  of  the  publ.  Sep. 
Winner  (2). 

A-J  border;  eagle.  22.3  x  15.4  cm.  (cropped) 

374.  CONEY  1SI.AND.— Myself  and  Bob  went  out  to  ride, 
in  a  gallus  hoss  and  wagon  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  885;  As  Sung  by  J.  H.  Budworth;  publ. 
Wrigley  [imperfectly  printed]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

375.  THE  "CONFEDERACY"  BOUND  FOR  THE  "LAST 
DITCH".— .A/;  when  we  set  forth,  Jeff,  to  strike  for  our 
rights  (2  vs.) 

[Signed]  P. 

Letter  paper;  text  in  script;  cartoon  of  rooster,  horse, 
two  crows  and  two  Confederates.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

376.  CONGRATULATORY  VERSES  TO  WILLIAM  HEP- 
WORTH  DDfON,  ESQ.— Across  the  wide  Atlantic  came 
(3  vs.) 

[Signed]  Benjamin  Hornor  Coates.   19.6  x  11  cm. 

377.  CONSCRIPT  HOW  ARE  YOVi-"How  are  you 
Conscript?"  "How  are  you  to-day?"  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  D.  McConahy,  the  Razor  Powder  Man; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

a.  Adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border;  Union  guard  before  tent,  cannon  and 
rifles.   21.5  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:  Kromer's  (Upham's)  Hair  Dye. 

A-J  border;  Union  guard  before  tent,  cannon  and 
rifles.  25  x  14  cm. 


25 


378.  CONSCRIPT  SONG.— Say  did  you  see  a  Conscript 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  856;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  15.5  cm. 

379.  CONSCRIPT'S  LAY.-Say,  Conscripts,  have  you  got 
your  notice  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.— Kingdom  Coming. 

a.  Respectfully  dedicated  to  Richard  Cogan,  Esq.;  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A- J  border.  24  x  16  cm. 

b.  By  George  P.  Holt;  [without  4th  vs.;]  with  "conscript" 
in  first  line;  2nd  song:  "How  Are  You  Conscript?" 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  142,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

380.  THE  CONSTITUTION I-O/z  God,  preserve  the  Union 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

National  Anthem,  written,  composed  and  respectfully 
dedicated  to  the  President  and  People  of  the  United  States, 
By  F.  Widdows;  sung  by  James  Dunn  Esq.;  Music  Pub- 
lished by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  16.6  cm. 

381.  THE  CONSTITUTION,  OUR  PLATFORM! 
McCLELLAN,  OUR  CHOICE!— A  man  rose  up  in  Sixty-one 
(3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Folks  that  put  on  airs. 

By  John  C.  Cross. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.3 
X  17.3  cm. 

c.  [Without  commas  and  exclamation  point  in  title;]  sung 
by  W.  S.  Budworth,  at  Campbell's  Minstrel  Hall. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  12,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

382.  CONTINENTAL  INTERROGATORY,  1776.-H^o/ired 
the  first  shot  at  the  Star  of  the  West  (7  vs.)  Tune— Con- 
tinental, or  Lafayette  March. 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia,  October  6th,  1862; 
print.  Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   18.7  x  11.3  cm. 

383.  THE  CONTRABAND'S  ADVENTURES.-0/z.'  my  name 
is  Darkey  Sam.  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   22.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25  x  16 
cm. 

c.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  219,  col.   18  x  10.5  cm. 

(cropped) 

384.  CONTRABAND'S  SONG  OF  FREEDOM.-See  the 
light  now  gently  glowing  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  Eastburn;  cop:  1865,  W.  R. 
Smith,  Agt.  Music  &  Musical  Instruments;  publ.  Auner 
(5). 

A-J  border.  24  x  16  cm. 

385.  THE  CONVENT  C-Ehi^.-Of  girlhood's  happy  days  I 
dream  (2  vs.) 

a.    From  the  Opera:  The  Rose  of  Castille;  2nd  song: 
"There  is  a  Flower  that  Bloometh";  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 


b.   Sheet  no.  985;  Words  by  Messrs.  A.  Harris  and  E. 
Falconer;  Music  by  W.  Balfe,  from  the  new  opera  of  the 
Rose  of  Castille;  Sung  by  Miss  L.  Pyne;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  15. 5  cm. 

386.  THE  COON  HUNT. -As  /  was  gwine  down  to  Sandy 
Point  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  Nightly  by  Charley  White,  with  shouts  of  Ap- 
plause, at  his  Opera  House,  No.  49  Bowery,  N.  Y.;  print. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15.7  cm. 

387.  THE  COPPERHEADS.— WTzo  are  the  men  that  clamor 
m.ost  (8  vs.) 

[With  "The  Copperhead's  Catechism  of  Negro 
Equality"  on  verso.]  19.5  x  11  cm. 

388.  CORA  DELL.— Cora  sleeps  amid  the  flowers  (2  vs.) 
Sheet  no.  1084;  by  J.  Ward  Childs;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15  cm. 

389.  CORCORAN  TO  HIS  REGIMENT.   OR  "I  WOULD  NOT 
TAKE  PAROLE."— Bear  aloft  that  Flag,  boys,  Erin's 
glorious  green  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  at  Jones'  Wood,  29  August  1861,  for  the  ben- 
efit of  the  widows  and  orphans  of  those  of  the  69th  Regi- 
ment who  fell  at  Bull-Run;  Words  and  Music  by  an  Irish- 
man. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.4  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.4  x  16.4  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  523;  2nd  song:  "Pretty  Girl  \mder  the  Rose"; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  after  "Regiment";)  sheet  no.  825; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.7  x  15.7  cm. 

390.  CORCORAN'S  BALL!  — 0/ course,  you've  all  heard 
of  the  Great  Michael  Corcoran  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Lanigan's  Ball. 

Written  expressly  for  Thomas  L.  Donnelly,  Esq.  and 
sung  by  him,  with  tremendous  applause,  at  the  New- 
Bowery  Theatre;  by  John  Mahon;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

391.  CORCORAN'S  IRISH  LEGION.— >1  song  for  our  Flag, 
proudly  waving  on  high  (3  vs.)  Air:  The  Flag  of  Our 
Union. 

By  Eugene  Johnston. 

a.  "Corcoran"  misspelled  with  a  "G";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.8  x  17. 1  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  777;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19  x  12.3  cm. 

c.  [Without  author's  name;]  sheet  no.  1069;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1);  [with  COMIC  PARODY  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  14. 3  cm. 

392.  THE  CORKERS.— Tfee  Corkers  are  a  crowd  of  men, 
who  loaf  about  the  town  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Oh 
Susanna." 

By  Jack  Williams;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.1  cm. 


26 


393.  CORPORAL  KEhhY.—Away  with  the  mallet  and 
chisel  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:    Lushy  Old  Cobbler. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.8  x  17.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1026;  by  J.  P.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

394.  THE  COT  WHERE  I  WAS  BORN.— /'w  roamed  be- 
neath a.foreign  sky  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  654;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  COT  WHERE  I  WAS  BORN,  see  also  GIVE  ME 
A  COT  IN  THE  VALLEY  I  LOVE. 

395.  THE  COTTAGE.— i/ozo  well  I  remember  the  cottage 
(3  vs.  and  chor.)  "Air,  Gentle  Annie." 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.5  cm. 

396.  THE  COTTAGE  BY  THE  SEA.— Childhood's  days 
now  pass  before  me  (3  vs.) 

By  permission  of  the  publishers,  Messrs.  Firth, 
Pond  &  Co. 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  view  of 
Mount  Vernon.  20.3  x  12  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  236,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  247b, 
col.  20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

d.  (Without  "The"  in  title  and  publ.'s  name;]  with  chor. 
added. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  15  cm. 

397.  COULDN'T  STAND  THE  PRESS.-/'>w  going  to  sing 
a  song  (5  vs.  and  spoken  lines) 

Sheet  no.  846;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

398.  COUNTY  JAIL.— Good  people,  all  give  ear  I  pray, 
and  mark  ye  all  to  what  I  say  (7  vs.) 

a.  As  Sung  by  E.  Dugan;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.8  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

c.  (Without  period  after  title;)  sheet  no.  753;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.  22.7  x  15.6  cm. 

399.  COURAGE,  MOTHER,  I  AM  GOING. -Farewell, 
Mother!  I  must  leave  you  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  When  I 
Saw  Sweet  Nellie  Home. 

a.  By  Otto  W.  Ludwig;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

b.  (As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

o.   (Without  "Courage"  in  title;)  varying:  Air— "Seeing 
Nellie  Home";  Respectfully  Dedicated  to  Wm.  S.  Corbit, 
late  of  the  28th  Pa.  Regt.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 
A-J  border.  24.2  x  15.1  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  774;  by  Otto  W.  Ludwig;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   19  x  12. 1  cm. 


e.  Sheet  no.  1058;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  (with  FATHER 
MACSHANE  on  verso.) 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.4  x  14.6  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  with  MY  NORMANDY  on  verso.)  24  x  15.6 
cm. 

400.  COURTING  IN  CONNECTICUT.- 'Tz<;as  Sunday  night 
in  Podunk  valley  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  26.2  x  16.8 
cm. 

401.  COURTING  IN  THE  RAIN.  — Oree  April  mom,  when 
walking  down  (4  vs.,  4  parts  spoken  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Miss  Jennie  Worrell,  at  the  Alhambra 
Theater;  publ.  I.  S.  Cohen;  print.   S.  F.  Printing  Co. 
T.  o.  border,  curved  corners.  29.4  x  11.3  cm. 

402.  THE  COVE  VOT  SPOUTS.-7  will  tell  you  in  my 
song,  what  happened  the  other  night  (8  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Mr.  J.  H.  Briest;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  cut  of  magician  with  boy.   19.1  x  11.6 
cm.  (cropped) 

403.  THE  COW  AND  THE  MILKMAID. -AiZ  writers  0} 
fables,  as  fancy  may  strike  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Vilikens 
and  his  Dinah. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

CRAFTED  INTO  THE  ARMY,  see  GRAFTED  INTO 
THE  ARMY. 

404.  THE  CRAVEN.— Ora  that  mighty  day  of  battle,  'mid 
the  booming  and  the  rattle  (4  vs.) 

(From  an  unpublished  poem  by  Alfred  Andhison;) 
(Evening  Post;)  with  contemporary  pencil  note  attributing 
poem  to  Alfred  Sell  &  Son  of  New  York.   23.7  x  13.2  cm. 

405.  CRAZY  JANE.— Wfey/az'r  maid  in  every  feature 
(4  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.9  x  15.3 
cm. 

406.  CRINOLINE.— Zn  the  days  there  was  no  crinoline 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  997;  written  by  Frank  Spear;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

407.  CROSS-BOY.  — W/zera  /  was  an  apprentice  I  lived  upon 
the  square  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  in  Sing-Sing  Prison  by  one  of  the  B'hoys; 
(publ.)  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.4  x  16.9  cm. 

CROSSING  ON  THE  FERRY,  see  ROLLING  HOME  IN 
THE  MORNING. 

408.  THE  CROW  FAMILY.-/  went  from  here  to  Washing- 
ton a  short  time  ago  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25.1  x  16.4  cm. 


27 


409.  CRUELTY  TO  JOHNNY. -Cruel  wos  de  Captain  vot 
took  my  Short  vrom  me  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  784;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

CRUELTY  TO  OUR  UNION  PRISONERS  WHILE  IN 
DIXIE'S  SUNNY  LAND,  see  DIXIE'S  SUNNY  LAND,  OR 
THE  CRUELTY  TO  OUR  UNION  PRISONERS. 

410.  THE  CUMBERLAND'S  CREW.-O^z.'  shipmates,  come, 
gather,  and  join  in  my  ditty  (7  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner.   19.7  x  11. 7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

c.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2).  21.2  x 
11.5  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  47;  publ.  Wehman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15.3  cm. 

411.  DADA,  DADA!— /  am  going  to  tell  of  a  charming  belle 
(4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Sam  Collins;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.5  x  16. 9  cm. 

412.  DADDY.  COME  HOME  PARODY  ON  "FATHER, 
COME  ROIHE."— Daddy,  Oh!  daddy,  why  don't  you  com.e 
hom.e  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  John  L.  Zieber;  Copyright  Secured;  print.  Auner 
(5). 

A-J  border.  20.4  x  13.4  cm. 

413.  DAILY  EVENING  BULLETIN  (1864). -Peace  be  unto 
you,  dear  patrons  (10  vs.  uneven  length) 

Peacock,  Chambers  &  Co.;  editor  G.  Peacock;  publ. 
F.  L.  Fetherston. 

Engraved  border;  eagle  and  motto.  29.5  x  19.5  cm. 

414.  DAILY  EVENING  BULLETIN,  W&b.-"Bright  shines 
the  dawning  sun,  it  lights  a  world  at  peace  (76  lines) 

Engraved  border  with  ornamental  corners;  eagle  with 
fasces.  25  x  19  cm. 

415.  DAILY  EVENING  BULLETIN,  l»m .- Hark ! Nay , 
'twas  but  an  echo  (144  lines) 

Engraved  border  with  corner  shields;  eagle  with 
fasces.  39.4  x  20.7  cm. 

416.  DAILY  EVENING  BULLETIN,  1867. -Tfes  year's 
events  the  pen  would  now  record  (114  lines) 

Engraved  border  with  corner  shields;  eagle  with 
fasces.  38.8  x  25.8  cm. 

417.  DAILY  NEWS.  ANNUAL  GREETING  OF  THE  CAR- 
RIER'S TO  THEIR  PATRONS,  JANUARY  1,  lBbS.-"Happy 
New  Year  to  all!  as  here  we  stand  (6  vs.  uneven  length) 

Floral  border;  Liberty  with  eagle  and -bust  of 
Washington;  L.  N.  Rose[n]thal's  Lith  Phila.  47  x  30.5  cm. 

418.  DAISY  DEANE.—' Tzwas  down  in  the  meadows,  the 
violets  were  blowing  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1108;  Music  publ.  by  Root  &  Cady  (2);  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.  20  x 
12.5  cm. 

419.  DAN  RICE'S  BENEFIT.  FRIDAY  EVENING,  MARCH 
7TH,  1862,  AT  THE  WALNUT  STREET  THEATRE. - 
Fam.ed  Dan  Rice,  with  his  mighty  Show  has  come  (8  vs. 


uneven  length) 

A  tribute  From  An  Admiring  Friend;  print.  King  & 
Baird  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  13.9  cm. 

420.  THE  DANDY  BROADWAY  SWELL. -0;z  what  are 
dandy  niggers  7  dare's  not  one  dat  can  compare  (5  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.8  x  15.5 
cm. 

421.  DANIEL  CAMPBELL'S  TRIP  TO  ENGLAND.- My 
nam,e  is  Daniel  Cam.pbell,  I  live  in  Argyle  (9  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

DANIEL  TUCKER'S  WEDDING,  see  OH,  I  SHOULD 
LIKE  TO  MARRY. 

422.  DARK  AND  ROGUISH  EYE. -We  all  do  like  the 
pretty  girls  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  Billy  Emerson;  Music  publ.  by  J.  Church, 
Jr.,  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan 

(4)- 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.9  x  16  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Oh!  How  is  That  for  High";  sheet  no.  1958; 
publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

423.  DARK  EY'D  SAILOR.— 'Tis  of  a  comely  young  lady 
fair  (9  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24.8  x  17.2  cm. 

424.  THE  DARK  GIRL  DRESSED  IN  BLUE.— Frowz  a 
village,  up  the  Hudson  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.1  x  16  cm. 

425.  DARKEY  BOAT  GLEE.— iJoM)  thy  boat  lightly,  love, 
over  the  sea  (3  vs.) 

Arranged,  and  sung  by  C.  White,  in  his  Popular  Band 
of  Serenaders,  49  Bowery,  N.Y.;  2nd  song:  "I  Love  the 
Merry  Sunshine";  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

426.  DARKEY  CONSCRIPT.— WTzew  /  was  a  little  moke,  I 
used  to  stay  at  hom.e  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Cars  on  the 
track. 

By  Charlie  Hall. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  26.5  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.;  adv:  500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  196,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1)  [imprint  on  left  side  of  hdpc.].   20.4  x  12.7 
cm. 

c.  [As  above,  but  with  imprint  on  right  side  of  hdpc] 
20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

d.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  222a,  col.   20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no  1192;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.4  x  13  cm. 

f.  [As  above,  but  without  imprint.]  22.9  x  15.1  cm. 


28 


427.  DE  DARKIES'  SLEIGHING  PARTY. -Jingle,  jingle, 
clar  de  way  (3  vs.  uneven  length  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (3);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  14.6  cm. 

428.  DARLING  BESSIE  OF  THE  LEA.- Oh! I  wander  mid 
the  roses  in  the  golden  summer  tim.e  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  George  Cooper;  Music  by  Henry  Tucker; 
advs:  By  sending  Johnson  35  cts,  and  Handkerchief 
Flirtation,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (2).  21  x  ii.s  cm. 

429.  DARLING!  HOW  CAN  I  FORGET  TUEE?-Darling 
how  can  I  forget  thee  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  composed  by  Henry  Tucker;  publ.  Wm. 
A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  250,  col.  20.2  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 

Magnus  255.  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

430.  DARLING  LITTLE  BLUE-EYED  NEhh.— Where  the 
placid  little  stream  (2  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.8  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  516;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.6  x  15.4  cm. 

431.  DARLING  LITTLE  SOPHIE. -Tripping  through  the 
wildwood  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sung  by  RoUin  Howard,  of  Bryant's  Minstrels. 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ. J  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 

Magnus  247b.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  253a,  col.  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1145;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15.7  cm. 

432.  DARLING  MINNIE  IjEE.— Where  the  violets  are 
blooming  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  W.  Dexter  Smith  Jr.;  Music  by  E.  N.  Catlin; 
Music  publ.  by  Henry  Tolman  &  Co.,  had  of  Wm.  Hall  & 
Son  (1);  2nd  song:   "Bring  Thy  Shattered  Heart  To  Me"; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

433.  DARLING  NELL.— Come,  darkies,  listen  unto  me 
(4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Poor  Old  Slave. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  418;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

434.  DARLING  NELLY  GRAY.- There's  a  low  green 
valley  on  the  old  Kentucky  shore  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Billheads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  427;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  0.  border.  21.5  x  14  cm. 

435.  DARLING  ROSABEL. -So/it/y  sighs  the  winds  of 
evening  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 


At  [sic]  Sung  By  T.  B.  Prendergast,  At  Bryants 
Minstrels,  472  Broadway;  2nd  song:  "She  Sleeps  in  the 
Grave!";  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  15.4  cm. 

436.  THE  DARLING  YALLER  GAL  DAT  HAD  A  JOSEY 
ON.—/  seed  a  dashing  yaller  gal  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.4  x  15.6  cm. 

437.  THE  DASHING  WHITE  SERGEANT.-/// /wcf  a  beau 
for  a  soldier  would  go  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  992;  Sung  by  Miss  Ernestine  De  Faiber,  at 
the  American  Music  Hall  444  Broadway  N.Y.;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border. 

a.  Imprint  printed  on  3  lines.  22.3  x  13.9  cm. 

b.  Imprint  printed  on  2  lines.   24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

THE  DASHING  WHITE  SERGEANT,  see  also  KIN- 
DLING WOOD  MAN. 

438.  THE  DAUGHTERS  OF  EKW.-The  daughters  from 
green  Erin's  shore  (3  vs.)  Air.— The  Girl  I  left  behind 
me. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

439.  DAVIS,  BEAUREGARD  &  CO.— Since  treason  now  is 
ram.pant  South,  and  rebels  rule  the  hour  (5  vs.)  Air— 
"Nonsense,  No! " 

T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  15.8  cm. 

440.  THE  DAY  I  SAW  MY  MOTHER  DIE.-  The  day  I  saw 
my  mother  die  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air- "I'm  lonely  since 
my  Mother  Died". 

Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.7  cm. 

441.  DAYLIGHT  IS  ON  THE  SEA.- Daylight  is  on  the  sea 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

442.  DAYS  OF  ABSENCE.— Days  of  absence,  sad  and 
dreary  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "What  Fairy  Like  Music";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.3  x  15. 4  cm. 

443.  THE  DEAD  BEAT— There  was  a  young  man,  in  the 
city  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Pretty  Maid  milking  her  cow. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  16.1  cm. 

444.  DEAD  RABBITS'  FIGHT  WITH  THE  BOWERY  BOYS. 
NEW  YORK  JULY  4TH  imi.-They  had  a  dreadful  fight, 
upon  last  Saturday  night  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Jordan. 

Written  at  Hoboken,  by  Saugerties  Bard;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15.1  cm. 

445.  DEAL  WITH  ME  KINDLY. -OeaZ  with  me  kindly, 
cheer  my  young  heart  (3  vs.) 

a.  Sung  by  T.  B.  Prendergast;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.7  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Ulustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  236, 

col.  20.4  X  12.5  cm. 


29 


446.  DEAR  ELIZA.—/  am.  deep  in  lub  wid  a  yaller 
charmer  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "New  Song";  print.  Andrews. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

447.  DEAR  MARY  COME  BACK.— Sarf  and  heart-broken, 
I  sigh  for  the  past  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Rock  me  to 
sleep. 

a.  With  comma  in  title,  and  with  "Mother"  in  Air;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.3  cm. 

c.  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1093;  publ.  \Vrigley 

(D- 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.7  cm. 

DEAR  MOTHER,  I'VE  COME  HOME  TO  DIE,  see 
MOTHER,  I'VE  COME  HOME  TO  DIE. 

448.  DEAR  MOTHER,  I'VE  COME  HOME  TO  EAT. -Dear 
Mother,  I  rem.em.ber  well  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Dear 
Mother,  I've  come  home  to  die. 

By  John  C.  Cross;  short  description  beginning:  "This 
melancholy  scene  happened  but  a  few  months  ago.  .  ." 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   23.2  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.4  x 
16.8  cm. 

c.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  173,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

449.  THE  DEAR  OLD  FLAG.— See  the  flag!  the  dear  old 
flag  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Dear  Old  Flag!";  Composed  and  dedicated  to 
the  Soldiers  of  the  Unit.  Stat.;  By  Wm.  B.  Bradbury;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.  24.2  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25  x  16.9  cm. 

d.  2nd  song:  "Our  Flag  is  There";  adv:  New  Songs; 
[publ.]  Johnson  (2).   23.8  x  15.2  cm. 

e.  Title:   "Dear  Old  Flag!";  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  21.8 
X  11.7  cm. 

f.  With  1  chor.  only;  sheet  no.  773;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15  cm. 

g.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  922;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.9  x  13.7  cm. 

450.  DEAR  ONES,  I  AM  COMING  HOME  !-For  a  time  the 
strife  is  ended  (3  vs.)  Air:   Mother,  is  the  Battle  over? 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  5,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.5  cm 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  172,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 


451.  DEAREST  MAY.  — O^,  niggers,  come  and  listen,  a 
story  I'll  relate  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  Sung  by  C.  White,  the  Christy's  and  others;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  4  chors.;  adv:  Price  One  Cent.  All  the  New 
Songs  constantly  on  hand. 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  12.8  cm. 

452.  THE  DEAREST  SPOT  ON  EARTH  TO  ME  IS  HOME, 
SWEET  HOME.— T/ze  dearest  spot  of  earth  to  me  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "Welcome,  Welcome  Home";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  25  x  17  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

453.  DEAREST,  THEN  I'LL  LOVE  THEE  MORE.  ANSWER 
TO  "WILL  YOU  LOVE  ME  THEN  AS  NOW?"- Fes,  I'll 
love  you,  oh,  how  dearly  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

454.  THE  DEARING  FAMILY-Come  all  you  feeling 
Christians  wherever  you  may  be  (10  vs.) 

Headed  "In  Memoriam."  24  x  15.7  cm. 

455.  DEATH  OF  COL.  ELMER  E.  ELLSWORTH.-Trae 
Union  m.en,  attention  give  (6  vs.)  Air— "Auld  Lang  Syne." 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  Published  and  sung  by 
James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia;  Composed,  published  and 
sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery,  of 
Reading,  Pa.  [both  printed  laterally,  with  historical  notes;] 
with  "Ellsworth's  Last  Letter";  cop:  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  decoration  in  gray  ink;  t.  o.  border  with 
cornerpieces;  bust  of  Ellsworth  within  ornamental  frame. 
24.8  X  17.3  cm. 

b.  Composed  by  James  D.  Gay-Ringgold  Artillery;  title 
as  above;  with  "Ellsworth's  Last  Letter";  cop:  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  bust  of  Ellsworth 
within  red  and  blue  flagged  wreath.   25  x  19. 6  cm. 

c.  By  James  D.  Gay-Ringgold  Artillery;  cop:  EDPa. 
T.  o.  border;  Zouave  soldier  with  flag  trampling  on 

Confederate  flag.  27.5  x  I8  cm. 

d.  Composed  by  James  D.  Gay,  on  the  Sunday  after  his 
assasination;  adv:  Gay's  celebrated  army  songs. 

Letter  paper;  bust  of  Ellsworth  within  ornamental 
frame.   19.8  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  but  without  "Air".]  19.7  x  13  cm. 

f.  Composed  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery; 
[without  "Elmer  E."  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  soldier  with  drawn  sword  trampling  on 
Confederate  flag,  and  motto,  "Remember  Ellsworth!" 
23.8  X  14.6  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  without  publ.  and  adv.;]  copyright  secured. 
Multi-line  border ;  Zouave  soldier  with  flag  trampling 

on  Confederate  flag.  21  x  11.7  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  sold  Wholesale  at  300  N.  20th  St.  above 
Vine,  Philadelphia  [James  D.  Gay]. 


30 


T.  o.  border;  Zouave  soldier  with  flag  trampling  on 
Confederate  flag.  23.3  x  15  cm. 

456.  DEATH  OF  COLONEL  BAKER.  KILLED  IN  BATTLE 
NEAR  LEESBURG,  VIRGINLA.,  OCTOBER  21ST,  1861.— 
Our  starry  flag  is  at  half  mast,  and  the  muffled  drum 
beats  low  (7  vs.)  Air.  — "California  Brothers." 

Composed  by  William  Sutherland;  Respectfully  Dedi- 
cated to  Dr.  John  F.  Kaufman;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.  21  x  12.8  cm. 

457.  DEATH  OF  DONAHUE.— T^eji  left  him  there  alone 
to  die  (9  vs.,  "each  succeeding  verse  constitutes  the 
Chorus".)  Tune— Home  Again. 

By  John  Anderson,  of  the  U.S.S.  Connecticut;  print. 
Johnson  (2).  21.4  x  11.8  cm. 

458.  THE  DEATH  OF  ELLSWORTH.- ffe/eiZ  in  his 
prime  by  a  dastard's  hand  (4  vs.)  Air— Burial  of  Sir  John 
Moore. 

Publ.  T.  W.  Strong;  cop:  1861,  Thomas  W.  Strong, 
SDN.Y. 

Mourning  figure  at  tomb.  26.3  x  17.2  cm. 

459.  THE  DEATH  OF  ELLSWORTH.  MAY  24TH,  1861.- 
It  was  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  May  (3  vs.)  Tune.— "The 
Drummer  Boy  of  Waterloo." 

Composed  by  William  H.  Murphy. 

a.  Headed:  "Second  Edition";  publ.  Du  Bree;  advs: 
Printing  of  all  descriptions  executed,  and  an  Illuminated 
edition  of  Volunteer  Cards,  etc. 

Mourning  border  vrith  ornamental  corners.  24.4  x 
14.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  headed:  "Third  Edition".]  21.5  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  date,  tune,  or  author's  name.] 

T.  o.  border;  tombstone.  18.6  x  11  cm.  (cropped) 

460.  DEATH  OF  GENERAL  LYON.-2%e  wild-dog  sought 
his  matted  lair,  the  rattlesnake  his  hole  (7  vs.)  Air— 
"John  Anderson,  My  Jo." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21.5  x  12. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

461.  THE  DEATH  OF  LITTLE  JOEY.-TTzg  kiddy  Joey, 
taken  ill,  his  mother  call' d  Nan  Tatter  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

462.  DEATH  OF  NELSON .—  ' Twas  in  Trafalgar's  bay 
(3  vs.) 

Text  preceded  by  four  lines  beginning:  "O'er  Nelson's 
tomb,  with  silent  grief  oppress'd";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

163.   DEATH  OF  PRESIDENT  LINCOLN! -'Twos  on  that 
sad  and  mournful  night  (4  vs.)  Air— Sword  of  Bunker  Hill. 
Cop:   1865,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

a.  Following  title :  "Born  February  12th,  1809:— Died 
April  15th,  1865.";  composed  April  23rd,  1865,  by  James 
D.  Gay. 

Mourning  border;  bust  of  Lincoln  within  flagged 
wreath  with  mourning  soldier  and  woman  at  sides.  26.7 
X  19.8  cm. 

b.  Composed  by  Jas.  D.  Gay;  adv:  Gay's  Illustrated 
Army  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  20.7  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

464.   DEATH  OF  WARREN. -Let  others  boast  of  monarch's 
pride  (7  vs.) 


Publ.  Edwin  J.  Gibson;  for  sale  at  J.  Rafferty's. 
T.  o.  border;  pink  paper;  Warren's  death  on  battle- 
field.  24  X  14.7  cm. 

465.  THE  DECLARATION.— We  come,  we  come,  a  little 
band  (6  vs.) 

a.  I>ubl.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  963;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   21.7  x  13  cm. 

D'DOLCY  JONES,  see  DOLCY  JONES. 

466.  DEDICATED  FOR  THE  WHEATLEY  GUARDS.-Noto 
give  me  your  attention  a  tale  to  you  I'll  tell  (6  vs.) 

By  Miss  Matilda  Pettit.   18.5  x  12  cm. 

467.  DEDICATED  TO  HOOKER'S  OLD  DIVISION.  IN 
MEMORY  OF  THE  BATTLE  AT  WILLIAMSBURGH  AND 
CHANCELLORSVILLE,  V A.- From  Yorktoum  on  the  first 
of  May  (11  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Adv:  Magnus's  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
T.  o.  border;  gold  ink.   18  x  11.8  cm.  (cropped) 

468.  DEDICATED  TO  THE  MEMORY  OF  ABRAHAM 
LINCOLN.— .America's  noblest  sons  are  weeping  (8  lines) 

Cop:   1865,  James  Logan,  EDPa. 
Mourning  border.  24.5  x  19.2  cm. 

DEEP  BLUE  SEA,  see  FAR  O'ER  THE  DEEP  BLUE 
SEA. 

469.  DER  DEITCHER'S  DOG.-O/j  where,  oh  where  ish 
m.ine  little  dog  gone  (4  vs.) 

Music  Publ.  Sep.  Winner  &  Co.  (7). 

A-J  border;  hound.  20.3  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped) 

470.  DEMOCRATIC  RALLYING  SONG  .-Come  join  our 
throng,  ye  patriots  true  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Old  Dan 
Tucker." 

Respectfully  Dedicated  to  the  "Keystone  Club";  advs: 
save  25  per  cent  by  getting  your  printing  done  at  John- 
son's, and  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc.;  publ. 
Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  15.3  cm. 

471.  THE  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  69TH  VOLUNTEERS.- 
The  gallant  Qdth,  once  more  (8  vs.)  Air:   River  Roe. 

By  John  Flanagan. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  17.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  860;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

472.  DERMOT  ASTORE.   REPLY  TO  "KATHLEEN 
MAVOURNEEN".— 0?!,  Dermot  Astore  between  waking 
and  sleeping  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Farewell  to  Home." 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  210;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  (with  THE  BANNER 
OF  THE  FREE  on  recto.) 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.6  x  14.7  cm. 

473.  THE  DESCENT  OF  THE  EAGLE.-/  saw  in  a  vision, 
with  glory  o'errun  (38  lines) 


31 


a.  Philadelphia,  October  7th,  1865;  with  letter  beginning: 
"Samuel  B.  Fales,  Esq.  Dear  Sir:  -  The  following  poem 
on  the  Eagle,  recited  by  me  last  night.  .  .  was  suggested 
by  my  delightful  visit.  .  .  to  the  'Union  Volunteer  Re- 
freshment Saloon'.  .  .  [signed]  T.  Buchanan  Read."  27.8 

X  21.3  cm. 

b.  Headed:   "Among  the  beneficent  agencies  in  aid  of 
the  great  cause  which  have  made  Philadelphia  pre-emi- 
nent [first  line  ending  "pre-";]  "Samuel  Fales,  Esq.  Dear 
Sir:  -  You  have  long  been  known  as  a  lover  of  Art.  .  . 
[signed]  T.  Buchanan  Read.  Philadelphia,  October  7th, 
1865."   25  X  20  cm. 

c.  [As  above,  but  first  line  of  heading  ending  "Philadel- 
phia".] 25  X  20  cm. 

474.  THE  DESERTED  SEAMSTRESS.  — O/z, /oitr  maids  all, 
both  great  and  small  (5  vs.)  Air:  Lily  of  the  West. 

A  pathetic  banjo  song,  written  by  T.  Gannon;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

475.  DICK  DARLIN'  THE  COBBLER.— Ocfe.' wji  name  is 
Dick  Darlin'  the  cobbler  i^  vs.  and  3  vs.  spoken) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.6  cm. 

476.  DIG,  DIG,  DIG,  OR  HUSH-A-BYE  BABY.-W?te»  but 
a  little  fellow ,  I'd  nothing  else  to  do  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

477.  DIGGING  YOB.  GOVlAi.- Darby  Kelly  below,  in 
Kilkenny  did  live  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

478.  DINAH'S  LAMENTATION.- Waji  down  beside 
Francisco  Bay  (4  vs.)  Air:  The  Girl  I  left  behind  me. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  435;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

479.  DINA'S  WEDDING.  — Hurrah!  hurrah!  the  day  is  come 
(1  vs.,  6  lines  chor.  &  solo,  2  vs.  solo  spoken) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

480.  DISFRANCHISED  SONS,  TO  ARMSl- Pennsylvania 
has  made  a  call  (2  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

Dedicated  To  The  Disfranchised  Sons  of  Pennsylvania; 
print.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  25  x  14  cm. 

DISMAL  SWAMP,  see  THE  LAKE  OF  THE  DISMAL 
SWAMP. 

DIS- UNION  DIXIE  LAND,  see  DIXIE. 

481.  DIVIDING  CREEK  VOLUNTEERS.- Tfeere  was  a 
Company  F.,  that  left  Dividing  Creek  (4  vs.)  Tune— "Joe 
Bowers." 

Composed  At  Dividing  Creek;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
23.2  X  9.7  cm. 

482.  DDCEY'S  LAND.— Away  down  south  in  de  fields  ob 
cotton  (5  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  at  Sandford's  Opera  House,  by  E.  F.  Dtxey. 


a.  Printed  by  permission  of  R.  F.  Simpson;  publ.  Auner 
(2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Bonsai. 

T.  o.  border.  22.1  x  14.6  pm. 

c.  Title  headed:  "Original";  publ.  by  permission  of 
R.  F.  Simpson;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Sam  Sandford's 
New  Song  Books.  20.3  x  11.7  cm. 

d.  [Without  "As  sung  at.  .  ."] 

T.  o.  border.  29  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

483.  (DIXIE)  DIS-UNION  DIXIE  Ui^HD. -I'm  glad  I'm  not 
in  de  land  ob  cotton  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Union  Badges,  Lette-r  and 
Note  Paper,  etc.  23.3  x  13  cm. 

b.  Title:  "The  New  Dixie.  The  True  Dixie  for  Northern 
Singers";  with  extra  chor.;  adv:  War  Song  of  the  Ameri- 
can Union;  publ.  Wm.  V.  Spencer;  print.  E.  L.  Mitchell. 

19.2  X  12.5  cm. 

484.  DIXIE  FOR  THE  UNION. -Ofe,  ye  Patriots,  to  the 
battle  (5  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  Fanny  Crosby;  As  sxmg  in  the  Public  Schools. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  810;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]-  Wrigley  flag  border,  stars  within  two 
stripes,  col.  21.7  x  13.5  cm. 

DIXIE  OF  OUR  UNION,  see  HURRA  FOR  OUR  UNION. 

485.  "DIXIE"  UNION-IZED.— O.'  I'm  glad  I  live  in  a  land 
of  freedom  (6  vs.  and  4  chors.)  Tune,  "Dixie's  Land." 

By  A.  W.  Muzzy,  (a  member  of  the  Guards)  of  Panama, 
New  York;  Dedicated  to  Cassius  M.  Clay's  Washington 
Guards;  cop:  1861,  A.  W.  Muzzy,  SDN.Y.,  and  "Copyright 
Secured"  preceding  title;  text  prefaced  by  letter  from 
L.  H.  Sigourney  and  followed  by  three  other  letters.   30.3 
X  12.4  cm. 

486.  DIXIE.  WHERE  IS  DIXIE?— Dme,  Dixie  -  where  is 
Dixie  (5  vs.) 

By  Ned  Buntline  [Edward  Zane  Carroll  Judson];  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

487.  DIXIE'S  LAND.—/  wish  I  was  in  de  land  of  cotton 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  220,  col.  19.5  x  10.3  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  223, 
col.  21.3  X  13.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above,  but  with  text  and  hdpc.  in  bronze  ink.] 

21.3  X  13.7  cm. 

488.  DIXIE'S  LAND.   NO.  2— Come  along,  boys,  come  out 
in  the  fields  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  704;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [printed  upside-dovra] . 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.3  x  14  cm. 

489.  DIXIE'S  LAND  No.  i.—Oh  come  my  lub  an'  go  wid 
me  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 


32 


Sheet  no.  703;  As  sung  by  Frank  Sinclair,  Ethiopian 
Comedian;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

490.  DIXIE'S  LAND.   NO.  i.— I  wish  I  was  in  Baltimore 
(7  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  With  "No.  6"  after  title;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  734;  by  William  P.  Ferris;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.5  X  13.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;)  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x 
13.2  cm. 

491.  DIXIE'S  LAND.   NO.  b.—Come,  Patriots  all  who  hate 
oppression  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  after  "5";]  sheet  no.  823;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

492.  DIXIE'S  NURSE.— Way  down  in  South  Car'Una  State 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Eastburn;  Music  by  M.  E.;  publ.  Lee  & 
Walker;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Cir- 
culars, etc.  24.5  X  15  cm. 

493.  DIXIE'S  SUNNY  LAND  OR,  THE  CRUELTY  TO  OUR 
UNION  PRISONERS.  — Dear /rzentfs  and  fellow-soldiers 
brave,  come  listen  to  our  song  (8  vs.)  Air— "Twenty 
Years  Ago." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

a.  Title  in  three  lines.  19.5  x  11.7  cm. 

b.  Title  in  two  lines  without  the  comma  in  title,  and 
with  adv.  for  music.  17.  8  x  10. 5  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Cruelty  to  Our  Union  Prisoners  While  in 
Dixie's  Sunny  Land." 

Elephant  wearing  boots  and  carrying  banner.  23.2 
X  15  cm. 

d.  Title:  "The  Song  of  Union  Prisoners  From  Dixie's 
Sunny  Land";  July,  1865. 

Elephant  wearing  boots  and  carrying  banner  inscribed 
"I  am  off  for  home."  20.3  x  11.1  cm. 

494.  DO  THEY  MISS  ME  AT  HOME.— Do  they  miss  me  at 
hom.ef  do  they  m.iss  m.e  (4  vs.) 

[By  Caroline  A.  Mason.) 

a.  Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia; 
[with  LET  ME  KISS  HIM  FOR  HIS  MOTHER  on  verso.) 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  21.5  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  question  mark  in  first  line;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.5  x  16.6  cm. 

c.  With  question  mark  at  end  of  title;  adv:  Ten  illustrated 
Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  168b,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  20  x  10.8  cm. 

495.  DO  THEY  THINK  OF  ME  AT  HOME.-^Do  they  think 
of  me  at  home  (3  vs.) 

a.   Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 


b.  [Without  3rd  vs.,  but  with  chors.;]  2nd  song:  "You'll 
Remember  Me". 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  41,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  171.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above,  with  black  ink  and  col.  hdpc]  20.3  x  12.6 
cm. 

e.  [Without  3rd  vs.  but  chors.  added;]  2nd  song:  "You'll 
Remember  Me";  publ.  Gay. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  243,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  13  cm.  (cropped?) 

f.  [As  above;]  sheet  no.  829;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

496.  DO  YOU  ASK  ME  IF  I  LOVE  YOU?-Do  you  ask  me: 
if  I  love  you  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

b.  By  Henry  Morford;  sheet  no.  954;  [without  question 
mark  after  title;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15. 5  cm. 

497.  DO  YOU  EVER  THINK  OF  ME?-Do  you  ever  think 
ofm.e,  love  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

498.  DO  YOU  REALLY  THINK  SHE  DID?-/  courted  a  nice 
young  girl:  I'll  tell  you  if  I  can  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  She 
had  such  a  delicate  way. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  26  x  16.9  cm. 

499.  THE  DOCTOR'S  WIFE.— /«  the  parish  of  Peters,  in 
this  very  town  (8  vs.)  Air— "Dumble-dum-deary." 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

500.  THE  DOG  IS  DEAD.  — Times  are  very  hard  now  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.5  X  16.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  750;  As  sung  by  Jim  Cotton;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

501.  DOGS'  MEAT  MAN. -iVear  the  old  Fly  Market,  not  a 
long  time  ago  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Title:  "The  Dogs'-Meat  Man";  As  Sung  by  Tony 
Pastor;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  Pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:  1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.7  x  17  cm. 

502.  DOLCY  JONES.— 0/!.'  ladies,  don't  you  wonder  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 


33 


a.  Music  obtained  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1). 
A-J  border.  20.3  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Title:  "D'Dolcy  Jones";  sheet  no.  1034;  publ.  Wrigley 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

503.  A  DOLLAR  OR  TV/O.— With  cautious  steps,  as  we 
tread  on  our  way  through  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  nightly,  with  tremendous  applause,  by  Mrs. 
W.  O.  Jones  in  the  drama  of  "Fast  Women"  at  the  New 
Bowery  Theatre;  music  had  of  D.  H.  Biessenher;  Presented 
for  publication  by  Bennett  &  Carroll;  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.9  cm. 

504.  DOLLY  VABSEVi.— Won't  you  tell  me,  Dolly  Varden 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Signed]  Prof.  Carey;  print.  Bruce. 

Pointed  double-line  border;  yellow  paper.  16  x  8.3 


505.  DON'T  BE  ADDICTED  TO  DRINKING.—/  early  one 
morning  down  Chestnut  Street  walked  (6  vs.) 

Print.   Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   18.5  x  10  cm. 

506.  DON'T  BE  ANGRY,  MOTHER.  — I>o«'i  be  angry 
mother,  m.other  (3  vs.) 

Adv:  Obtain  the  Answer  to  this  song. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

507.  DON'T  BE  CHOKED  OFF.— Now,  kind  folks,  give 
attention  (4  vs.)  Air:   Young  Gal  from  New-Jersey 

By  John  C.  Cross. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.1  x  16.5  cm. 

508.  DON'T  MIX  YOUR  LIQUOR  BOYS.— Kon't  mix  your 
Liquor,  hoys,  but  always  take  it  neat  (5  vs.)  Music— "Low- 
backed  car,"  or  "Wait  for  the  Wagon." 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15.2  cm. 

509.  DON'T  STRIKE  A  MAN  WHEN  HE'S  DOWN.-O/z/ 
don't  strike  a  mxin  when  he's  down  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  W.  P.  Cunnington;  cop:  1865,  J.  Marsh, 
EDPa.;  [sold  at]  Marsh's  Music  Store  (2). 
A-J  border.   18.9  x  11.4  cm.  (cropped) 

510.  DON'T  YOU  CRY  SO,  NORAH  DARLING- Dow '<  yoM 
cry,  so,  Norah,  darling  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:  "Norah,  Darling,  Don't  You  Cry!";  Music  ob- 
tained at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Auner  (address  im- 
perfectly printed). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1507;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

511.  DON'T  YOU  GO,  TOMiAY .- You' II  miss  it,  my  boy, 
now  m.ind  what  I  say  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  C.  T.  Lockwood;  Copied  from  the 


"Pulling  hard  against  the  Stream  Songster,"  publ.  R.  M. 
De  Witt;  publ.  H.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.3  x  16.8  cm. 

512.  DONYBROOK  FAIR.— Once  /  went  to  Donybrook,  that 
good  old  Irish  fair,  sirs  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Limerick 
Races. 

By  Eugene  Johnston. 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1078;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 
Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

513.  THE  DOONY  SONG.— TTzere  came  a  man  from  Lon- 
don Town-hurrah,  hurrah  {7  vs.)  Air,  When  Johnny  comes 
marching  home. 

As  Sung  by  Mat  Kelly;  cop.;  publ.  Boyd;  advs:  Boyd's 
Novel  Exchange,  and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 
T.  o.  border;  boxer.  20  x  11.7  cm. 

514.  DO  RAN 'S  ASS.  —  /  am  going  to  sing  a  little  song  to 
pass  away  the  time  (8  vs.) 

28.8  X  14.5  cm. 

515.  DOUBT  ME  NOT  I  CANNOT  CHANGE .— Doubt  me 
not— I  cannot  change  (4  vs.) 

From  the  New  York  Ledger,  By  Tamar  Anne  Kermode. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  with  Astley's  imprint  added.]  24.5  x  14. 5 
cm. 

516.  THE  DOVE  OF  PEACE.-When  the  dark  cloud  of 
rebellion  (4  vs.)  Air— Last  Rose  of  Summer. 

Written  by  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia,  February,  1863; 
print.   Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  14.7  cm. 

517.  DOWN  BY  THE  RIVER  SIDE  I  STBAY.-Down  by  the 
river  side  I  stray  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1045;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  WILLIAM  OF 
THE  FERRY  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

518.  DOWN  UPON  THE  RAPPAHANNOCK.- Douire  upon 
the  Rappahannock  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  2nd  chor.;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Catalogue 
of  over  600  Songs. 

Double-line  border.   19.5  x  11.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  different  adv:  Johnson's  New  Cata- 
logue. 

A-J  border.  24.7  x  15.2  cm. 

519.  THE  DRAFT  ISA  COMING.— Saji,  Gents,  hab you 
seen  de  enrolling  officer  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Kingdom 
coming. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  22.5  x  14  cm. 


34 


c.  With  "Coming"  capitalized;  sheet  no.  863;  sold  by 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [Title  as  above;)  By  B.  A.;  sheet  no.  1150. 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23  x  i4  cm. 

520.  DRAW  THE  SWORD,  NORTHLAND.- Draw  the 
sword,  Northland!  Northland!  Northland  (2  vs.)  Air— Draw 
the  Sword,  Scotland. 

a.  Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.J  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  64,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  96,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

521.  A  DREAM.— T/ze  other  night,  as  on  my  bed  I  laid 
(3  vs.  uneven  length) 

By  the  Arkansas  Traveler;  adv:  A  Copperhead 
"Among  the  Reeds,"  sold  at  403  Chestnut  Street. 
Blue  paper.  24.5  x  10.5  cm. 

522.  DREAM  NO  MOBS .— Early  dreams!  why  drag  me 
hack  (3  vs.) 

A-J  border.   20  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped) 

523.  DREAM  OF  BONAPARTE. -One  night,  sad  and 
languid,  I  went  to  my  bed  (4  vs.) 

A-J  border;  figure  of  Bonaparte.  20.2  x  13. 9  cm. 
(cropped) 

DREAM  OF  JEFF  DAVIS,  see  JEFF  DAVIS'S  DREAM. 

524.  DRINK  TO  THEM  K'L1.\- Here's  to  the  Drummer  of 
only  fourteen  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:    "Here's  to  the  maiden 
of  bashful  fifteen." 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

a.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  179,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  179,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

DRINKING  CHORUS,  see  PIRATE'S  CHORUS,  and 
BEAUTIFUL  VENICE. 

525.  DRINKING  SONG.— We't;e  drunk  the  first  glass  out 
and  out  (5  vs.  and  6  chors.) 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  179,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

526.  DROP  A  TEAR,  YOU  DARKIES!-/  was  bom  in  old 
Kentucky  State  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  J.  S.  Lefavour,  And  sung  with  unbounded 
applause,  by  the  Howard  Burlesque  Opera  Troupe,  of 
&.lem;  print.  Moreland. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

527.  DROVER  BOY.  — /'m  a  merry  heart'd  mountain 
drover  boy  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.7  x  16  cm. 

528.  THE  DRUMMER  BOY  OF  NASHVILLE.- i¥e  went  to 
the  war  with  a  heart  full  of  glee  (3  vs.) 

By  Robert  Johnston;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus, 


SDN.Y.;  advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  43a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

529.  THE  DRUMMER  BOY  OF  VICKSBURGH;  OR,  LET 
HIM  SLEEP.  — /fe  pass'dfrom  the  earth  while  contending 
for  right  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  P.  De  Geer;  Music  published  by  J.  Marsh  (1);  nar- 
rative preceding  text,  beginning:  "Charles  Howard 
Gardner,  the  subject  of  this  composition  had  the  misfor- 
tune to  fall  during  the  siege  of  Knoxville.  .  .";  adv:  Prof. 
Brooks  Ball  Room  Monitors;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.,  and 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  15. 5  cm. 

530.  DRUMMER  BOY  OF  WATERLOO. -WTten  battle 
rous'd  each  warlike  band  (3  vs.)  Air— "Woodland  Mary." 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.   20.7  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  colon  and  without  quotation  marks  in  Air;  publ. 
Auner  (1). 

Eagle  with  flag.  20.2  x  12.2  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  16. 5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24.5  x  15. 5  cm. 

e.  [Without  quotation  marks  in  Air;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 
21  X  11  cm. 

f.  Sheet  no.  1025;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  PEANUT 
GAL  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15. 5  cm. 

531.  THE  DRUMMER  BOY'S  FAREWELL. -R^ere  the 
Southern  gales  were  sighing  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Let  me 
kiss  him  for  his  mother. 

By  John  Ross  Dix. 

a.  Cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  125,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  159,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

532.  THE  DRUMMER  OF  ANTIETAM.— Tfce  drummer  of 
Antietam  (3  vs.)  Air:   The  Last  Rose  of  Summer. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  13.7  cm. 

c.  By  Eugene  Johnston;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2,  cropped). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  99,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    18.8  x  12.8  cm. 

d.  [As  above,  but  with  perfect  adv.;]  letter  paper;  red 
ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  111.   18.8  x  12. 5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  112.   18.7  x  12.6  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  114.  19.3  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  By  Eugene  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1080;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1);  [with  MARY'S  DREAM  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.7  x  15.7  cm. 


35 


533.  THE  DRUNKARD'S  APPEAL.— O/z,  come  my  friends 
and  sign  the  pledge,  from  whiskey  to  abstain.  (5  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air:  Swinging  in  the  Lane. 

Sheet  no.  1499;  Dedicated  to  Young  Mens,  Father 
Mathew,  U.B.T.A.B.  Society,  Branch,  No.  1;  By  Capt. 
Kelly;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  Pat  &  Mike  border.   24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

534.  THE  DRUNKARD'S  LONE  CHILD.— Owf  in  the  gloomy 
night  sadly  I  roam  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Adolphus  Morninglory.";  publ.  De  Marsan 

(4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

535.  THE  DRUNKARD'S  WIFE.— So/ifZy  the  drunkard's 
wife  breatheth  her  prayer  (4  vs.)  Air— The  Troubadour. 

By  E.  P.  Hood;  2nd  song:  "Try,  Try  Again";  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.3  cm. 

536.  DRY  GOODS  CLERK.— T/jere  was  a  young  man  lived 
in  Maayunk  [sic]  town  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   25  x 
16.7  cm. 

537.  DUBLIN  BAY.  OR  ROY  NEILL.-T/zey  sailed  away, 
in  a  gallant  bark  (3  vs.) 

With  4-line  rhyme  below  text  called  "Virgo  Senilis"; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

538.  THE  DUMB  SCOLD.  — T/zere  lived  an  English  blade, 
who  loved  a  pretty  maid  (6  vs.)  Air— Cowskeen  Lawn. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

539.  THE  DUTCH  RAGPICKER'S  SHANTY. -Dirf  you  ever 
chance  into  a  poor  Dutchm-an's  shanty  (8  vs.)  Air:  The 
Irishman's  Shanty. 

Composed  by  "John  Mackenzie",  of  New  York;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24  x  16  cm. 

540.  THE  DYING  CALIFORNIAN.— Z-ay  up  nearer,  brother, 
nearer,  for  my  limbs  are  growing  cold  (8  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Sold  by]  D.  Kimball  &  Co.;  print.  A.  Crawford 
Greene. 

T.  o.  border.  21  x  13  cm. 

541.  THE  DYING  CALIFORNIAN.-ffearfeera  to  me, 
brother,  hearken!  I've  something  I  would  say    (8  vs.) 

Text  as  above  with  varying  vs.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.4  x  16.5. 

542.  THE  DYING  GIRL'S  APPEAL. -Stoj),  father,  stay; 
the  night  is  wild  (6  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  semi-colon  in  first  line;]  sheet  no.  915; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

543.  DYING  HERO'S  REQUEST. -A  hero  foremost  in  the 
fight  (3  vs.  and  chors.)   Tune,— Poor  Old  Slave. 

a.   Publ.  Aimer  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 


b.  By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia,  October  13th,  1862; 
composed  on  the  fall  of  J.  W.  Greer,  31st  Regiment, 

P.  v.,  at  the  battle  of  Malvern  Hill,  Virginia;  Tune  vary- 
ing: "as  sung  to  Poor  Old  Slave";  print.   Harris. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  14  cm. 

c.  With  "Hero"  capitalized  in  first  line;  By  A.  Anderson; 
composed  on  the  fall  of  Lt.  J.  W.  Greer,  32d  Regiment, 

P.  V.  at  the  Battle  of  Malvern  Hill,  Virginia. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  14  cm. 

544.  THE  DYING  'PATRIOT .- Native  land!  oh!  dear 
sweet  hom,e  (3  vs.)  Air:  The  Last  Rose  of  Summer. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   23.2  x  17  cm. 

b.  Dedicated  to  our  gallant  Volunteers  by  J.  Singer,  Jr.; 
sheet  no.  941;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.2  x  13  cm. 

545.  THE  DYING  REPUBLIC;  A  MATTER-OF-FACT 
POEM.—/  who,  with  warnings  oft  repeated,  tried  (192 
lines  in  2  columns) 

By  L.  A.  Wilmer.  .  .;  Union  Press. 
Double-line  border.  37.5  x  18  cm. 

546.  THE  DYING  SLAVE.— TTtey  tore  me  from  my  happy 
hom.e  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  16.5  cm. 

547.  THE  DYING  SOLDIER.— My  noble  commander, 
thank  God  you  have  com.e  (8  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  11  cm.  (cropped) 

548.  THE  DYING  SOLDIER.-O;;.'  Jmry  me  not  'neath 
foreign  skies  (3  vs.  and  chor.)   "Air- Dearest  May." 

By  E.  Walter  Lowe,  19  N.  Y.  Cavalry;  adv:  500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  154,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  193,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

549.  THE  DYING  SOLDIER.  NO.  2.  OR  ONE  OF  THE 
RANK  AND  FILE.— Twas  a  glorious  day,  worth  a  war- 
rior's telling  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "No.  2."  in  title;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

550.  THE  DYING  SOLDIER.—^  soldier  of  the  army  (3  vs.) 
Air- "Bingen  on  the  Rhine." 

Sheet  no.  800;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.5  cm. 

551.  THE  DYING  SOLDIER  TO  HIS  MOTHER.-0«  the 
field  of  battle,  m.other  (5  vs.) 

Words  by  Thos.  MacKellar;  music  by  Wm.  U.  Butcher; 
Music  Published  by  Lee  &  Walker. 

a.  Title:  "The  Soldier's  Death,  or.  The  Soldier  to  His 
Mother!";  Lee  &  Walker,  Music  and  Musical  Instruments; 
publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  14.7  cm. 


36 


b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  [without  publisher's  initials;]  adv: 
Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 

A- J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  publisher's  initials,  but  without  adv.] 
24  X  15  cm. 

d.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.  19.7 

X  12  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  166,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  with  2nd  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs;]  hdpc. 
Magnus  193,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

552.  THE  DYING  VOLUNTEER  OF  THE  SIXTH  MASS. 
REGT .—  Farewell  my  child.  Farewell  my  wife  (6  vs.) 

By  G.  Gumpert;  cop:  1861,  EDPa.,  J.  Magee;  publ. 
J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  red  and  blue  border;  blue  ink;  red  and 
blue  figure  of  Columbia  holding  flag.  20  x  12.5  cm. 

THE  DYING  YEAR,  AN  OLD  MAN'S  STORY,  see 
CARRIERS'  ADDRESS  TO  THE  PATRONS  OF  THE  SUN- 
DAY TRANSCRIPT,  JANUARY  1ST,  1860. 

553.  E  PLURIBUS  UNUM.  AN  AMERICAN  NATIONAL 
SONG.— Though  many  and  bright  are  the  stars  that  appear 
(8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  comma  after  "Unum";  [publ.]  Louis  Bonsai. 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  12.5  cm 

c.  [Without  "An  American  National  Song";]  5  vs.  only; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.  23  x  14.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  23  x  14  cm. 

e.  I^^bl.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  13.2  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  with  publisher's  initials.] 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  13  cm. 

h.  Sung  by  R.  J.  Turner,  the  Ballad  Singer;  publ. 
Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  11.5  cm. 

i.    T.  o.  border.  21.3  x  11.3  cm.  (cropped) 

554.  EDWIN  JAMES  OR  ANY  OTHER  MAN.— From 
London-town,  there  came  a  celebrated  Yorkshireman 
(6  vs.)  Air:   Molly  Branigan. 

a.  Presented  for  publication,  for  the  burlesque  edifica- 
tion of  John  Bull,  or  the  American  Public,  or  any  other 
man;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Presented  for  publication,  for  the  edification  of  John 
Bull,  Or  any  other  man,  by  M.  I.  W.;  sheet  no.  1012;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22.5  x  14  cm. 

555.  EFFIE  LANE— Long  years  have  passed  since  first 
I  met  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.3  x  14.6  cm. 


556.  ELEGY  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  ABRAHAM  LINCOLN,- 
The  nation  m.oums-aye'.  bleeds  with  sorest  grief  (16  vs.) 

By  John  Collins.   27  x  10  cm. 

557.  ELLA  LEENE.  — Sfee  was  fair  as  the  beams  of  the 
morning  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1017;  2nd  song:  "Linger  in  Blissful  Repose"; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

558.  ELLA  REE.— Oh,  Ella  Ree  so  kind  and  true  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Sung  nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands. 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

559.  ELLEN  BAYNE.— Soft  be  thy  slumbers  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

560.  ELLESWORTH  [sic]  KEQUIEU.- Faintly ,  faintly- 
slow  and  soft  (3  vs.)  Air— See  the  Conquering  Hero  Comes. 

Sold  at  J.  Bardsley's  Book  Stand. 
T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag  and  motto.  24.3  x  14.8 
cm. 

561.  ELLSWORTH,  THE  GALLANT  ZO\5AVE.-Ye fathers 
and  sons  of  Columbia  (7  vs.) 

a.  Advs:  New  Songs,  and  Johnson's  Union  Songs;  [publ.] 
Johnson  (2).  24.3  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Adv:  Ball  Room  Monitor  By  Prof.  Brooks  [publ.] 
Johnson  (2). 

Eagle  with  motto  "E  Pluribus  Unum".   24.3  x  15.5 
cm. 

c.  Title:   "Song  on  the  Death  of  Colonel  Ellsworth,  The 
Gallant  Zouave";  Tune-Rosin  the  Bow,  or  Tippecanoe; 
cop:  EDPa.,  1861,  J.  Magee;  publ.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  Brownell  and  the  dying 
Ellsworth  in  red  and  blue.  24,5  x  19.3  cm. 

562.  ELLSWORTH'S  AVENGERS.— Doz^ra  where  the 
patriot  army  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Annie  Lisle. 

By  A.  L.  Hudson. 

a.  [Without  "'S"  in  title,  and  author's  name;]  print. 
Auner  (5);  with  quotation  marks  around  Air, 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (4). 
T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  14. 7  cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21.3  x  14. 5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]   [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  16.7  cm. 

e.  [Without  '"S"  in  title;  and  author's  name;]  publ. 
Doyle. 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  11.7  cm. 

f.  With  2  chors.;  adv:  See  the  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
Ellsworth  trampling  Confederate  flag,  with  motto 

"Remember  Ellsworth!"  20  x  13  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  adv:   Ball  Room  Monitor  By  Prof.  Brooks. 
Ellsworth  trampling  Confederate  flag,  with  motto 

"Remember  Ellsworth!"  24.5  x  15  cm. 

h.   Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  Excelsior  Brigade, 
U.S.V.  Commanded  by  Gen.  Sickel,  of  N.Y.;  advs:  New 
Songs,  and  100  Union  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 


37 


Ellsworth  trampling  Confederate  flag  while  holding 
Union  flag.  24.1  x  15  cm. 

i.    [Without  Air  and  author's  name;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 
20.7  X  12  cm. 

j.    Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  49,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus.  20.4  x  13.2  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  117,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  14.2  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  118,  col.  20  x  13  cm. 

m.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  131,  col.  21  x  13  cm. 

n.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  133,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

o.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  146,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  13  cm. 

p.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  148,  col.   20.5  x  13  cm. 

q.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  191,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.7  cm. 

r.   [As  above;]  but  with  different  adv:  Ten  illustrated 
Songs.  20.3  X  12.6  cm. 

s.   Sheet  no.  528;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.7  cm. 

t.    Sheet  no.  844. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

u.  T.  o.  border.   20.7  x  12.2  cm. 

563.  ELLSWORTH'S  BODY  LIES  MOULDERING  IN  THE 
GRA.VE.— Ellsworth's  body  lies  mouldering  in  the  dust 
(7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Brothers,  will  you  meet  me? 

a.  Title:  "Glory  Hallelujah.   No.  1";  9  vs.;  with  "meet" 
in  caps  in  Air;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  14. 5  cm. 

b.  With     "halieluja"  in  1st  chor.;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border;  bust  of  Ellsworth.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

o.  With  "hallelujah"  in  1st  chor.;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border;  bust  of  Ellsworth.   23.3  x  15.9  cm. 

d.  With  "Tune"  for  "Air"  and  quotes  around  Tune;  as 
sung  by  the  Philadelphia  Fire  Zouaves;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flags,  drums,  bugle,  etc. 
24.2  X  15  cm. 

e.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  Tune— "California 
Brothers";  as  sung  by  the  Philadelphia  Fire  Zouaves; 

first  line  ending "in  the  grave";  with  dittos  used  in 

verses. 

Multi-line  border;  eagle  with  flags,  drums,  bugle, 
etc.  21.5  X  14.5  cm. 

f.  With  "Tune"  for  "Air"  and  quotation  marks  around 
it;  [without  comma  after  "Brothers";]  as  sung  by  the 
Canterbury  Minstrels,  at  the  Canterbury  Hall,  N.W.  [c]or. 
5th,  &  Chestnut  Streets;  [imprint  at  head  cropped,  leaving 
only ' '  Philadelphia" .  ] 

T.  o.  border;  flags,  cannon  and  drums.   19.8  x  12.5 
cm. 

564.  ELLSWORTH'S  DEATH.-O,  say,  has  the  news,  o'er 
the  wires,  reached  your  ears  (3  vs.)  Air— "Star  Spangled 
Banner." 

Printed,  at  422  Vine  Street,  below  Fifth  [Phila.] 
T.  o.  border;  mourning  woman  at  tomb.   18.7  x  11.5 
cm. 


565.  EMANCIPATION  DAY  OR  SLAVERY  DAYS.-/n 
April  when  de  proclimation  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  G.  L.  Stout;  music  by  Davie  Braham;  adv: 
By  sending  Johnson  (4)  25  cts.   14.1  x  n  cm.  (cropped) 

566.  THE  EMIGRANT'S  FAREWELL. -/'»z  leaving  you  at 
last,  Mary,  and  all  I  love  behind  (6  vs.)  Air.— The  Emi- 
grants's  Lament. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  15  cm. 

567.  THE  EMIGRANT'S  RETURN.— /'m  home  again!  I'm 
home  again  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.- Auld  Lang  Syne. 

a.  By  Archibald  Scott;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   26  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  880;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.7  x  15. 2  cm. 

568.  THE  EMMET  LIFE-GUARD. -f/^,  up  with  the  sun- 
burst, our  standard  so  true  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

569.  THE  ENGLISHMAN.— TAere's  a  land  that  bears  a 
well  knoum  nam.e  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

570.  ENLISTING  SOLDIERS. -f^arfe.'  listen  to  the 
trumpeters  (7  vs.) 

(From  tlie  African  M.E.  Church  Hymn  Book,  page  399;) 
publ.  Supervisory  Committee  for  Recruiting  Colored 
Regiments. 

Floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto  "Our 
Country".  24.2  x  15  cm. 

571.  ENNISKILLEN  DRAGOON.— j4  beautiful  damsel  of 
fam.e  and  renown  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.6  x  17  cm. 

572.  ENOCH  ARDEN. -C/zeer  up,  Annie  darling,  urith 
hopeful  em.otion  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music,  published  by  Sep.  Winner  &  Co.  (4),  obtained 
of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  2nd  song:  "Annie's  Reply  To 
Enoch  Arden";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.7  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  With  "Or,  I'll  Sail  the  Seas  Over"  in  title;  cop:  1865, 
Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (3). 

Multi-line  border.  19.1  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

573.  ERIN,  ADIEVI  — Adieu!  to  thee,  Erin,  a  long  last 
adieu  (9  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  and  exlamation  point  in  title;]  sheet 
no.  1085;  by  Henry  Nelson  Hanna;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

574.  ERIN  GO  BRAGH!— Greere  was  the  fields  where  my 
forefathers  dwelt  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Bright  Star  Of  Hope";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.2  x  is. 2  cm. 


38 


575.  ERIN  IS  MY  HOME.— O^,  /  have  roamed  in  many 
lands  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "The  Harp  That  Once  Thro'  Tara's  Halls"; 
print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.6  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  third  vs.;  2nd  song;  "Mother  Dear,  I'll  Come 
Home  Again";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.8  x  14  cm. 

ERIN  IS  MY  HOME,  see  also  THE  HARP  THAT  ONCE 
THRO'  TARA'S  HALLS. 

576.  THE  ESCAPE  OF  STEPHENS,  THE  FENIAN  CHIEF. 
NEW  VERSION  OF  SHAN  VAN  VOCWT.— Perhaps  you'd 
like  to  know  (9  vs.) 

With  narrative  preceding  text,  beginning:  "The  only 
exciting  topic,  in  the  streets  of  Dublin,  is  a  new  version 
of  Shan  Van  Vocht.  .  .";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.6  x  16.3  cm. 

577.  ETTIE  MAY.— In  beauty  gleamed  the  moon  last  night 
(2  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Peel's  Campbell  Minstrels;  Music  ar- 
ranged for  the  pianoforte;  Sold  by  W.  Hall  &  Son;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  328;[with  NORAH'S  REMONSTRANCE  on 
verso;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22.4  x  14.8  cm. 

578.  "EVIA-IAE.— Blue-birds,  linger  here  awhile  (3  vs.) 
Music  obtained  of  Firth  Pond  &  Co.  (2);  print. 

Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

EULOGY  ON  THE  GLORIOUS  69TH  REGIMENT, 
THAT  BLED  AT  BULL'S  RUN,  see  BATTLE  OF  BULL'S 
RUN. 

579.  THE  EVENING  BELL.  LA  CLOCHE  DU  SOIR.- 
Knell,  sister  dear'..  .  .  eve's  shadows  gather  (2  vs.,  with 
French  original  in  2  vs.) 

Nocturne  for  two  voices;  English  words  by  Jos.  R. 
Fry;  music  by  Ad.  Boieldieu;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  15.6  cm. 

580.  EVER  BE  HAPPY.— Sfer  be  happy  and  light  as  thou 
art  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  I6.8  cm. 

581.  EVER  OF  THEE.-Ct-er  of  Thee  I'm  fondly  thinking 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  David  S.  Wambold,  with  immense  success 
throughout  the  States;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  240, 
col.  20.1  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  247b,  col.   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  248b,  col.   20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

EVER  OF  THEE,  see  also  THE  PILOT. 

582.  EVERY  BULLET  HAS  ITS  BILLET. -/'w  a  tough  true 
hearted  sailor  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  Charles  Swain,  at  Jenkins'  Concert 
Saloon  Seventh  &  Chestnut  Streets. 


a.  Print.  Harris. 

T.  o.  border;  three  sailboats.   18.4  x  9.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  publ.  Zieber.]   18.8  x  9.5  cm. 

583.  THE  EXCURSION  STEAMER. -0/  Cape  May  parties 
you  have  heard,  while  some  Tacony  have  preferred  (7  vs. 
and  chor.)   Air.— Teddy  the  Tyler. 

Headed:   "Zieber's  Popular  Editions";  as  sung  by 
Mr.  Charles  Jenkins. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.4  cm. 

584.  EXECUTION  OF  HICKS. -All  You  people  far  and  near 
(■5  vs.  and  chor.)   Air:  Happy  Land  of  Canaan. 

By  John  Mackenzie;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   25  x  16.3  cm. 

585.  EXECUTION  OF  JAMES  KELLY. -AZi  you  who  have 
any  pity,  come  listen  to  my  song  (4  vs.)  Air— Caroline  of 
Edinboro  Town. 

By  Jersey;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  25.4  x  15.2  cm. 

586.  THE  EXEMPTS. -O/z,  /  am  so  gay  and  lively  14  vs. 
and  chors.)  Air.— Gay  and  Happy. 

By  the  Dock  St.  Bard;  cop:  1863,  Guyer  &  Schaefer, 
EDPa.;  adv:  Get  the  Song  "Who  Will  Care  for  Conscript 
Now." 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  14.4  cm. 

587.  FADED  COAT  OF  BLUE.— Mji  brave  lad  he  sleeps  in 
his  faded  coat  of  blue  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:  by  sending  Smith  40  cents,  he  will  send  you  the 
music  of  this  song;  2nd  song:  "Fairy  Bell."  14.9  x  11.5 
cm. 

588.  FADED  FLOWERS. -T/ze/Zowers  /  saw  in  the  wild 
wood  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Copied  by  permission  of  Russell  &  Tolman,  owners  of 
the  copyright;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus 
(2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

589.  FAIR  HELEN.— 7  wish  I  were  where  Helen  lies  (10 
vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.;  copy- 
right secured.   25  x  16.9  cm. 

590.  THE  FAIR  MAIDEN  WHO  SAT  ON  MY  KNEE. -flow 
pleasant  my  thoughts,  as  with  calm,  retrospection  (3  vs.) 

a.  By  R.  B.  Nicol;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.6  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  14.9  cm. 

FAIR  OAKS  BATTLE.  FOUGHT  ON  THE  31ST  OF 
MAY  1862,  see  THE  23D  PENN'A  REG.'S  BRAVE  ACTION. 

591.  FAIR  ROSmA.- Fair  Rosina  horc  hard  is  thy  fate 

(5  vs.) 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15.2  cm. 

592.  THE  FAIREST  OF  THE  FAIR.-Ohc?  summer  eve  in 
the  month  of  June  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Shells  of  the 
Ocean. 


39 


By  A.  B.  Eckerson;  sheet  no.  949;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

593.  FAIRY  BELLE. -The  pride  of  all  the  village  and  the 
fairest  in  the  dell  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  hyphen  in  title;  2nd  song:   "Flowing  Hair";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.2  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border;  song  pasted  on  ornamented  paper.  18.7 
X  11  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]   sheet  no.  815;  music 
obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  with  THE  GAY  CAVALIER  on  verso.]  25 
X  15.7  cm. 

FAIRY  BELL[E],  see  also  FADED  COAT  OF  BLUE 
and  O  GENTLY  BREATHE. 

594.  THE  FAIRY  BOY.— A  mother  came,  when  stars  were 
paling  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.3  x  15.9  cm. 

595.  FAIRY  JiELL.-Wilt  thou  meet  me  in  the  Fairy  Dell, 
love  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  had  of  O.  Ditson  &  C.  C.  Clapp;  publ.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   25  x  15  cm. 

596.  FAITHLESS  MARIA.  SHE  LIVED  IN  THE  LAND  OF 
GREEN-GINGER.— 0/z.'  pity  me,  pray,  and  hear  what  I've 
to  say  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Harry  Clifton;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

597.  THE  FALL  OF  CHARLESTON  1-Ofe.'  have  you  heard 
the  glorious  news  ?  is  the  cry  from,  every  m.outh  (4  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air:  Whack  row  de  dowl 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  With  "(The  Professor.)"  added  to  author's  name; 
advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  109,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

FALSE  ONE,  I  LOVE  THEE  STILL,  see  I'LL  TOUCH 
MY  HARP. 

598.  FAMILY  PRIDE. -To  be  sure  I  can't  sing  an  oration 
(6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  15.2  cm. 

599.  A  FAMOUS  MAN  WAS  ROBIN  HOOD. -A  famous  man 
was  Robin  Hood  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  970;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

600.  THE  FAMOUS  NEW  ANTI-KNOW-NOTHING  DITTY.— 
I'll  tell  you  the  truths  ivithout  any  flam.  (22  vs.) 


As  sui^,  with  immense  applause,  by  A  Distinguished 
Gent  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  Grand  National  Circus  and 
Menagerie,  Washington  City;  advs:   Quipp's  &  Go's  Comic 
Miscellany.   No.  VIII,  and  Agents  supplied  at  No.  383  South 
St.  ab.  10th;  cop:   EDPa. 

T.  o.  border;  comic  cut  of  the  ceremony  of  kissing  the 
Pope's  toe.   36.4  x  17.5  cm. 

601.  FAMOUS  OIL  FIRMS. -T/zere's  "Ketchum  & 
Cheatum"  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1339;  music  obtained  of  Horace  Walters  (1); 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.4  x  15.1  cm. 

602.  THE  FAMOUS  RETREAT  OF  THE  SOUTHERN 
REBELS  FROM  PHILIPPL -About  the  "Cotton  Heroes"  a 
tale  I  udll  relate  (9  vs.)   Tune- "The  Bold  Privateer." 

Headed:   "Quipps  &  Go's  Comic  Miscellany-No  XXII"; 
written  by  Professor  Shortfellow;  cop:    1847,  Quipps  and 
Co.,  EDPa;  adv:   Newsmen  and  boys  supplied  at  No.  1021 
Market  Street. 

Single-line  border  with  ornamental  comers;  cartoon 
of  fleeing  rebels.  37  x  12.7  cm. 

603.  THE  FANCY  PEELER.— Come  all  you  gallant  lov-iers, 
and  listen  to  my  ditty  (4  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  Whiskey  in  the 
jar. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.9  x  17.5  cm. 

b.  With  quotes  around  Air;  sheet  no.  1138;  Written  and 
sung  by  Lew  Simmons,  at  444  Broadway,  N.Y.;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.7  cm. 

604.  FANNY  GKta.—Well,  well,  sir,  so  you've  com.e  at 
last,  I  thought  you'd  come  no  more  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.7  x  17  cm. 

605.  FAR,  FAR  UPON  THE  SEA.— i^ar,  far  upon  the  sea 
(3  vs.) 

A  Highly  Popular  Song  by  Charles  Mackay;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24.7  x  16.5  cm. 

606.  FAR  O'ER  THE  DEEP  BLUE  SEA.-TTze  moon  is 
beam.ing  brightly,  love  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25.2  x  I6.I  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Deep  Blue  Sea";  [without  comma  in  first  line;] 
with  "brightly"  spelled  "brigtly"  in  1st  line;  sheet  no. 
267;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  m.ilitary  cupid  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.6  cm. 

607.  FARE  THEE  WELL.   KITTY  DEAR.-/ saw  the  smile 
of  evening  die  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "New  Song";  composed  expressly  for  Wood's 
Minstrels;  music  published  and  for  sale  by  W.  Hall  and 
Son  (3). 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.5  x 
15.2  cm. 

608.  FAREWELL,  CORA  LEE. -Years  have  fled  since 
last  I  saw  thee  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


40 


[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

609.  FAREWELL  LILLY  DEAB..— Lilly  dear,  it  grieves  me 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews', 
24.6  X  15.3  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.5  cm. 

FAREWELL  TO  HOME,  see  DERMOT  ASTORE. 

610.  FAREWELL  TO  IRE  LAND. -TTzo'  on  the  great  skip's 
deck  I  stand  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Mr.  Frank  Drew;  music  publ.  by 
Marsh  (2);  publ.  Auner  (5)  [imprint  cropped]. 
A-J  border.  20.5  x  14  cm. 

611.  FAREWELL  TO  OLD  ENGLAND.-FarezoeZZ  to  old 
England  (4  vs.)  Air— Farewell  to  the  Mountain. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.6  x 
15.8  cm. 

612.  THE  FARMER'S  BOY. -The  sun  had  gone  down  behind 
yon  hill  (5  vs.  uneven  length) 

Adv:   Obtain  the  companion  to  this  Song. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.9  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  141;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  NELLY  WOOD 
on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15.7  cm. 

613.  THE  FARMER  SAT  IN  HIS  EASY  CWaB..-The  farmer 
sat  in  his  easy  chair  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  710;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.    24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

614.  FARRAGUT'S  BALL.  A  PARODY  ON  LANNIGAN'S 
BALL.— 0«  the  blockade  was  one  Admiral  Farragut  (6  vs.) 

By  J.  E.  v.— U.S.  Steamer  Richmond. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.1  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  With  "Lannigan's"  spelled  "Lanagans";  with  quotes 
around  "Lanagans  Ball";  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  20.7  x 
11.2  cm. 

615.  FASHIONABLE  FRED. -0/»ne  you  may  have  read, 
I'm.  Fashionable  Fred  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

616.  THE  FAST  YOUNG  ALDERMAN. -/t's  of  a  gay  young 
Cavalier  a  song  I  now  will  sing  (6  vs.)   Air:  Joe  Bowers. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.  23.8  x  le  cm. 

617.  THE  FATE  OF  A  FALSE  LOVER.-Cowe  all  who  feel 
for  innocence  (20  vs.)  Air— Caroline  of  Edinburg  Town. 

With  sub-title  "Or  the  successful  Triumph  of  Margaret 
Garrity,  who  was  tried,  at  Newark,  N.J.,  for  stabbing  her 


Seducer  with  a  Carving  Knife";  By  John  Costin  Eames; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.1  x  17  cm. 

618.  FATHER  MACSHANE.-OW/after  Macshane  he  was 
holy  and  fat  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  624;   publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  COURAGE,  MOTHER,  I  AM  GOING  on 
recto.]   24.4  x  14.5  cm. 

619.  THE  FATHER  OF  ALL  SO^GS.~And  come  all,  you 
lads  and  lasses,  wherever  you  may  be  (5  vs.)  Air:   The 
Glorious  Sixty-Ninth. 

a.  Composed  by  Wm.  Dunne,  and  sold  at  the  Stationary- 
Store,  223  Ninth  Avenue;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  "Sixty-Ninth"  spelled  "69th";  quotes  around  Air; 
sheet  no.  1191;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

620.  THE  FATHER  OF  FREEDOM. -Come /orifc,  every 
true  son  of  Freedom  (3  vs.)  Air:  Red,  White  and  Blue. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   26  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  With  dash  and  a  period  after  Air;  sheet  no.  898;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.8  cm. 

621.  FATHER'S  COME  HOME.  — Fes,  Mary,  my  Mary, 
your  father' s  come  home  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

With  sub-title  "A  Sequel  to:   Come  Home,  Father"; 
[publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

622.  THE  Y'E.DY.KA.l.W'E.nDVE..-" And  going-going!  Step 
up,  friends  (11  vs.) 

[By]  Abraham  Auctionarius  Loquitur  [E.  Spencer]. 
T.  o.  border.  30.3  x  11.2  cm.  (cropped) 

623.  THE  FELLOW  THAT  LOOKS  LIKE  ME. -/re  sad  de- 
spair I  wander 

Sheet  no.  715;  adv:   Wanamaker  &  Brown,  Oak  Hall 
Clothing;  publ.  Auner  [address  imperfectly  printed] 
T.  o.  border.  21  x  13.3  cm. 

624.  THE  FEMALE  AUCTIONEER.-WeZZ  here  I  am,  and 
what  of  that  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.5  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  616;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.8  cm. 

625.  FEMALE  SMUGGLER.-/^  sailor's  clothing  young 
Jane  did  go  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

A-J  border.   20.1  x  13.6  cm.  (cropped) 

626.  THE  FEMALE  VOLUNTEER.-yl«cfi/wn /)a>',  >iou 
lerul  an  ear  to  what  I  am  going  to  say   (7  vs.) 

Double-line  border.  24.2  x  14.8  cm. 


41 


627.  THE  FENIAN  MEN.— See  who  come  over  the  red- 
blossomed  heather  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.4  x  17  cm. 

628.  FEW  DAYS.— Oar  country  now  is  great  and  free 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Berry  &  Gordon. 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.4 
cm. 

629.  FEW  DAYS  NO.  2.  — This  world  is  coming  to  an  end, 
few  days-few  days  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15  cm. 

630.  A  FEW  RHYMES  ON  THE  NAVAL  EXPEDITION  TO 
PORT  ROYAL.  — We're  now  across  the  fam.ed  Potomac 
(10  vs.) 

By  Henry  Albert  Setley,  Camp  Pierpoint,  Dec.  7,  1861. 
28.2  X  12  cm. 

631.  THE  FIGHT  FOR  THE  CHAMPIONSHIP. -'Tzoas  a 
great  many  years  ago  (5  vs.)  Air:  Yankee  Doodle. 

Composed  by  John  MacKenzie  of  New  York;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.9  x  16.8  cm. 

632.  THE  FIGHT  FOR  THE  CHAMPIONSHIP.  NO.  2.- 
Benicia  Boy  has  whipped  Tom  Sayers  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25.6  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25.5  x   16.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  "No.  2."  in  title;]  Sheet  no.  360;  "Sayers" 
in  first  line  spelled  "Sayer's";  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  I 
WOULD  NOT  DIE  m  SPRING  TIME  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.1  x  15  cm. 

633.  "FIGHTING  JOE  nOOKEU." -O ,  fighting  Joe  Hooker 

the  brave  (3  vs.) 

For  sale  at  Taylor's  Stationery  Store. 
T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  15.3  cm. 

634.  FILLMORE  THE  WISE.— Stand  forth,  ye  true  men  of 
all  parties  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Old  Rosin  the  Beau." 

T.  o.  border.   21.5  x  12  cm. 

635.  THE  FINAL  VICTORY. -T/ze  veteran  troops  at 
Gettysburg  (5  vs.)  Air.  — "Johnny  fill  up  the  Bowl." 

Headed:   "Ballad  No.  3.";  adv:   See  Numbers  One  and 
Two;  by  A.  Anderson,  January,  1864;  cop:    1864,  A.  Ander- 
son, EDPa;  [publ.]  A.  Anderson. 

a.  T.  o.  border,  horseshoe  design.   23.8  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  T.  o.  border,  leaf  motif.  24.6  x  15.2  cm. 

636.  THE  FINE  OLD  DUTCH  GENTLEMAN. -/'«  sing  you 
now  a  Ditchen  song  'bout  Hans  Von  Krouplegheet  (5  vs.) 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  Air— Fine  Old  English 
Gentleman;  Composed  and  sung  by  J.  F.  Poole;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title.] 

A-J  border.   20.1  x  15.2  cm.  (cropped) 


c.   Sheet  no.  672;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

637.  THE  FINE  OLD  ENGLISH  GENTLEMAN. -/'«  sing 
you  a  good  old  song,  made  by  a  good  old  pate  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Sheet  no.  670;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

638.  THE  FINE  OLD  IRISH  GENTLEMEN. -/'ZZ  sing  you  a 
dacent  song  that  was  m.ade  by  a  Paddy's  pate  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  671;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

639.  THE  FIRE  FELLER.-/  keeps  a  Lager  Beer  Saloon 
m.it  pretzels,  kase,  und  beer  (10  vs.)   Air— The  Raging 
Canawl. 

By  Jotm  L.  Zieber;  headed:   "Wholesale  Agents:   T.  M. 
Scroggy  (1),  G.  Boshart,  and  H.  K.  Logan." 

a.  Publ.  Zieber;  adv:   Buy  "Polly  Grey". 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.  21.5  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped 
at  head?) 

b.  [As  above;]  headed:   " Zieber 's  Popular  Editions". 
T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.   21.2  x  13  cm. 

640.  THE   FIRE -CAP  AND  TRUMPET. -As/ z<;a/feedoai 
one  fine  Summer's  morning  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   24  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  835;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

641.  THE  FIREMAN.— O/z.'  the  fireman's  life  is  the  life 
that  is  good  (5  vs.)  Air.- Rory  O'More. 

Dedicated  to  Engine  Co.  No.  21.   "Old  Fulton";  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

642.  THE  FIREMAN'S  BOY.— Mother,  look  out  and  see 
that  light  (22  vs.)  Air.— The  American  Boy. 

Sheet  no.  641;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.   24.2  x  15. 1  cm. 

643.  THE  FIREMAN'S  DEATH. -//e  slept,  and  o'er  his 
dauntless  brow  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.2  x  16.8  cm. 

c.  With  "The"  in  title  spelled  "Teh";  sheet  no.  241; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEER  NO.  3 
on  verso.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.9  x  15  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  with  I'LL  NE'ER  GET  DRUNK  AGAIN  on 
verso.]  24.9  x  15.7  cm. 

644.  THE  FIREMAN'S  VIC  TORY. -/farfe/  hark!  hark!  to 
the  deep-toned  bell  (4  vs.  and  chors.  uneven  length) 

a.  Words  by  Mr.  Brougham;  music  by  Mr.  C.  R.  Dod- 
worth;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  yellow  paper.   23  x  14.8  cm. 

645.  FIRST  ANNUAL  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIER  OF 
THE  "NATIONAL  DEMOCRAT,"  TO  HIS  PATRONS  AND 


42 


FRIENDS.— Patrons  and  Friends!  Once  more  (11  vs. 
uneven  length) 

Headed:  "1867  Happy  New  Year  1867";  [signed] 
Carrier  Boy. 

T.  o.  border.   25.2  x  21.6  cm. 

646.  THE  FIRST  BLOOD.— O/z.'  Massachusetts  rich  in  lore 
(10  vs.) 

[Signed]  Compliments  of  O.  C.  Bosbyshell. 
Light  green  paper;  printed  on  both  sides.   20.5  x 
10.3  cm. 

647.  THE  FIRST  MARYLAND.— O^z  where  are  now  the 
gallant  boys  (5  vs.)  (Tune:— My  Normandy.) 

[Signed]   T.  G.  D. 

T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  12.6  cm. 

648.  THE  FISH-BALL  MUSKETEER. -A  musketeer  went 
up  and  down  (8  vs.)  Air— The  Cork  Leg. 

Sheet  no.  1070;  as  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  pubL 
Wrigley  (1). 

a.  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.3  x  13  cm. 

b.  [With  MY  BOYHOOD'S  HAPPY  HOME  on  verso.] 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25.2  x  15.7  cm. 

649.  FLAG  OF  FORT  SUMTER.— O  say,  have  you  heard 
how  the  Flag  of  our  sires  (4  vs.)  Air— "Star  Spangled 
Banner." 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  flag.   23.8  x  I6  cm. 

b.  With  "The"  and  hyphen  in  title;  with  hyphen  in  "Air" 
and  without  quotes;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25.3  x  16.8  cm. 

c.  [Sold  by]  Scroggy  (1). 

A-J  border.   20.5  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped?) 

d.  With  "The"  in  title;   [without  quotes  around  Air;] 
sheet  no.  773;  pubL  Wrigley. 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.  20.6 
X  12.9  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.4  cm. 

650.  THE  FLAG  OF  OUR  UNION. -T^ze  Flag  of  our  Union 
boys,  now  and  forever  (4  vs.)  Air:   The  American  Star. 

Composed  by  Mathew  Brady. 

a.  Print.  Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border,  horseshoe  design.  22.4  x  13  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  t.  o.  border,  leaf  motif.   23.1  x  13.9  cm. 

651.  FLAG  OF  OUR  UNION  FOREVER. -yl  song  for  our 
banner!  the  watchword  recall 

a.  By  General  George  P.  Morris;  3  vs.  and  3  seven-line 
chors.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  2  vs.  and  2  seven-line  chors.;  with  colon  at  end  of 
title;  subtitle:   "A  National  Song";   respectfully  inscribed 
to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott;  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Forever"  in  title;]  2  vs.  and  2  five-line 
chors.;  with  e.xclaraation  point  at  end  of  title;  subtitle:   "A 
National  Song";  as  sung  by  Mr.  Collins,  with  immense 
applause,  at  the  Arch  Street  Theatre,  Philad.;  music  publ. 
by  Wm.  Hall  &  Son  (1). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  21  x  13.7  cm. 

d.  [Without  "Forever",  but  with  "The"  in  title;)  2  vs. 
and  2  five-line  chors.;  to  be  had  at  the  publisher's  store 


De  Marsan  (4)  and  at  Bennett  and  Carroll's;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.3  x  16.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

f.  2  vs.  and  2  seven-line  chors.;  subtitle:   "A  National 
Song";  respectfully  inscribed  to  Gen.  Winfield  Scott. 

Eagle  with  flag.   16.7  x  io.2  cm.  (cropped) 

g.  3  vs.  and  3  five-line  chors.;  with  "Forever"  in  two 
words;  published  by  James  D.  Gay  of  Philadelphia,  for- 
merly a  member  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery,  Reading,  Pa.; 
[with  BATTLE  CRY  OF  FREEDOM,  OR  WE'LL  RALLY 
ROUND  THE  FLAG,  BOYS  on  verso.] 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  red  triple  t.  o.  border  with 
ornamental  corners.   23.2  x  16  cm. 

h.   [As  above;  with  I'M  GOING  TO  FIGHT  MIT  SIGEL  on 
verso.]  23.2  x  16  cm. 

i.    3  vs.  and  3  seven-line  chors.;  with  "Forever"  in  two 
words;  by  Gen.  Geo.  P.  Morris;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24.6  x  14.9  cm. 

j.    [Without  "Forever",  but  with  "The"  in  title;]  3  vs. 
and  six-line  chor.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;   hdpc.  Magnus  180, 
col.   21.4  X  13.5  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illus- 
trated Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  32,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   19.9  x  11.9  cm. 

1.    [As  above;  but  without  adv:   Ten  illustrated  .  .  .;]  hdpc. 
Magnus  143,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  13.8  cm. 

m.  [Without  period,  but  with  "The"  in  title;]  3  vs.  and 
six-line  chor.;  sheet  no.  714;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  13.6  cm. 

n.   [As  above;]  Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry 
top,  col.   22.3  X  13.6  cm. 

652.  THE  FLAG  OF  THE  YKEY..- Nobly  our  flag  flutters 
o'er  us  to-day  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Without  "The"  in  title  and  period  at  end;  without 
hyphen  in  first  line;]  2  chors.;  publ.  Auner  [address  im- 
perfectly printed.] 

A-J  border;  sailor  nailing  flag  to  masthead.   21.2  x 
12.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24.3  x   15.1  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   23.2  x  14  cm. 

d.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26.2  x  17  cm. 

e.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  2  chors.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
Sailor  nailing  flag  to  masthead.   18.9  x  11.5  cm. 

f.  [Without  hyphen  in  first  line;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Johnson  has  600  different  kinds  of  songs. 

A-J  border.   25.1  x  15.8  cm. 

g.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  by  Henry  A. 
Milliard;  sheet  no.  732;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  12.3  cm. 

h.   By  Henry  A.  Milliard;  sheet  no.  861. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23  x  15.2  cm. 

653.  THE  FLAG  OF  THE  REPUBLIC. -Long  iivve  our 
proud  Stars  and  Stripes  of  Libetiy  (2  vs.)  Air:  I'm  Afloat. 


43 


a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.9  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  By  Eugene  Johnston;  [with  BLUE  VIOLETS  on  recto;] 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

654.  THE  FLAG  WITH  THE  THIRTY-FOUR  STARS. -77ze 
Rebels  sing  the  "Bonnie  Blue  Flag"  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Without  hyphen  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border.   23.9  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  By  Gen.  W.  H.  Hayward;  6  vs.  and  chor.;  variant  in 
viiording  of  text;  [publ.]  Doyle  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  13.8  cm. 

c.  Variant  in  wording  of  text;  [publ.]  Doyle  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

d.  Title:   "Our  Flag  With  Thirty-Four  Stars";  Tune- 
Dixey's  Land;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Johnson's  New  Cata- 
logue of  Songs. 

A-J  border.  24  x  14.4  cm. 

e.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.   19.6  x 

12.1  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  207,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illus- 
trated Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  109a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

h.  [Without  "The"  before  "Thirty-Four";  without  quotes 
in  first  line;]  Air— Bonnie  Blue;  sheet  no.  876;  publ.  Par- 
tridge (2). 

T.  o.  border.   21.8  x  13.9  cm. 

i.    Title  in  quotes;  By  W.  H.  Hayward,  Esq.;  cop:   1862, 
Wm.  H.  Hayward,  DCMd;  long  lines;  7  vs.  and  chor. 
Double-line  border.  22  x  12.3  cm. 

655.  FLAMING  O'FLANNAGANS.-ATow  I'm  of  age,  I'll 
come  into  m,y  property  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Geo.  W.  Anderson,  Irish  Vocalist;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   25.4  x  16  cm. 

656.  FLASH  EVERY  SABRE  BRIGHT. -DraM;  comrades 
draw  the  bright  sabre  again  (3  vs.) 

By  Robert  Johnston;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus, 
SDN.Y.;  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  13.6  cm. 

657.  FLIP  FLAP. -T/zere's  big  fish,  and  little  fish  (5  vs. 
and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Frank  Lum,  the  celebrated  Ethiopian 
comedian. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.4  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3);  Boyd's  imprint  added  (1). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.1  x  13.7  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  22.6  X  14.5  cm. 

658.  THE  FLOATING  WORK- HOUSE.  — 'Tzs  of  a  fearful 
captain  a  story  now  I'll  tell  (9  vs.)  Tune  of  Brennan  on  the 
Moor. 

23.7  X  15.2  cm. 


659.  FLORA  MAY.— In  South  Carolina  I  was  bom  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  composed  by  John  S.  LeFavour,  of 
Salem;  words  published  by  permission  from  the  author; 
music  to  be  had  at  the  principal  Bookstores;  publ.  and 
sold  by  Peckham  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  12.9  cm. 

660.  FLORENCE  NIGHTINGALE. -WS/z  lofty  song  we  love 
to  cheer  (3  vs.) 

By  Francis  Bennock;  part  of  "Soldier's  letter  from  the 
Crimea"  at  bottom;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.8  cm. 

661.  FLOW  GENTLY  SWEET  AFTON.-i^ioev  gently  sweet 
Afton  am,ong  thy  green  braes  (2  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.5  x  I6.I  cm. 

662.  THE  FLOWER  OF  THE  LAND.-TTte  Sunburst  has 
dawned  over  all  the  glad  mountains  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air: 
Jessie,  the  Flower  of  Dumblane. 

Sung  by  G.  W.  Gill;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16.7cm. 

663.  THE  FLOWERS  WERE  V.'LOOm.mG.- The  flowers 
were  blooming,  the  birds  they  were  singing  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Beautiful  Song  and  Chorus,  sung  by  Carncross,  at 
Carncross  &  Dixey's  Eleventh  Street  Opera  House;  music 
obtained  of  J.  L.  Carncross  &  Co.;  publ.  Auner  (5).   20.5  x 
12.8  cm. 

FLOWING  HAIR,  see  FAIRY-BELLE,  and  JOHNNY'S 
SO  BASHFUL. 

664.  THE  FLOW'RY  SHANNON  SIDE.-7f  was  on  a  sum- 
m.er's  morning,  as  early  I  did  stray  (12  vs.)  Air— Burning 
of  the  Henry  Clay. 

Publ.  [De]  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.9  cm. 

665.  FLYE^G  YOUR  KITE  TOO  HIGH.-When  Doctor 
Franklin  went  to  catch  (7  vs.)  Air— The  Elixir  of  Love. 

Tony  Pastor's  Comic  Songster;  publ.  Dick  &  Fitz- 
gerald. 

A-J  border.  20  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

666.  FOND  HEARTS  AT  HOME. -When  I  left  the  dear  home 
of  my  father's  (3  vs.) 

Composed  by  W.  Percival;  sung  nightly  with  Tremen- 
dous Applause,  by  Buckley's  celebrated  Band  of  Minstrels, 
539  Broadway,  New  York;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

667.  FOR  LOVE  OF  TKEE.-The  forest  flowers  again  are 
springing  (2  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.4  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  729;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15.7  cm. 

668.  FOR  THE  UNION  WE'LL  DIE.-/«  oppression's  dark 
hour,  are  our  patriot  Sires  (3  vs.) 

By  Dr.  W.  S.  Hurlocke;  Respectfully  inscribed  to 
General  Sam.  Houston,  of  Texas;  music  published  by  W.  H. 
Coulston. 

A-J  border.   20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

669.  THE  FORSAKEN  TO  THE  FALSE  ONE.-7rfare  thee 
to  forget  m.e!  go  wander  where  thou  wilt  (6  vs.) 


44 


By  Thomas  Haynes  Bayly;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

FORT  DONELSON  IS  TAKEN,  see  THE  SWORD  OF 
BUNKER  HILL. 

670.  THE  FOUR  LEAVED  SHAMR0CK.-/7i  seek  a  four 
leaved  shamrock  (5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  hyphen  in  title,  and  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  713; 
7  vs.  in  3;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

671.  FOURTH  OF  JULY  OBEX— Great  Independent  Day  has 
come  (33  vs.) 

Headed:   "1856";  By  Josiah  Lord  Thomas,  Esq. 
T.  o.  border.   31.3  x  24.5  cm. 

672.  FOURTH  OF  JULY  SONG. -We  hail  once  again,  the 
glad  day  that  gave  (3  vs.)   Air:  Star-Spangled  Banner. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3),  with  2-line  imprint. 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  3-line  imprint.] 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

c.  [Without  hyphen  in  Air;]  By  M.  J.  Million;  sheet  no. 
1010;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

673.  FOURTH  OF  JULY  UNION  SOT^G. -Hail,  our  country's 
natal  mom  (8  vs.)  Air— "Scots  wha  hae  wi'  Wallace  bled." 

[Publ.]   Louis  Bonsai. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag  and  banner.  21.5  x  12  cm. 

674.  FRANKLIN  HOSE  SONG. -Ye  Members  of  the  Frank- 
lin Hose  (14  vs.)  Tune— "Rocks  of  Sicily." 

Publ.  T.  M.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

675.  FREE  AND  EASY.— /'m  the  girl  that's  free  and  easy 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Fanny  Forrest  with  immense  success;  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  20.4  x  13.9  cm.  (cropped) 

676.  FREE  &  EASY.  NO.  2.-/  know  a  gal  that  I  do  fancy 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  Frank  Spear,  and  sung  by  J.  H.  Budworth; 
sheet  no.  924;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

677.  FREE  &  EASY  OF  OUR  UNION. -Listen  to  the  can- 
nons roaring  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  By  John  C.  Cross; 
sheet  no.  820;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

678.  THE  FREE  &  EASY  SOnG.-Merrily  pass  the  nights 
away  (4  vs.)   Air— Barclay  and  Perkins's  Drayman. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15.5  cm. 

679.  FREE  &  EASY  STILL. -/'m  the  lad  that's  free  and 
easy  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 


Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

680.  A  FREE  MASON'S  HYMN,  IN  HONOR  OF  THE  REV. 
GEORGE  GhUBKEATK.  — In  fasting  and  praying  with 
Christ  in  the  way  (9  vs.) 

Composed  by  Maria  L.  Davis,  fWidow.)  Philadelphia, 
July,  1864.   24  x  12  cm. 

FREEDOM'S  ALTAR,  see  ON  FREEDOM'S  ALTAR. 

FREEDOM'S  BANNER,  see  FREEDOM'S  GITIDE. 

681.  FREEDOM'S  BATTLE.— Brothers!  though  ye  strive 
full  bravely  (6  vs.) 

By  Richard  Coe. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

682.  FREEDOM'S  COMING  HOME.— Be/ore  Old  Abe  leaves 
Washington  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Few  Days. 

Sheet  no.  727;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20  x   12  cm. 

683.  FREEDOM'S  GUIDE. -OMr  country  is  now  great  and 
free  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Dedicated  to  the  69th.  Regiment  of  New-York;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  flag  border,  with  central  star,  col.   25.5  x 
17  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x 
16.5  cm. 

c.  Dedicated  to  the  69th  Regt.  N.Y.S.M.   By  P.  Sharkey; 
sheet  no.  737;  Air— Dixie's  Land;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.8  X  13.5  cm. 

d.  [Asabove;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   21.5  x   12.5  cm. 

e.  Title:  "Freedom's  Banner!!";  dedicated  to  the  New 
York  Zouaves,  Federal  Hill. 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.   19  x  11  cm.  (cropped?) 

684.  THE  FREEMAN'S  HOME.  A  NATIONAL  ODE.- TTzom 
Star-spangled  Banner,  we  love  thy  sweet  wave  (5  vs.) 
Air.— "Flow  Gently,  Sweet  Alton." 

a.  By  the  Author  of  "The  Nation's  Scourge";  copyright 
secured;  published  907  Poplar  St.,  Philadelphia. 

T.  o.  border.   20  x   11.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  quotes  around  "The  Freeman's 
Home";  with  adv.  printed  on  verso  in  red  ink:   "Callis' 
Toy  and  Variety  Store."   17.3  x  10. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

685.  FREEMEN,  ARISE.— Oh!  freemen  arise  in  defence  of 
your  flag  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.  The  American  Star. 

By  William  Sutherland;  publ.  J.  Magee. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  border  and  flag  in  red  and  blue. 
20  X  13.2  cm. 

686.  FREEMEN,  KAhhYX— Awake  from  your  slumbers. 
Brave  Heroes  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Rosin  the  Bow. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  By  Eddie  Eames;  sheet  no. 
824;  with  e.xclamation  point  and  "Brave  Heroes"  not  cap- 
italized in  first  line;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.7  cm. 


45 


687.  FREEMEN'S  RALhYl— Freemen,  freemen,  from 
mountain,  from,  valley  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

T.  o.  border.   16.5  x  10.5  cm.  (cropped?) 

688.  FREMONT  &  VICTORY. -ilzse,  rise!  from  your 
stupor!  awake  ye,  awake  (5  vs.) 

For  the  Mass  Meeting  at  Oyster  Bay,  September  20, 
1856.   24.2  X  15.3  cm. 

689.  FREMONT  AND  VICTORY.  A  RALLYING  SONG.— 
Behold!  the  furious  storm,  is  rolling  (3  vs.)  Tune— Mar- 
seilles Hymn. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Rallying  Song  for  the  Mass  Meeting  at  Oyster 
Bay,  September  20,  1856";  with  3  chors.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

690.  THE  FRENCH  LADY.— Come  and  listen  to  the  story 
(6  vs.)   Air— "Sister  Mary." 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border.   27  x  13.5  cm. 

691.  THE  FRIENDS  WE  LEAVE  BEHIND  US. -Come  Com- 
rades while  we  March  away  (3  vs.)  Tune— "The  Girl  I  Left 
Behind  Me." 

Cop:   1862,  J.  Magee;  subtitle:   "The  Soldiers  Parting 
Song." 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double  line  border  with  2  flags 
and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union  Forever"  in  red  and  blue. 
20  X  12.5  cm. 

692.  FRIENDSHIP  AND  l.OV'E.— Of  every  sensation  true 
joy  can  impart  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  16  cm. 

FRIENDSHIP'S  WISH,  see  I'M  AFLOAT. 


Publ.  T.  M.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  13  cm. 

GAILY  THE  TROUBADOUR,  see  SWASH  SHAY,  HANDS 
ACROSS. 

698.  GAL  FROM  THE  SOUTH.— M31  massa  had  a  colored 
gal  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   24  x  15.2  cm. 

699.  THE  GAL  IN  THE  CABBAGE  LINE.  A  PARODY  ON 
"DANDY  JIM  FROM  CAROLINE.  "-Mji  darling  Jane,  I'd 
have  you  know  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

700.  THE  GAL  WITH  DE  BLUE  DRESS  O^.-Now  white 
folks,  I'll  sing  to  you  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

701.  THE  GAL  WITH  THE  BALMORAL. -As  /  walked  down 
the  street  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Jockey  Hat  and  Feather." 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (address  imperfectly  printed). 
A-J  border.  21.9  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Bryants'  Minstrels;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x  16.5  cm. 

702.  GALLANT  FIGHTING  JOE. -On  old  Virginia's  sacred 
soil  (6  vs.)  Air— "Brave  Lord  Willoughby." 

a.  Sheet  no.  825;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Song  of  the  Potomac  Veterans;  or,  Gallant 
Fighting  Joe";  with  first  vs.  set  to  music;  adv:   War  Songs 
for  Freemen;  [publ.]   Ticknor  &   Fields.   27.3  x  15.7  cm. 


693.  THE  FRIGHT  OF  OLD  VIRGINIA.  BEING  A  CON- 
DENSED ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HARPER'S  FERRY  INSUR- 
RECTION, OCTOBER  16TH,  1859. -O/z.'  have  you  heard 
the  news  of  late  (9  vs.  and  chor.)   Air— "Teddy  the  Tiler." 

By  Walter  W.  Warren;  publ.  Warren  (4).  23.9  x 
12.8  cm. 

694.  FROM  A  HUSBAND  TO  HIS  WIFE.-S/ze  who  sleeps 
upon  m.y  heart  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.3  x 
15.4  cm. 


703.  THE  GALLANT  HUSSAR. -A  damsel  possess 'd  of 
great  beauty  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  436;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.   22.5  x  13.7  cm. 

704.  THE  GALLANT  99TH  REGIMENT.  ^.Y .S.V .-Brave 
Comrades ,  all,  come  list  to  me;  your  spirits  I'll  cheer 
(8  vs.)  Air:  River  Roe. 

By  P.  K.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.2  x  16.5  cm. 


695.  THE  FRONTIER  MUSKETEERS. -/f  was  on  the 
second  of  October,  when  us  boys  we  did  parade  (3  vs.  and 
2  chors.) 

Composed  by  Wm.  H.  Core;  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

696.  FUNERAL  PROCESSION  OF  PRESIDENT  LINCOLN, 
AS  IT  STARTED  FROM  THE  DEPOT  IN  PHILADELPHIA, 
APRIL  22D,  1865.— So^Zy  the  light  of  the  parting  day  (4  vs.) 
Tune.— Star  of  the  Evening,  Glory  on  High. 

July  4th,  1865;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Bill- 
Heads,  Circulars,  etc.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

697.  THE  FURNITURE  CAR.-When  last  I  saw  the  Philly, 
'twas  on  a  wint'ry  day  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Low  Back'd 
Car." 


705.  GALLANT  PENNSYLVANIA  69TH,  IRISH  VOLUN- 
TEERS —  To  Erin's  sons  of  hill  and  plain,  come  listen  to 
my  feeble  strain  (6  vs.)  Air.— McKenney's  Dream 

Dedicated  to  the  Sixty-ninth  Regiment  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers,  by  M.  Fay;  cop:   1863,  J.  H.  Johnson,  EDPa. 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2).  23.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Irish  Volunteers,  Penn'a's  Gallant  69th."; 
publ.  Johnson  (2).   24.5  x  16  cm. 

706.  GALLANT  69TH  —We  are  privates  in  the  Sixty-Ninth 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Ed.  Harrigan;  music  by  Dave  Braham. 

a.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  "Ninth"  in  first  line  not  in 
caps;  adv:   By  sending  Johnson,  40  cents;  [publ.]  Johnson 
(4)  [imprint  partially  cropped].   18.3  x  12  cm. 


46 


b.  Music  published  by  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

Four  military  figures.   15.3  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

707.  THE  GALLANT  69TH  NO.  8. -The  Sons  of  old  Granua 
are  arming  (5  vs.)  Air:  The  Land  of  Shillelagh. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.   24  x  17  cm. 

708.  THE  GALLANT  69TH  REGIMENT.-Ofe.'  Hibernia, 
green  Gem  of  the  Ocean  (3  vs.)  Air:  Red,  White,  and  Blue. 

Dedicated  to  the  "Sullivan  Boys"  of  Company  A. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.  21  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  With  single  quotes  around  "Sullivan  Boys"  in  dedica- 
tion; sheet  no.  861;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  By  Ned  Kirby;  sheet  no.  808;  worded:   "And  dedicated 
to  the  Sullivan  Boys  of  Company  A.";  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

709.  THE  GALLANT  SOLDIER.  — W%eM  war-drums  beat 
and  cannons  rattle,  sage  and  sire  stories  tell  (7  vs.) 
Air:   The  Storm. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  17.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  By  F.  Collins;  sheet 
no.  1024;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

710.  GALLANT  SOLDIER  BOYSl-Tfee  shrill  trumpets 
sounding  and  the  drums  are  rattling  loud  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— Fairy  Belle. 

Sheet  no.  745;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22  x  12.2  cm. 

711.  THE  GALLANT  SONS  OF  ERIN.-yoM,  Soldiers  brave, 
pray  pay  attention:  gentle  folks,  grand  condescention  (6  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Dedicated  to  the  69th  Regt.  N.Y.S.M. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  26  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.7  x  I6  cm. 

c.  With  varying  punctuation  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  1064; 
By  Timothy  B.  O'Regan;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  with  BY  THE  SAD  SEA-WAVE  on  recto.] 
23.6  X  15.6  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  with  O  GENTLY  BREATHE  on  recto.] 
22.4  X  13.5  cm. 

712.  THE  GALLANT  28TH.-Corwe  all  you  brave,  and 
united  let  us  be  (6  vs.)  Tune.— "Sons  of  America." 

Composed  by  John  Hayes,  John  Chapman  and  David  S. 
Beeth;  respectfully  dedicated  to  the  28th  Regiment,  P.V., 
in  Camp  near  Point  of  Rocks,  Md.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A- J  border;  two  hands  pointing  at  title.  23  x  14  cm. 

713.  GALS  ON  THE  AVENUE. -As  /  walked  out  one  sultry 
morn  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Tom  Vance;  sheet  no.  727;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  14.5  cm. 


714.  THE  GAMBLER'S  WIFE. -Dark  is  the  night!  how 
dark!  no  light— no  fire  (9  vs.) 

Poetry  by  Dr.  Crofts;  music  by  Henry  Russell. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

715.  THE  GARDEN  GATE.  — The  day  was  clos'd,  the  moon 
shone  bright  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

716.  THE  GARRET  NEAR  THE  SKY. -The  cottage  by  the 
sea  you've  heard  of  (3  vs.)  Air:   The  Cottage  by  the  sea. 

Written  by  G.  W.  Hunt,  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

717.  GAY  AND  HAPPY.-/  am  the  girl  that's  gay  and  happy 
(8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Miss  Annie  Rush,  the  Philadel- 
phia Vocalist. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A- J  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  With  "&"  in  title. 

A-J  border.  20.3  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  [Without  "the  Philadelphia  Vocalist";]  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16.6  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc. 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  Adv:   Union  Badges,  Letter  &  Note  Papers,  etc.  at 
Johnson's  (2). 

A-J  border.   18.8  x  10. 3  cm. 

f.  With  7  vs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

h.   [Without  "Composed  and  sung  by  .  .  .";]  As  sung  by 
Miss  Clara  Butler  at  the  New  Grotto  Saloon,  Corner  Fifth 
and  Chestnut  Sts.;  print.  Walter  Warren  (3). 

Wavy -line  border;  man  riding  sow  with  sign  "Fourth 
Edition".  25.3  x  14.5  cm. 

i.    Sheet  no.  821;  with  "&"  in  title;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

THE  GAY  CAVALIER,  see  THE  CAVALIER. 

718.  GAY  CONDUCTOR.-PWitte /oifes,  give  me  your  atten- 
tion, while  I  sing  yoti  a  little  song  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:   "Gay  Conductor  On  the  City-Railroad-Cars"; 
As  Sung  by  Lewis  Simmons,  the  favorite  banjoist,  at  the 
Melodeon,  539  Broadway;  [without  chorus;]  publ.  De 
Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.2  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Andrew  J.  Leavitt,  the  Champion  Banjo 
Soloist;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc.,  and  Sam.  Sanford's  New  Song  Books. 

A-J  border  [partly  cropped];  horses  pulling  railroad 
cars.   20.5  x  12.2  cm. 

719.  THE  GAY  OLD  COOK.— Some  tiventy  years  ago 
(10  vs.)  Air:  Shan  Van  Rocht. 


47 


By  Frozen  Water;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.3  x  17  cm. 


GEN.  F.  SIEGEL,  BRIG.  GEN. 
MARCH  TO  THE  WHITE  HOUSE! 


U.S.A.,  see  TRAITOR'S 


720.  GEN.  GILMORE  VS.  BEAUREGARD !-iJoMKd  the  South 
Atlantic  Shores  (6  vs.)  Air— Landlady  of  France. 

By  A.  Anderson,  late  of  the  45th  Regt.,  P.V.M.,  Sep- 
tember, 1863;  print.  Harris. 
T.  o.  border.  21.4  x  13  cm. 

GEN.  GRANT'S  BOYS,  see  GENERAL  GRANT'S  BOYS. 

721.  GEN.  GRANT'S  VICTORY  AT  CHATTANOOGA.-/* 
was  November  twenty-third  the  Union  Ball  began  (8  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— On  the  Road  to  Brighton. 

Written  by  Geo.  P.  Hardwick,  Washington,  D.C.; 
Respectfully  dedicated  to  Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant;  cop:   1863, 
G.  P.  Hardwick,  DCD.C. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  part  of  Magnus 
Gettysburg  series  (closest  to  hdpc.  113)  with  lateral  exten- 
sion full  length  of  right  side  of  sheet.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

721A.   GEN.  LEE,  "IS  PRETTY  GOOD  LOOKING,"  BUT 
HE  CANT  COME  IN  MARYLAND.-O/z,  carry  me  back  to 
old  Virginia  (4  vs.)  Air— "Oh,  carry  me  back  to  Old  Vir- 
ginia. ' ' 

T.  o.  border.   25.1  x  9  cm. 

722.  GEN.  McCLELLAN'S  FAREWELL  ADDRESS  TO 
HIS  ARMY.  — Ke  hills  and  vales  and  camps  around  (6  vs.) 
Air— Highland  Mary. 

Cop:   A.  Anderson,  EDPa.,  1862. 

a.  Written  by  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia,  November,  1862; 
[publ.]  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  border.   21  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  By  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  border.  21.4  x  13.5  cm. 

GEN.  SCOTT  &  CORPORAL  JOHNSON,  see  GENERAL 
SCOTT  AND  CORPORAL  JOHNSON. 

723.  GEN.  SIEGEL'S  CELEBRATED  CAMP  SONG.-Hark! 
the  loud  reveille  of  the  artillery  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  J.  P.  Morris;  music  composed  by  David  A. 
Warden;  cop:   1862,  David  A.  Warden,  EDPa.;  adv:   The 
Music  for  the  following  Copyright  Songs  obtained  [from] 
D.  A.  Warden  (1);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

724.  GENERAL  GRANT'S  BOYS.-Fe  copperheads  and 
traitors,  to  you  these  lines  we  write  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Cop:   1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

a.  With  "Gen."  in  title;  By  James  D.  Gay,  the  celebrated 
Army  Song  Publisher  and  Vocalist. 

T.  o.  border;  battle  scene  with  line  of  charging  soldiers 
within  ornamental  frame.  24.5  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  election  rally  with  man  on  platform,  and 
slogan  "Grant's  Beverage  is  Meade."  24.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  With  "copperheads"  in  first  line  in  caps;  Respectfully 
dedicated  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac;  By  James  D.  Gay; 
Air:  "Old  Virginia  low  lands,  low";  with  cop.  12  mm. 
below  text. 


Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  with 
title  "Richmond"  under  hdpc;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.4  x 
12.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  hdpc.  title;]  with  cop.  3  mm.  below 
text.  20.2  X  12.6  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  without  hdpc.  title;]  with  cop.  12  mm.  below 
text;  with  "bart"  for  "part"  in  2nd  line.   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

GENERAL  LEE,  see  THE  ROSE  OF  TRALEE. 

725.  GENERAL  LOGAN,  AND  THE  15TH  ARMY  CORPS. - 
Oh,  did  you  see  the  flying  Johnnies  (12  vs.  and  chor.) 
Tune.— "The  Kingdom  am  a  Coming." 

By  Capt.  R.  W.  Burt,  76th  Ohio  V.V.I. 

a.  American  Steam  Press,  Newark,  Ohio. 
Double-line  border.   26.5  x  13  cm. 

b.  With  "Fifteenth"  in  title;  with  "Comin"  in  Tune;  adv: 
Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

T.  o.  border;  blue  ink.   20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

726.  GENERAL  M'CLELLAN  ON  THE  BATTLEFIELD  OF 
ANTIETAM.— .Saj;,  who  at  Antietam.  a  spectator  has  been 

(4  vs.) 

By  J.  B. 

a.  Double-line  border  with  corner  fleurons;  green  paper; 
bust  of  McClellan.  25.5  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  23  x  11.7  cm. 

727.  GENERAL  MEADE,  THE  HERO  OF  GETTYSBURG. - 
Hail  to  the  chieftain  who  comes  in  his  glory  (3  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air.— Hail  to  the  Chief  who  in  triumph  advances. 

July  4th,  1865;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Bill- 
Heads,  Circulars,  etc.   24.5  x  14.5  cm. 

728.  GENERAL  SCOTT  AND  CORPORAL  JOHNSON. -An 
old  and  crippled  veteran  to  the  War  Department  came 

(5  vs.) 

a.  Words  by  Bayard  Taylor;  Music  by  D.  A.  Warden; 
Music  had  of  D.  A.  Warden  (2);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Title:   "The  War  of  1812  &  1861.   Gen.  Scott  and  Billy 
Johnson";  By  Bayard  Taylor;  adv:   Printing  of  all  descrip- 
tion; print.  John  W.  Du  Bree. 

Double-line  border  with  corner  fleurons.   24.3  x 
13.4  cm. 

c.  With  "Gen."  and  "&"  in  title;  adv:   500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  19,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.4  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  20,  col.   20.2  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  With  "&"  in  title. 

Letter  paper;  General  Scott  in  armchair  holding  paper 
"To  the  People  of  the  U.S.",  col.   23.2  x  14  cm. 

GEN'L  SHERMAN'S  BONNY  BOYS,  see  SHERMAN'S 
BONNY  BOYS  IN  BLUE. 

729.  GENTLE  ANNIE. -Ttow  wilt  come  no  more,  gentle 
Annie  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Billheads,  etc.;  publ.  John- 
son (2). 

T.  o.  border;  girl  with  flower  pot  and  shovel.   23.8  x 
15.3  cm. 


48 


730.  GENTLE  ELLA.— Once  I  knew  a  blue-eyed  maiden 
(4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.   25  x  17  cm. 

b.  By  F.  C.  Long;  sheet  no.  707;  pubL  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

731.  GENTLE  JENNY  GRAY.-Mji  heart  is  sad,  I'll  tell 
you  why  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  Joseph  Murphy,  of  Wood  &  Christy's 
Minstrels;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.6  x  16.5  cm. 

732.  GENTLE  MAGGIE. -Ok  an  Island  in  the  old  Mohawk 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  John  Miller;  Music  composed  and  arranged 
by  Frank  Mosier;  As  sung  by  the  Mohawk  Chorals  of 
Cohoes,  N.Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24  7  x  16  cm. 

733.  [GEORGE  B.  McCLELLAN. ]-Gorf  leads  to  victory 
where  justice  is  our  aim  (16  lines) 

The  following  Beautiful  Acrostic  was  written  down  by 
Col.  Max  Langenschwartz,  during  McClellan's  interview 
with  the  Chicago  Delegation;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  11,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

734.  GEORGE  SHIFFLER. -Americans,  attention  give 
(7  vs.) 

With  narrative  beginning:   "It  will  be  remembered 
that  this  young  man  was  shot  .  .  .";  advs:   Printed  and  for 
sale  at  [blank]  Card  and  Job  Printing  Office  Phila.,  and 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.   18.8  x  10.3  cm. 

735.  THE  GERMAN  BAND,  OR  THE  DUTCH  FLAGEOLET- 
PLAYER.— BetoM  a  poor  deluded  man,  a  victim  to  decep- 
tion (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25  x  16.7  cm. 

736.  GERMAN  FIFTH— Of  you'll  look  at  us  your  oud 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Harry  Bennett;  Music  by  Gus  Williams;  adv: 
By  sending  Johnson  (4)  12  three-cent  stamps;  publ.  John- 
son (4).   20.2  X  12  cm. 

737.  GETTYSBURG. —Tfee  boldest  and  the  bloodiest  raid 
(14  vs.) 

By  Robert  Morris,  Esq.;  Respectfully  dedicated  to 
General  Meade;  publ.  with  music  by  Lee  &  Walker;  copy- 
right secured.  24.5  x  17.7  cm. 


■Bin  ich  Eins 


738.   GEWISSHEIT  DES  GNADENSTANDES.- 
deiner  Kinderschaar  (5  vs.) 

[By]  C.  M. 

T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.   16  x  13  cm. 


739.  THE  GHOST  OF  MIKE  WALSH. -Tare  an'  ages,  ye 
spolpyeens  be  asy  (5  vs.)   Air:   Old  Rosin  the  Beau. 

"Song  rapped  out  at  a  spiritual  circle  .  .  .;"  publ. 
H.  [De]   Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15  cm. 

740.  GIDEON'S  BAND.— O^J,  keep  your  hat  upon  your  head 
(8  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  As  sung  at  the  Arch  Street  Theatre,  with  unbounded 
applause;  music  obtained  at  A.  Fisher's  Book  Store;  cop: 
1861,  C.  R.  Dodworth,  EDPa. 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.6  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1048;  As  Sung  by  Wood's  Minstrels;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1);  [with  NATURE'S  WOODLAND  CALL  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.8  x  15  cm. 

741.  THE  GIFT  OF  OUR  FATHERS-THE  FLAG  OF  THE 
FREE!  OUR  OATH  OF  ALLEGIANCE-THE  UNION  PER 
SE.  A  NATIONAL  SONG.— O/z  say  can  you  see  by  the  dawn's 
early  light  (6  vs.  and  chor.  with  music) 

By  John  M.  Crosland,  Written  for  the  advance  Troops 
in  defence  of  the  National  Capitol,  and  dedicated  to  loyal 
hearts  everywhere;  cop:    1861,  J.  M.  Crosland,  EDPa. 

Lithographed;  flag.   30.3  x  24.2  cm. 

742.  GIPSY  COUNTESS. -O/z.'  how  can  a  poor  Gipsy 
maiden  like  me  (8  vs.) 

Duett;  words  by  Mrs.  Crawford;  music  by  Glover; 
Music  obtained  at  Wm.  R.  Smith;  adv:   By  sending  Johnson 
50  cts;  publ.  Johnson  (2).   20  x  12.5  cm. 

743.  THE  GIPSY  KING. -'Tis  I'm  the  Gipsy-King  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.4  x  I6  cm. 

b.  With  "Gipsey"  in  title;   sheet  no.  978;  [without  2  line 
chor.  after  first  vs.;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

744.  THE  GIPSY'S  WARNING. -Tr«s<  him  not,  0  Gentle 
Lady  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

745.  GIPSY'S  WARNING.  OR  BE  WATCHFUL  &  BEWARE! 
—Seek  not  to  know  the  future  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   23.7  x  15.6  cm. 

746.  THE  GIRL  FROM  YEWDALE'S  MILL.-«  is  of  a  girl 
at  Fairmount,  that  I  am.  going  to  sing  (8  vs.)  Air:   "The 
Raging  Canal." 

By  Jimmy  Smith;  publ.  Scroggy  (3);  adv:   Largest  col- 
lection of  songs  in  the  United  States.   27.8  x  15.5  cm. 

747.  THE  GIRL  I  LEFT  BEHIND  MF.-I'm  lonesome  since 
I  cross' d  the  hills  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;   blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;)  hdpc.  Magnus  233,  col.   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  76;  publ.  Partridge  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  12.3  cm. 

748.  THE  GIRL  I  LEFT  BEHIND  ME.-' Tis  many  days 
since  I  left  home  (4  vs.) 

Dedicated  to  Our  Volunteers. 

a.   Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   23.7  x  15  cm. 


49 


b.  [Without  dedication;]  Published  and  sold  by  James  D. 
Gay,  the  celebrated  song  Publisher  of  Philadelphia. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.1  x  13.1  cm. 

c.  By  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  Johnson  (2),  with  "7  N. 
Tenth"  in  imprint. 

A-J  border;  female  figure.   23.5  x  15.3  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  "No.  7  North  Tenth"  in  imprint; 
adv;   all  the  New  and  Popular  Songs. 

T.  o.  border;  female  figure.   23.5  x  15.2  cm. 

e.  By  John  L.  Zieber;  cop:    1862,  J.  Magee,  in  blue  ink. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double  red  and  blue  line  border 

with  flags  at  top  and  motto;  bust  of  Liberty.  20.1  x  12.8  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  with  cop.  in  red  ink.   20.1  x  12.8  cm. 

g.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  By  John  L.  Zieber. 
17.7  X  10.2  cm.  (cropped) 

h.    [Without  dedication;]  but  with  title:   "The  Wife  I  Left 
Behind  Me";  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;   hdpc.  Magnus  5,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  but  with  different  adv:   500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  5,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  171,  col.;  publ.  iVIagnus  (1). 
20.2  X  12.7  cm. 

k.   [Without  dedication;]  adv:   Price  List  of  Stephens' 
Colored  Album  Drolleries  [publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  woman  resting  on  divan  in  garden,  col. 
21.4  X  13.9  cm. 

749.  THE  GIRL  I  LOVED  BEST  OF  ALL.-T/ze  girl  that  I 
loved  best  of  all  (3  vs.)  Air— Harp  that  once  Through 
Tara's  Hall. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.5  x  16.7  cm. 

750.  GIVE'EM  STRING  AND  LET'EM  WENT.-i,t/e  is  but 
a  span  of  horses  (5  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Go  It  While  You're  Young." 
A-J  border.   19.7  x  15  cm.  (cropped) 

751.  GIVE  ME  A  COT  IN  THE  VALLEY  I  hOWE.-Give  me 
a  cot  in  the  valley  I  love  (2  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  musical  instruments  on  song  book.  23.7 
X  14.9  cm. 

b.  2nd  song:   "The  Cot  Where  I  Was  Born";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.3  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (2).  24.9  x  16. 8  cm. 

752.  GIVE  ME  A  nOME.-Give  me  a  home,  that  I  can  call 
(7  vs.) 

Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

753.  GIVE  ME  A  NOBLE  FELLOW  WITH  A  BUCKTAIL  IN 
HIS  HAT.  — KoM  may  boast  of  fancy  Regiments  (3  vs.) 

Words  by  Miss  Harriet  L.  Castle;  Music  by  J.  C. 
Beckel;  cop:  J.  C.  Beckel,  EDPa.;  music  publ.  by  J.  C. 
Beckel. 


a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   24.4  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor,  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

GIVE  ME  WOMAN,  GIVE  ME  WINE,  see  WHEN  I 
DREAM  THAT  YOU  LOVE  ME. 

754.  GIVE  US  BACK  OUR  OLD  COMMANDER. -Giw  us 
back  our  old  Commander  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Cop:    1862,  Winner  &  Co.,  EDPa.;  Winner  &  Go's 
music  store  (3);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.9  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.   23.4  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Give  Us  Back  Little  Mac  Our  Old  Commander"; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  Words  and  Music  by  Sep:  Winner;  published  by  per- 
mission of  Winner  &  Co.  (3);  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24  x  13.7  cm. 

f.  Publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   22.4  x  11. 5  cm. 

g.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  13, 

col.   20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  115, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   21  x  12.8  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  with  line  between  text  and  adv. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  134,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

j.    [As  above;  without  line  between  text  and  adv.]  20.2 
X  12.5  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  150,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  12.5  cm. 

1.    Adv:  Send  for  Price  List  of  Stephen's  Colored  Album 
Drolleries  [publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  McClellan  standing  by  his  horse,  col. 
22.8  X  14  cm. 

m.  Sheet  no.  1115;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23.3  x  14  cm. 

755.  GLEE.  COME  BROTHERS  SISTERS.— Cowze,  Brothers, 
Sisters,  tune  the  lay  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Advs:   You  will  save  25  per  cent,  and  Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill  Heads,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x   14.4  cm. 

756.  THE  GLORIOUS  FLAG  OF  LIBERTY.-We  wUl  pull 
down  the  Rebel  Flag;  it  shall  not  wave  on  high  (3  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air:  A  Yankee  Man-of-war. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24.5  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1038;  Written  by  James  TuUy,  and  sung  by 
T.  F.  McNally;  [without  "A"  in  title  of  Air;]  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22.5  x  13.5  cm. 

757.  GLORIOUS  69THI— Come  all,  you  Gallant  Heroes, 
along  with  me  combine  (12  vs.) 


50 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3);  with  2-line  title. 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  1-line  title.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

c.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  607;  publ.  Par- 
tridge (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.6  x  15  cm. 

d.  [Without  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no. 
902;  publ.  Wrigley  [without  address]. 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.   23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  T.  o.  border.    19  x  n  cm.  (cropped) 

758.  THE  GLORIOUS  STRIPES  &  STARS. -Come  all,  you 
loyal  Patriots,  many  may  there  be  (8  vs.)  Air:   George 
Reilly. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  F.  Collins;  sheet  no.  827;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

759.  GLORY  FOR  THE  NORTH. -C^zeer /or  the  banner  as 
we  rally  near  its  stars  (4  vs.  and  chor.)   Tune— Glory 
Hallelujah. 

Sheet  no.  701;  [publ.]  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.4  cm. 

GLORY  HALLELUJAH.  NO.  1.  see  ELLSWORTH'S 
BODY  LIES  MOULDERING  IN  THE  GRAVE. 

760.  GLORY  HALLELUJAH.  NO.  2.-0ur  Soldiers,  now 
are  marching  to'ards  the  South  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

Air:  John  Brown  song. 
By  Fred.  Percy. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.7  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   25.2  x  16.4  cm. 

761.  GLORY  HALLELUJAH.  NO.  2. -Brave  McClellan  is 
our  leader  now  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Brothers,  will  you 
Meet  me? 

Music  obtained  of  Horace  Waters  (1);  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.   23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

GLORY  HALLELUJAH.  NO.  3,  see  JOHN  BROWN 
SONG. 

GLORY  HALLY  HALLELUJAH,  see  JOHN  BROWN 
SONG. 

762.  GLORY  TO  GODl  GLORY  TO  GODl-Gtory  to  God! 
Glory  to  God!  (4  vs.  with  music  for  1st  vs.  and  chor.) 

[A  National  Anthem;]  Words  by  A.  J.  H.  Duganne; 
Music  by  Mrs.  E.  A.  Parkhurst;  publ.  Waters  (1);  cop: 
1865,  Horace  Waters,  SDN.Y.;  Warren  Music  Stereotyper. 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  27.6  cm. 

763.  GLORY  TO  OLD  MAINE. -Rally  round  our  standard, 
ye  gallant  men  and  true  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Glory 
Hallelujah." 

Dedicated  to  the  Twelfth  Maine  Regiment;  sold  by 
H.  W.  Bryant;  print.  Berry. 

Single-line  border.   23.5  x  15.1  cm. 

764.  "GO  IT  ALONE,"  OR  THE  GAME  OF  hlF'E. -There's 
a  game  much  in  fashion— I  think  it's  called  euchre  (7  vs.) 


Sheet  no.  991;  From  the  Phunny  Phellow;  by  John  G. 
Saxe;  publ.  Partridge  (5). 

T.  o.  border.   20.7  x  14.9  cm. 

765.  GO  IT  WHILE  YOU'RE  YOUNG. -Money's  scarce  they 
say,  and  very  well  we  know  it  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  John  Winans,  the  Popular  Comedian. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.1  x  16.5  cm. 

GO  IT  WHILE  YOU'RE  YOUNG,  see  also  GIVE 'EM 
STRING  AND  LET'EM  WENT. 

766.  GO  WHERE  GLORY  WAITS  THEE. -Go  where  glory 
waits  thee  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.3  x  16.2  cm. 

767.  THE  GOBBLE  FAMILY,  OR,  MY  GRANDFATHER'S 
FARM  YARD,  A  QUARTETTE.— My  Grandfather  had  some 
very  fine  turkeys  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

Composed  and  arranged  by  Prof.  Kirbye,  and  sung 
nightly  with  immense  applause,  at  all  the  popular  concerts; 
publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

768.  GOD  FOR  OUR  NATIVE  LAND. -Gorf's  blessing  be 
upon  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  23  x  14  cm. 

769.  GOD  PROTECT  OUR  DEAR  OLD  YhAG.—God  protect 
our  dear  old  flag  (3  vs.) 

Composed  by  Wm.  H.  Peirsol;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.    19  x  11  cm. 

770.  GOD  SAVE  AMERICA. -God  bless  the  land  that  gave 
us  birth  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "U.  S.  M.  O.  Series";  with  a  patriotic  war 
anecdote  at  top  of  page. 

T.  o.  border.   22.1  x  12.6  cm. 

771.  GOD  SAVE  OUR  COUNTRY'S  FLAG. -God  save  our 
Country's  flag  (3  vs.  printed  with  and  without  music.) 

Headed:   "National  Songs  Issued  By  The  Loyal  National 
League";  Words  by  E.  Turney;  Music  by  R.  Lowry;  sold 
by  R.  Brinkerhoff;  cop:   1862,  E.  Turney,  SDN.Y.;  [with 
explanation  of  the  song  at  bottom  of  page]. 

a.  Double  t.  o.  border,  flag,  between  words  "  'The  Sign 
of  Liberty  Our  Fathers  Gave'  ".   29.6  x  19.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  flag  printed  in  red  and  blue.   28.5  x 
17.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  but  without  heading.]   30.7  x  21. 1  cm. 

772.  GOD  SAVE  THE  PRESIDENT !-God  save  the  Presi- 
dent (4  vs.)   Tune— America. 

Sheet  no.  779;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19  x  12.5  cm. 

GOD  SAVE  THE  STATE,  see  THE  BATTLE  CRY  OF 
FREEDOM. 


51 


773.  GOD  SAVE  THE  UNION.— God,  save  our  native  land 
(3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22.1  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   24.8  x  16.2  cm. 

o.   By  John  Cross;  sheet  no.  711;  publ.  Wrlgley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   21,3  x  12.8  cm. 

774.  GOD  SAVE  THE  UNION. -May  God  save  the  Union'. 
God  grant  it  may  stand  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Printed  by  permission  of  the  owner  of  the  Copyright; 
Words  by  the  Rev.  Douglass  Brewerton;  Music  by  Carl 
Wolfsohn;  music  publ.  and  to  be  had  of  G.  Andre  &  Co.; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  13.5  cm. 

GOD  SAVE  THE  UNION,  see  also  OUR  COUNTRY'S 
FLAG. 

775.  GOD  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW.-Wee^  no 
more.  O  nobly  fallen  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Who  will  care 
for  Mother  now? 

By  Louise  Barrows. 

a.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.3  x  17.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.1  x 
15.4  cm. 

776.  GOD  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  T^O^ .-Death  has 
crept  upon  your  pathway  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

By  permission  of  Horace  Waters  (1),  owner  of  the 
copyright. 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  120,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  black  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  193a,  col.   20.3  x 
12.2  cm. 

c.  With  only  one  chor.;  Published  and  sung  by  James  D. 
Gay,  of  Philadelphia    [followed  by  biographical  sketch;] 
adv:  Sutlers  and  dealers  supplied. 

Letter  paper;  light  green  border  with  ornamental  fig- 
ures, by  E.  Rogers,  Eng.    24.7  x  17.2  cm. 

777.  GOING  ROUND  DE  HORN.— GoJK^  down  de  ribber  on 
de  Mississippi  steamer  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  5  Negro  musicians.   23  x  14.7  cm. 

778.  GOING  TO  UNION  HILL.-O/z  /  went  out  to  take  a  ride, 
de  Oder  afternoon  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  hyphen  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.1  x  17  cm. 

b.  Written  by  Frank  Spear  for  J.  H.  Budworth,  at  the 
Canterbury  Music  Hall  N.Y.;  sheet  no.  857;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

779.  THE  GOLD  DIGGER'S  LAMENT. -I'm  going  far  away 
from  m.y  creditors  just  now  (6  vs.)  Air,  Jeannett  & 
Jeannott. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  14.8  cm. 


c.    [Without  Air;]  with  hyphen  in  title,  and  6  vs.  in  3; 
sheet  no.  800;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

GOLDEN  SHORE:  OR,  A  HOME  BEYOND  THE  TIDE. 
see  A  HOME  BEYOND  THE  TIDE. 

780.  GOOD  BYE,  JOHN!—///  was  rich,  I'd  have  money 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  Composed  and  sung  by  Dr.  J.  B.  Kimball,  (Magic 
Oil  Man.);  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.5  x  16.8  cm. 

781.  GOOD  EVENING,  WHITE  FOLKS. -Good  evening 
white  folks,  how  do  you  do  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Dick  McGowan,  the  Lion  Banjoist,  and 
Comic  Vocalist;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:    1860,  H.  De  Mar- 
san SDN.Y.   26.2  X  16  cm. 

782.  GOOD  LAGER  BIER.— /'/Z  sing  to  you  a  song  dat  you 
all  likes  to  hear  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air;  Bold  Privateer. 

a.  Title:   "De  Goot  Lager  Bier";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.1  x  17  cm. 

b.  Published  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia,  formerly 
a  member  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery,  Reading,  Pa.;  (with 
I'M  GOING  TO  FIGHT  MIT  SIGEL  on  verso.] 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  ornamental  border  in  red. 
23.6  X  17.3  cm. 

783.  GOOD  MORNING,  MASTER  LINCOLN!— Good  morn- 
ing, Master  Lincoln  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  (Melody:  "Wait  for 
the  Wagon,"  &c.) 

By  Max  Langenschwarz;  cop:   1864,  Max  Langen- 
schwarz,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  68,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

784.  GOOD  NEWS  FROM  HOME.— Good  news  from  home- 
good  news  for  me  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  at  the  store  of  George  P.  Reed,  Exten- 
sive Music  Publisher. 

a.  T.  o.  border.   20.8  x  11.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   23.7  x 
15.3  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Music  obtained  .  .  .";]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.8  x  17  cm. 

GOOD  NIGHT,  see  THE  LAST  LINK  IS  BROKEN. 

GOOD  OLD  HUT  AT  HOME,  see  COME  BACK, 
STEBEN. 

785.  THE  GOOD  OLD  PARTY.  DEMOCRATIC  CAMPAIGN 
SONG.  — H'e're  the  boys  of  the  good  old  party  (8  vs.  and 
chor.)   Air:   Gay  and  Happy. 

Headed:   "No.  2.";  by  E.  M.  Jr.;  adv:   McClellan  Cam- 
paign Songster  [publ.]   Mason  &  Co. 

A-J  border  with  inner  border.   21.1  x  13.6  cm. 

786.  GOOD  OLD  SOUTHERN  HOMY..— Not  many  years  ago 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (1).   20.5  x  11.5  cm. 

787.  GOOD  SHIP  CUMBERLAND.-Cojwe,  all  ye  merry 
sailors  and  all  ye  landsmen  too  (9  vs.)  Air.— Raging  Canal. 

With  narrative:   "Which  was  sunk  by  the  Rebel 
Steamer  Merrimac,  in  Hampton  Roads,  March  9,  1862. 


52 


The  little  Monitor  then  whipped  the  Merrimac  and  the 
Whole  School  of  Rebel  Steamers." 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title,  and  explanation;]  publ. 
Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  explanation;]  with  "The"  in  title;  by  E.  F.  M.; 
As  sung  in  all  the  Saloons;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Auner  (1).    19.7  x  11.7  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   23  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  With  title  of  Air  in  quotation  marks.   16.8  x  11  cm. 
(cropped) 

f.  With  "Or  the  California  Brothers"  added  to  Air;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

Steamship.   23.8  x  15  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  but  without  period  at  end  of  title;]  adv: 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor;  [so]ld  by  Johnson  (2). 

Steamship.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

788.  GOOD  WILL  HOSE  SO}<SG.-Tke  "Bleeders"  of  Fight- 
ing so  often  have  boasted  (4  vs.)  Air— Jessie,  the  Flower 
of  Dumblane. 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24.8  x  14.9  cm. 

789.  ''GOQ-D-BY'E."-" Farewell,  farewell'."  is  often  heard 
(3  vs.) 

Sung  with  Tremendous  Applause  by  Buckley's  cele- 
brated Band  of  Minstrels;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.7  x  16.7  cm. 

790.  GOOD-BYE,  ALLIE  DEARl-ft's  when  I'm  far  away 
from  hom.e  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "One  Kindly  Word  Before  We  Part". 

a.  As  sung  by  R.  Simpson;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.  26  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  and  e.xclamation  point  in  title;]  with 
period  at  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  938. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   22.9  x  15.4  cm. 

791.  THE  GOOD-BYE  AT  THE  DOOR.-O/aZi  the 
mem.'ries  of  the  past  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "  'Twas  Rank  and  Fame";  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.4  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  With  "memories"  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  1100;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  14.8  cm. 

792.  GOOD-BYE,  FALSE  HEART,  GOOD-BYE. -Ocfc, 
Norah  dear,  this  heart  ye're  breaking  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

A  Parody  on:   Good-bye,  Sweetheart,  good-bye;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  16.1  cm. 

793.  GOOD-BYE  SALLY  DEAR.-SaZZji  dear,  I'm  gwan  to 
leave  you  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.7  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrew's. 
24.2  X  15.5  cm. 

794.  THE  GOOSE  HANGS  HIGH.-ATo!*  good  folks  I  will 
sing  you  a  song  (7  vs.) 


Composed  and  Sung  by  Mat.  Gebler  with  unbounded 
applause;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15.4  cm. 

795.  THE  GOOSE  HANGS  HIGH.  NO  2.  -Come,  listen  to 
my  rythm.ing,  and  I'll  not  detain  you  long  (7  vs.) 

a.  As  sung,  with  great  success,  by  Wm.  Jennings;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.7  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  With  period  after  "NO"  in  title;  sheet  no.  591;  sold 
by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  14.7  cm. 

d.  Title  as  above,  [without  period  after  "2";]  sheet  no. 
873;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

796.  THE  GOOSE  HANGS  HIGH.  NO.  3. -The  sights,  in 
New-York  City,  you'll  find,  are  strange  and  queer  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Frank  Lum,  the  celebrated  vocalist;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.1  x  17  cm. 

797.  DER  GOOSE  HANGS  HIGH. -Come,  all  yer  gallus 
fellers,  and  listen  unter  m.e  (9  vs.) 

a.  [Without  5th  vs.;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.6  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  735;  publ.  Wrigley  [without  address.) 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.7  x  13.5  cm. 

GORCORAN'S  IRISH  LEGION,  see  CORCORAN'S 
IRISH  LEGION. 

798.  GRACE  DARhmC—Oh!  father  loved!  the  storm  is 
raging  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  ool.   24.9  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  619;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   25.1  x  15.7  cm. 

799.  GRAFTED  INTO  THE  ARMY.— Owr  Jimmy  has  gone 
for  to  live  in  a  tent  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Henry  C.  Work.] 

a.  With  3  vs.  and  3  chor.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  14  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  Sung  by  Walter  Bray,  Talbot,  &c.;  publ.  Boj'd;  advs: 
Boyd's  Circulating  Library,  and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border;  comic  figures  of  soldiers.   21.7  x  13  cm. 

d.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3);  with  last  line  reading: 
"Chorus:   O  Jimmy,  farewell!" 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  14.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  last  line  reading:   "Chorus:   O  Jimmy, 
farewell!   &c."   25.6  x  16. 8  cm. 

f.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs . 

A-J  border.   23.3  x  15. 1  cm. 

g.  With  "Grafted"  spelled  "Crafted"  in  title;  publ. 
Johnson  &  Co. 

Eagle.  21.1  X  11.1  cm. 


S3 


h.   Title:   "Our  Jimmy  Grafted  in  the  Army.";  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:   largest  assortment  of  Sentimental  and 
National  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  13.4  cm. 

i.    Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  34,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.6  x  12.9  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  51,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
19.4  X  13.1  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  177,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.2  X  12.1  cm. 

1.    Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.   20.3 
X  12.6  cm. 

m.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  1136;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23.9  x  15.7  cm. 

800.  "GRAND  ARMY"  SONG.— Oh,  we've  met  the  boasting 
traitors  on  a  thousand  battle  days  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— 
"Benny  Havens,  O!" 

Sheet  no.  1102;  publ.  and  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.   20.1  x  12.5  cm. 

801.  GRANT  &  COLFAX  CAMPAIGN  SONG. -With  Grant 
and  Colfax  as  our  candidates  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Nico- 
demus." 

By  the  Major;  for  sale  by  old  Stephen  Fisher,  a  soldier 
in  the  Florida' War,  Mexican  War,  and  late  private  Co.  A, 
73rd  Pa.  Vols.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Dancer's  Com- 
panion.  19.5  X  12.3  cm. 

802.  GRANT  TO  WASHINGTON  SHALL  GO. -Grant  to 
Washington  shall  go  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— "Tramp, 
Tramp,  Tramp." 

Sheet  no.  1098;  publ.  and  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   20  x 
12.7  cm. 

803.  GRANT'S  THE  M.AN.—Our  Army  has  a  leader  now 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  C.  L.  Abdill;  Music  by  J.  M.  Darling;  cop: 
1864,  J.  Marsh,  EDPa.;  J.  Marsh  (1),  sheet  Music,  Pianos, 
Musical  Instruments,  etc. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  adv:   Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

804.  GRAVE  OF  BEN  BOLT. -By  the  side  of  Sweet  Alice 
they've  laid  Ben  Bolt  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.1  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Printed  &  Sold  wholesale  at  [blank]  Printing  office, 
Philadelphia;  publ.  Johnson  (3);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill  Heads  etc. 

Wavy-line  border;  woman  and  child  mourning.  21.5  x 
15  cm. 

805.  THE  GRAVE  OF  BONAPARTE. -On  a  lone  barren 
isle,  where  the  wild  roaring  billow  (3  vs.) 


a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   18  x  11.9  cm. 

806.  THE  GRAVE  OF  LILLY  DALE.  — W'e  smoothed  down 
the  locks  of  her  soft  golden  hair  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Sidney  Dyer. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x  16.6  cm. 

d.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  adv:   Johnson  has  600  differ- 
ent kinds  of  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  mourning  woman  leaning  on  tomb.   25.5  x 
15.1  cm. 

807.  THE  GRAVE  OF  UNCLE  TRUE. -Besirfe  the  worn 
and  m.oss- grown  rock  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23.9  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  22.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.8  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  602;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.7  x  15.5  cm. 

808.  GRAVES  OF  A  HOUSEHOLD. -T/jej)  grew  in  beauty 
side  by  side  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25.1  x  16.1  cm. 

809.  THE  GRAVES  OF  WASHINGTON  &  BONAPARTE- 
Disturb  not  his  slumbers,  let  Washington  sleep  (Grave  of 
Washington,  2  vs.;  Grave  of  Bonaparte,  3  vs.) 

Printed  and  sold  wholesale  [blank]  Card  &  Job  Print- 
ing Office;  publ.  Johnson  (3);  advs:   Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill  Heads  etc.,  and  You  will  save  25  per  cent. 

Multi-line  border.  21.7  x  12. 7  cm. 

810.  GRAY  GOOSE  AND  GANDER.-WTzen  /  war  a  single 
feller  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.8  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
Andrews  ivy  border.   24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

811.  THE  GRAY  MARE.— As  /  was  a  walking  to  Nottingham 
fair  (4  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Bob  Hart,  at  the  American  Concert  Hall, 
444  Broadway,  N.Y.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.6  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  749;  as  sung  by  Jim  Cotton;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23.9  x  15.3  cm. 

812.  GREAT  CHAMPION  PRIZE  FIGHT.-H^ai  wonderous 
news  have  com.e  to  light  (4  vs.)  Air:  Tippacanoe  and  Tyler 
too. 

By  Remsey  Roe,  Jr.  of  New  Brunswick'  N.J.;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 


54 


813.  GREAT  EASTERN  STEAMER.-When  I  lef  New  Or- 
leans 'twas  early  in  the  morning  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Dick  McGowan,  the  Prince  of  Banjoists; 
[publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   25.1  x  16.4  cm. 

814.  THE  GREAT  JAPANESE  EMBASSY  .—Hark!  we  hear 
the  Zeino  drum  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   The  King  of  the 
Cannibal  Islands. 

By  Jake  Wag-a-wag,  Nix-cum-a-rouse,  No-Kame, 
alias  Remsey  Roe  Jr.  of  New-Brunswick,  N.J.,  -Dedicated 
to:   Simmoon-Buggins,  Hokey-Bung-Hole,  all  the  way  from 
Had-A-Koh-Ki-Ka-Ki-Ho-Kah-Ki-Yah;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Mar- 
san, SDN.y.   25  X  16.5  cm. 

815.  THE  GREAT  KNOW  NOTHING  SONG,  "I  DONT 
KNOW."— 0/aZZ  the  m.any  mighty  things  in  this  here 
Quaker  City  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Bow,  wow,  wow. 

By  Francis  F.  Eastlack;  publ.  H.  J.  Kehr;  copyright 
secured. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

816.  THE  GREAT  POLICE  FIGHT. -/i  was  in  the  month  of 
June,  upon  the  fifteenth  day  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Root, 
hog  or  die." 

Following  title:   "Which  took  place  June  15,  at  the 
City  Hall,  in  the  Park";  publ.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

817.  THE  GREAT  PRIZE  TlGnT .—Sullivan  made  a  match 
to  fight  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Camptown  Races. 

Following  title:  "Which  took  place  at  Boston  Comers, 
Oct.  12th,  1853". 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   23.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  15  cm. 

818.  THE  GREAT  PRIZE  FIGHT  NO.  Z.-Ye  merry  gay 
sportsmen,  wherever  you  be  (8  vs.)  Air:   Villikins  and  his 
Dinah. 

Following  title:   "Between  Morrissey  and  Heenan,  the 
Benicia  Boy,  at  Long  Point,  Canada,  Oct.  20,  1858,  for 
$5,000;"  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25.5  x  16  cm. 

819.  GREAT  PRIZE  FIGHT,  BETWEEN  BRADLEY  & 
RANKiN .—Attend  you  sporting  circles  give  ear  to  what  I 
state  (14  vs.) 

Composed  by  Arthur  McCann. 

T.  o.  border;  boxers  and  crowd.  30.4  x  24.2  cm. 

820.  THE  GREAT  PRIZE  FIGHT  FOR  $2,000  BETWEEN 
BRADLEY  &  RANKIN.—/  will  sing  a  song  though  it  is  not 
very  long  (7  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  boxers.   20.1  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

821.  THE  GREAT  REBELLION.— T/zis  war  against  our 
liberties  (12  vs.) 

Philadelphia,  October  22,  1861;  [signed]  A[ndrew] 
C[omstockl. 

T.  o.  border;  seal  of  Philadelphia  within  ornamental 
frame  of  agricultural  and  industrial  implements.  29.2  x 
18.5  cm. 

822.  THE  GREEN  BUSHES.— /'H  buy  you  a  new  bavers  and 
fine  silken  gowns  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Blow,  Gentle  Gales.";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15.2  cm. 


823.  THE  GREEN  FLAG.  A.D.  1647. -Boys!  fill  your 
glasses  (3  vs.)  Air:  O'Connell's  March. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   23  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  sheet  no.  942;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.9  x  15.6  cm. 

824.  GREEN-GROCER'S  LAMENT. -O^z,  dear!  it's  a  wery 
case,  I  m.ust  say  (5  vs.)  Air:   The  lad  wi'  the  carrotty  head. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.   25.3  x  17  cm. 

825.  GREEN  GROW  THE  RUSHES,  0\-There's  nought  but 
care  on  every  han  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   24.2  x 
16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  "nought"  spelled  "naught" 
in  first  line;  sheet  no.  605;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

826.  THE  GREEN  LINNET.— Cariosiiji  bore  a  young  native 
of  Erin  (7  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.6  x 

15.5  cm. 

827.  GREEN  MONSTERS'  SONG. -Co?we  all  you  Good  Will 
heroes  (6  vs.)  Air— William  Reilly's  Courtship. 

By  J.  E.;  publ.  Scroggy. 

T.  o.  border.   30.1  x  12.9  cm. 

828.  GREENBACKS  FOR  BONDS.— Come,  brothers,  all 

unite  with  us  (4  vs.  and  chors.)   Tune.— "Wait  for  the  Wagon." 
Sheet  no.  1094;  [sold  by]  Partridge  (2). 
Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers.   20  x 

12.6  cm. 

829.  THE  GROCERY  UEBICVIA^T .-Kind  gentlefolks ,  just 
listen  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  Frank  Spear,  and  Sung  by  W.  Arlington,  at 
Geo.  Christy's  Minstrels;  sheet  no.  883;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

830.  THE  GROVES  OF  BLARNEY.— Ocfe.'  the  groves  of 
Blarney  they  look  so  charm.ing  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  23.6  x  16.6  cm. 

831.  HAIL  COLUMBIA.— //aiZ  Columbia!  happy  land 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (1). 
Flag.  19.5  X  11.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24.6  x  15. 1  cm. 

c.  With  ",  Happy  Land!"  added  to  title,  and  a  fourth 
verse;  long  lines;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25  x   16.2  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.2  x  15  cm. 

e.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  John  W. 
DuBree's  Stationary  &  Variety  Store. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  comers,  eagle  with 
shield.  21.7  X  12.4  cm. 


55 


f.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border,  eagle.   24.1  x  12.1  cm. 

g.  With  fourth  verse;  2nd  song:   "America". 

Letter  paper;  bronze  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 
Magnus  26.   18.8  x  11.9  cm.  (cropped) 

h.   [As  above;]  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  32a,  col.; 
[publ.]  Magnus  (1).   20.6  x  12.9  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  34,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 

20.6  X  12.9  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  38,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 

19.7  X  13.1  cm. 

k.  With  ",  Happy  Land!"  added  to  title,  and  fourth  verse; 
sheet  no.  118;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  14.4  cm. 

832.  HAIL  TO  THE  CHIEF  .—Our  Army  and  Navy  forever 
(3  vs.)  Air:   Red,  White  and  Blue. 

a.  With  hyphen  after  "Air";  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  22.9  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Sold  by  C.  Bohn. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  110,  col. 

20.8  X  13.1  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  119,  col.;    [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
20.8  X  13.4  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  129,  col.  21.3  x  13.1  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  148,  col.   20.7  x  13. 3  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  177,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  177a,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   20.2  X  12.4  cm. 

HAIL  TO  THE  CHIEF,  see  also  VIVA  L'AMERICA. 

833.  HAIL  TO  THE  NOMINEE.— ^Zi  haill  Unfurl  the  stripes 
and  stars  (4  vs.) 

Cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  14,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

834.  HAIL  TO  THE  UNION.-Ho^e  of  the  race  which  from 
Heroes  descended 

a.  3  vs.  and  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  22.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  3  vs.  and  chor.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Union  Badges, 
Letter  &  Note  Papers,  etc. 

A-J  border.   24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

835.  HAM-FAT.— Goorf  evening,  white  folks ,  I  come  to 
please  you  all  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "Poor  Old  Joe". 

a.  As  sung  by  Frank  Lura,  the  celebrated  ethiopian 
comedian;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  886;  as  sung  by  Ben  Cotton;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.6  era. 

HAM-FAT,  see  also  UNCLE  SAMMY. 

836.  THE  HANDSOME  CABIN  BOY. -It  is  of  a  pretty  fe- 
male, as  you  shall  understand  (8  vs.) 


Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.7  cm. 

837.  HANDSOME  SARAH  JANE  1— Tfee  moon  was  rising  in 
the  sky  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  Henry  O.  Upton;  And  sung  with  un- 
bounded applause  by  the  Howard  Burlesque  Opera  Troupe, 
of  Salem,  Mass.;  Words  published  by  permission;  publ. 
and  sold  by  Peckham  (2);  print.   Moreland. 

T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  13  cm. 

838.  HANDY  ANDY.— ifoM)  are  yez,  me  friends?    sure  I 
hope  you're  all  well  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Billy  Barlow. 

a.  Sheet  no.  958;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.4  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  With  quotes  around  the  title  of  the  Air;  headed: 
"Zieber's  Popular  Editions";  by  John  L.  Zieber;  publ. 
Zieber;  adv:   Buy  "Mat  Maloney's  Cat". 

T.  o.  border.   18.3  x  11.3  cm. 

839.  HANNAH  MORE.— /n  summer  tim.e  when  flowers  fine 
(6  vs.)  Air— "Hibernia's  Jean." 

a.  [Signed]  Misfortune's  Bard;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

840.  HANS  DUNDER  HAS  GONE  FOR  A  SOLGER.-/'d 
traveled  dis  Countree  there  und  here  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  P.  Bradel  Jr.  better  known  as 
Brudder  Bones,  Comic  Singer  of  Avenue  B.;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4);  Copyright  Secured. 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   25.2 
X  16.7  cm. 

841.  HAPPY  BE  THY  DREAMS. -Ofe,  happy,  happy,  happy 
be  thy  dreams  (2  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Charles  Melville. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

b.  With  two  vs.  in  four;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  728. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.5  x  15.1  cm. 

842.  THE  HAPPY  DAY  IS  COMING. -O/z.'  the  happy  day  of 
Jubilee  is  coming  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  H.  A.  Lockwood;  music  by  C.  T.  Lockwood; 
publ.  McC.  Crummill  &  Atkinson. 
T.  o.  border.  25  x  14.6  cm. 

843.  HAPPY  HAIDEE.— Gentle,  gentle  is  the  beam  (2  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Bryants'  Minstrels;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  With  2  chors.;   sheet  no.  522;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.3  x  16.5  cm. 

HAPPY  HEZEKIAH,  see  UNHAPPY  JEREMIAH. 

844.  THE  HAPPY  HOME. -To  please  me  the  more,  and  to 
change  the  dull  scene  (5  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.6  x  16  cm. 


.56 


845.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CAANAN. -Ross  Winans  made 
some  spears  for  the  Southern  Volunteers  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  J.  P.;  copy-right  secured. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.   16.7  x  13.7  cm. 

846.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN.   NO.  3. -Now  white  folks 
you  see  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

As  sung  nightly,  with  raptures  of  applause,  by  Dick 
McGowan,  the  favorite  Banjoist  and  Comedian;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.  25.2  x  17.3  cm. 

847.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN.   NO.  4. -White  folks, 
I'll  sing  my  song  (5  vs.) 

a.  The  Sayers  and  Heenan  Version;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.   24.3  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  "Nos.  1  &  2."  in  title;  composed  and  sung  by  A. 
J.  Leavitt,  at  the  Melodeon,  Phila.;   2nd  song:    [No.  2.] 
Now  white  folks  you  see;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Sam  San- 
ford's  New  Song  Books.   24.1  x  15. 2  cm. 

848.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN.   NO.  5. -You  may  talk 
about  de  times  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.    22.4  x  14.1  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26.4  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col. 
24.4  X  16.1  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  after  "5";]  By  Thomas  W.  Kearney; 
sheet  no.  819;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.7  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry 
top,  col.  21  X  13.5  cm. 

849.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN.  NO.  6.  -/  am  almost 
ninety-^ine;  I  remember  well  the  time  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  Sung  By  H.  Miller. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.7  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.2  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  singer's  name;]  sheet  no.  733;  with  comma 
after  "ninety-nine"  in  first  line;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  after  "6"  in  title  and  singer's  name;] 
with  comma  after  "ninety-nine"  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  937; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23.7  x  14  cm. 

850.  (A  NEW  VERSION  OF)  THE  HAPPY  LAND  OF 
CANAAN.— 0/2.'  good  evening  to  you  all,  I  ynean  both  great 
and  small  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  AI.  Pierce. 

T.  o.  border.  17.7  x  11.9  cm. 

851.  HAPPY  LAND  OF  KANAAN.-/'nj  going  to  sing  a  song 
it  wont  keep  you  long  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Jim  Edwards,  at  the  HoUiday  St.  Theatre. 
T.  o.  border  22.3  x  12.9  cm. 

HAPPY  MOMENTS,  see  NAPOLITAINE. 

852.  HARD  TIMES  COME  AGAIN  NO  UORE.-While  we 
seek  mirth  and  beauty  and  music  light  and  gay  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 


By  Stephen  C.  Foster;   music  obtained  at  Firth  Pond 
&  Co's  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

HARD  UP,  see  IN  THE  DAYS  WHEN  I  WAS  HARD  UP. 

853.  HARK!  BROTHERS,  HARK!-tfar*,  brothers,  hark! 
the  evening  gun  (4  vs .) 

Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  boat.  24  x  12.4  cm. 

854.  THE  HARP  OF  OLD  ERIN  AND  BANNER  OF  STARS. 
—  The  war  trump  has  sounded,  our  rights  are  in  danger 

(4  vs.)  Air:   St.  Patrick's  Day. 

Dedicated  to  Charles  J.  Murphy,  1st.  Lieut,  Scott 
Life-Guard,  N.Y.,  by  his  sincere  friend,  Thomas  Kean. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  hyphen  after  "Air";  [without  comma 
after  "N.Y.";]  sheet  no.  765;  publ.  Wrigley  [without 
address]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23.9  x  14.5  cm. 

855.  THE  HARP  THAT  ONCE  THRO'  TARA'S  HALLS. - 
The  harp  had  once  through  Tara's  halls  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Erin  is  my  Home";  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  30,  col.   18.7  x 
11.9  cm. 

THE  HARP  THAT  ONCE  THRO'  TARA'S  HALLS,  see 
also  ERIN  IS  MY  HOME 

856.  HARRY  BIAIVF .-When  a  boy,  Harry  Bluff  left  his 
friends  and  his  home  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "Star  of  Columbia";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  25  x  I6.I  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  775;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  13.7  cm. 

857.  HATTIE  LEE. -Ore  the  banks  of  the  silver  lake  we 
oft'  have  strayed  (3  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "Strike  the  Harp  Gently";  [publ.]   De 
Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  526;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  TRAITORS 
MARCH  TO  THE  WHITE  HOUSE  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  21.8  x  13.2  cm. 

858.  HAUNTED  SPRING. -GayZji,  through  the  mountain 
glen  (3  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  14.4  cm.  (cropped) 

859.  HAVE  FAITH  IN  ONE  ANOTHER. -Have  faith  in  one 
another  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

A  Celebrated  Song,  Sung  by  W.  Harrison,  Esq.;  sheet 
no.  62;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  23.3  x  16.5  cm. 

860.  HAVE  YOU  SEEN  HER  LATELY?-/  stand,  before 
you,  bath'd  in  tears  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  24.4  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1362;  [publ.  Wrigley  (1)]    (imprint  imper- 
fectly printed.) 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 


57 


861.  THE  HAZEL  DELL.-/w  the  Hazel  Dell  my  Nelly's 
sleeping  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Song  and  Chorus  by  Wurzel;  music  obtained  of  Wm. 
Hall  &  Son  (3);  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

862.  HE  LED  HER  TO  THE  ALTAR. -He  led  her  to  the 
altar  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  448;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   25.5  x  15.4  cm. 

863.  HE  TELLS  ME  HE  LOVES  UE.-He  tells  me  he  loves 
me,  and  can  I  believe  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De.  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.  25.2  x  17  cm. 

HE  TELLS  ME  HE  LOVES  ME,  see  also  LITTLE 
MAID. 

864.  THE  HEART  BOW'D  DOWN.-Tfee  heart  bowed  down 
by  weight  of  woe  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  1103;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.8  x 
14.8  cm. 

THE  HEART  BOW'D  DOWN  BY  WEIGHT  OF  WOE, 
see  also  LILLIE  BELL. 

865.  HEART  RENDING  TRAGEDY,  OR  SONG  NO.  2  ON 
THE  30TH  STREET  MURDER.-/re  the  month  of  October, 
in  the  year  fifty -eight  (9  vs.)  Air— Meeting  of  the  Waters, 
or  Indian  Hunter. 

By  the  Saugerties  Bard;  The  above  described  Tragedy 
occurred  in  N.Y.  Oct.  26th,  1858;  publ.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x   15.7  cm. 

866.  THE  HEARTY  WELCOME  HOME. -Our  noble  boys 
are  coming  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  composed  by  Eastburn;  cop:  1865,  W.  R. 
Smith,  EDPa.;  Wm.  R.  Smith,  Agt.  Music  Publisher;  publ. 
Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  22  x  13.5  cm. 

867.  "HEAVEN,  MY  HOME."  — There  is  a  land  of  joy  and 
peace  (6  vs.)  Air:— "Maryland!  My  Maryland!" 

By  W.  H.  Hayward;  [Written  for  the  Sunday  Telegram;] 
Baltimore,  Nov.  22d,  1862. 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   19.2  x 
10.2  cm. 

868.  HEAVEN'S  MY  HOME. -Though  the  world  may  me 
disown  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Multi-line  border.  23  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  A-J  border.  20  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

869.  HEENAN  THE  CHAMPION  OF  THE  WORLD.— H%o 
was  it  crossed  the  raging  ocean  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

870.  HENRY  SHALL  BE  MAYOR  A  CAMPAIGN  SONG.- 
Rozise!  ye  freinds  [sic]  of  Clay   (5  vs.)  Tune— "Scots  wha 
hae". 


By  D.  M.  B.  of  5th,  Precinct,  7th,  ward;  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 
A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

871.  HER  BRIGHT  SMILES  HAUNT  ME  STILL. -'Tjs  many 
years  since  last  we  m.et  (2  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

2nd  song:  "Thy  Voice  Hath  a  Charm." 

a.  [Without  2nd  song;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  bust  of  woman.  22.7  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  inlt;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1),  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1141;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

872.  HER  HEART  IS  THE  PRIZE  I  WILL  GAIN. -To  the 
Ball,  to  the  Ball,  I'll  pursue  her  (3  vs.) 

Composed  by  F.  W.  N.  Bayley;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24.7 
X  16.4  cm. 

873.  HERE  I  AM  AS  YOU  DISKIVER.-Here  /  am  as  you 
diskiver  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

874.  HERE  IN  BELLE  ISLE'S  DREARY  PRISON.-Here  in 
Belle  Isle's  rebel  prison  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  "Just  be- 
fore the  Battle  Mother." 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus, 
SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus,  76,  col.:  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19  x  11. 5  cm. 

HERE  IN  SOLITUDE  AND  SILENCE,  see  NO  ONE  TO 
LOVE. 

875.  [HERE  WE  MEET  ONCE  MORE  AGAIN]-ifere  we 
meet  once  m.ore  again  (12  vs.)  Air.— "Scots,  wha  hae  wi' 
Wallace  bled." 

By  Gen.  W.  H.  Hayward,  of  Baltimore;  Print.  Rose 
&  Co. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.  27  x  12.4  cm. 

876.  HERE'S  A  HEALTH  TO  THEE,  TOM  MOORE!— Mji 
boat  is  on  the  shore  (5  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "The  Rose  of  Tralee";  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "Thee"  in  title;]  with  period  at 
end  of  title;  sheet  no.  723;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

"HERE'S  A  HEALTH  TO  THEM  THAT'S  AWA'  "  ,  see 
THE  HURRAH!   FOR  THE  ("RED,  WHITE,  AND  BLUE"). 

877.  THE  HERO  OF  hEXlHGTOH .- Friends ,  one  and  all 
(5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Happy  Land  of  Canaan. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.    25  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  with  period  and  dash 
after  "Air":  sheet  no.  919;  sung  by  Theodore  W.  Russell; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.4  x  15  cm. 

THE  HERO  WHEN  FALLEN'S  NO  LONGER  A  FOE, 
see  I  AM  LONELY  TO-NIGHT. 


58 


878.  THE  HEROES  OF  '62.— Mji  brave  fellow  Soldiers 
prepare  for  your  foe  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Tune— Bonny 
Eloise. 

a.  By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia;  arranged  from  H.C.B.; 
print.  Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  9.7  cm. 

b.  By  H.C.  Brick;  Tune  in  parentheses;  "soldiers"  in 
first  line. 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

879.  HE'S  GONE  TO  THE  ARMS  OF  ABRAHAM. -My  true 
love  is  a  soldier  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Written  by  Sep.  Winner;  published  in  sheet  music  by 
Winner  &  Co.  (3);  publ.  Johnson  (2)  [with  initials]. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor; 
publ.  Johnson  (2)  [without  initials]. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  103a,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  140,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  Music  had  of  Winner  &  Co.;  adv:  Send  for  Price  List 
of  Stephens'  Colored  Album  Drolleries  [publ.]  Wm.  A. 
Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  comic  scene  of  three  weeping  soldiers, 
col.  23  X  14  cm. 

880.  HETTY  LOAR,  A  PARODY  ON  "NETTIE  MOORE"- 
In  a  lily-white  frock  coat,  and  a  vest  of  palest  green 

(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed  Zieber's  Popular  Editions;  wholesale  agents; 
G.  Boshart,  T.  M.  Scroggy  (1),  H.  K.  Logan  and  W.  A. 
Peet;  publ.  Zieber;  adv:   "The  Fire  Feller,". 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.  24.3  x  14  cm. 

881.  HICKS  THE  PIRATE. -A  mournful  tale  heart  rending 
(5  vs.)  Air:— The  Rose  Tree. 

By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  614;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

882.  HIGH  DADDY. -Tfee  sun's  gone  down  to  take  a  little 
sleep  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  written  and  composed  for  Bryant's  Minstrels 
by  Dan.  D.  Emmett;  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  22.6  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.2  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1131. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  15.2  cm. 

883.  THE  HILLHOUSE  INFANTRY. -Wozv  all  kind  friends 
that's  here  to-night,  give  ear  unto  my  song  (6  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air:  Whack  row  de  dow. 

By  John  C.  Cross;  written  for  J.  E.  Crookes,  132 
Regt.  N.Y.V.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.4  x  16.4  cm. 

884.  THE  HILLS  OF  NEW  ENGLAND.-Tte  hills  of  New 
England  how  proudly  they  rise  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2) 

De  Marsan  clown  border;  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.   24.2  x  16.5  cm. 


885.  [DAS  HIMMLISCHE  LUST-SPEIL  DER  LILIEN- 
GERUCH. ]—/)as  Himm.lische  lust-spiel  der  Lilien-geruch 
(10  vs.) 

With  comments  in  English  below  verses;  dated  1860. 
20.8  X   18.5  cm. 

886.  [HIP,  HIP,  HURRAHl    FOR  GENERAL  GSANT]-Hip, 
Hip,  Hurrah!  for  General  Grant  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— 
"Pop  goes  the  Weasel."  25.4  x  14.5  cm. 

887.  THE  HOD-CARRIER'S  SONG.-/  am  a  bold  Hodman, 
I  live  by  my  trade  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Villikens  and 
his  Dinah. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Boyd's  imprint  added  (1).   27  x 
12.5  cm. 

c.  By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  663;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

888.  HOIST  UP  THE  FhAC— Away  down  in  Dixie,  the  war 
first  begun  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  words  by  Billy  Holmes, 
arranged  for  the  Piano  by  Sep.  Winner;   cop:   1863,  Winner 
&  Co.,  EDPa.;  Winner  &  Co.,  Music  Publishers  (3);  publ. 
Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  Words  and  Melody  by 
Billy  Holmes;  music  publ.  by  Winner  &  Co.  (3);  publ. 
Auner. 

A-J  border.  24.7  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  Music  obtained  at  William  R.  Smith;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.7  x  14.7  cm. 

d.  Music  obtained  of  Winner  &  Co.  (3);  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  26  x  16.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  I6  cm. 

f.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  "New"  before 
title;  Words  and  Melody  by  Billy  Holmes;  music  arranged 
by  Sep.  Winner;  music  published  by  Winner  &    Co.  (3);  with 
second  line  of  title  in  caps;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  with  second  line  of  title  in  upper  and  lower 
case. 

A-J  border.   20  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

h.   [As  above,  but  without  period  at  end  of  title;]  adv: 
Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.  24.6  x  15  cm. 

i.    With  "New"  before  title  and  exclamation  point  at  end 
of  title;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  21.3  x  n  cm. 

889.  HOIST  UP  THE  FLAG.-TAe  Rebels  thought  they  had 
us  when  the  war  first  begun  (11  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:  "Up  With  The  Flag  Long  May  It  Wave.";  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   22.2  x  14. 8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (4).   21  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  but  with  e.xclamation  point  at  end  of  title;] 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  23.1  x  13.9  cm. 


59 


d.  Title:   "Hoist  Up  the  Flag,  Long  May  It  Wave.";  publ. 
Johnson  &  Co.  21.3  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.  24.4  x  15.3  cm. 

f.  Title;  "Up  With  The  Flagl";  written  by  J.  R.  Thomas; 
Received  Nightly  with  Thunders  of  Applause  in  all  the 
Principal  Concert  Rooms  in  the  United  States;  adv:   500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  206c,  bronze. 
19  X  12.4  cm. 

g.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]     By  Young  Sport; 
sheet  no.  1190;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  14  cm. 

h.    [As  above;  imprint  blank.]  23  x  15  cm. 

890.  HOLD  ON  ABRAHAM!  UNCLE  SAM'S  BOYS  ARE 
COMING  RIGHT  ALONG.  — We're  going  down  to  Dixie,  to 
Dixie,  to  Dixie  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Wm.  B.   Bradbury,  and  sung  with  immense  success 
by  Wood's  Minstrels;  publ.  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5) 

A-J  border.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Prof.  Brooks  Ball  Room  Monitor;  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

A-J  border.   24  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  [Without  publisher.]  23  x  15  cm. 

HOLD  YOUR  HORSES,  see  NOW  HOLD  YOUR 
HORSES,  WILL  YOU? 

891.  HOME  AGAIN.— Home  again,  home  again  (3  vs.) 
[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.4  cm. 

892.  A  HOME  BEYOND  THE  TIDE. -We  are  out  on  the 
ocean  sailing  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:  "Golden  Shore;  or,  A  Home  Beyond  The  Tide"; 
publ.  Auner. 

Multi-line  border.  20  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Sheet  no.  613;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  Title:  "We  are  out  on  the  Ocean  Sailing";  sheet  no. 
661;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

893.  THE  HOME  GUARDS. -7'm  a  Home  Guard  true  and 
steady  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— "Gay  and  Happy." 

Written  by  S.  S.  Steele,  Esq.;  cop:   1861,  John  W. 
Du  Bree,  EDPa.;  publ.  John  W.  Du  Bree;  adv:   Printing  of 
all  descriptions. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.   23.3  x  13  cm. 

894.  THE  HOME  OF  MY  YOUTH. -Tfee  home  of  my  youth 
is  now  lonely  (4  vs.) 

Headed:   "To  the  Union  Soldiers";  Respectfully  dedi- 
cated to  John  Lorence,  who  lost  both  legs,  at  the  Battle  ol 
Roanoke  Island,  North  Carolina,  February  8th,  1862; 
[signed]  Joseph  N.  Stetser;  cop:   1864,  Joseph  N.  Stetser, 
EDPa. 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto 
"Our  Country".  23.7  x  14.4  cm. 

895.  HOME,  SWEET  w:)MS.-' Mid  pleasures  and  palaces, 
though  we  may  roam  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  John  Howard  Payne;]  2nd  song:   "My  Boyhood's 
Home". 


a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.4  x  16. 6  cm. 

896.  HOME!  THE  BOYS  ARE  MARCHING!— Kowze  the  boys 
are  m.arching'.  victory's  banners  wave  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Poetry  by  C.  St.  John;  music,  by  F.  Wilmarth;  [publ.] 
Johnson  &  Cartlitch;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Get  the  two 
New  Songs.   19.3  x  io.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;]   [publ.] 
Johnson  &  Cartlitch;  adv:   See  the  New  Songs;  print. 
Johnson  (2).   20  x  10.6  cm. 

c.  [Without  exclamation  points  in  title;]  with  comma 
after  "marching"  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  987;  Music,  publ. 
by  O.  Ditson  &  Co.;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   21.7  x  14  cm. 

897.  THE  HOME  WHERE  ROSES  GREW.-0/j.'  how  often, 
when  at  eve  I'm  sitting  (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.4  x  16.5  cm. 

898.  HOME  WITHOUT  A  MOTHER.- WT^f  is  home  without 
a  m.other  (3  vs.) 

a.  Title:  "What  is  Home  Without  a  Mother";  by  Alice 
Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner] ;  music  obtained  at  Firth 
Pond,  &  Co.  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Title:  "What  is  Home  Without  a  Mother?"  ;  with 
"Home"  in  first  line;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Cir- 
culars, Billheads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  mother  with  four  children.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

c.  By  permission  of  the  publishers,  Messrs.  Lee  & 
Walker;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  78,  bronze; 
publ.  Magnus.  20.5  x  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  84,  bronze;  publ.  Magnus. 
20.7  X  13  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  199',  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.7  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.2  X  12.5  cm. 

g.  Title:  "What  is  Home  Without  a  Mother, ";  sheet  no. 
175. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15.3  cm. 

899.  A  HOME  WITHOUT  A  WIFE. -A  home  without  a 
mother  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  875;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

900.  HOMEWARD  BOUND.— Owf  on  an  ocean  all  boundless 
we  ride  (3  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  in  all  the  scnools. 

A-J  border;  ship.  20  x  13.6  cm. 

b.  With  hyphen  in  title;  with  first  line  "Out  on  the  Ocean 
boundless,  we  ride";  2nd  song:  "Thou  Hast  Cast  Off  the 
Heart  that  I  Gave  Thee";  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  bordei-.  25  x  17  cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title. 
T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15.7  cm. 


60 


d.  As  sung  in  all  the  Schools;  adv:  The  following  Hymns 
can  be  had  at  Johnson's  (2). 

Multi-line  border.  25.2  x  15.3  cm. 

901.  HONEST  ABE  OF  THE  WEST.-O  hark!  from  the 
pine-crested  hills  of  old  Maine  (5  vs.)  Air— "Star  Spangled 
Banner." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Political  Songs,  Badges,  etc. 
23.8  X  14,8  cm. 

902.  "HONEYBEE."  ENGINE  NO.  5.-0  there  is  a  place 
in  Ann  Street  of  which  I  love  to  tell  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air, 
"Old  Pine  Tree." 

By  J.  McGuey;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15  cm. 

903.  HOOPS  I  HOOPS.— What  wondrous  thing  now  moves 
along  (11  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Title  punctuated  "Hoops,  Hoops!;"  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

904.  HOOPS  NO.  2.  WHAT  A  RIDICULOUS  FASHION. - 
Now  Crinoline  is  all  the  rage  with  ladies  of  whatever  age 
(6  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— King  of  the  Cannibal  Islands. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  With  question  mark  after  "Fashion"  in  title;  with 
"Air;"  in  place  of  "Tune—";  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.3  x  16.5  cm. 

905.  HOP  LIGHT,  LOO.— My  ole  missus  she's  a  widder 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (3);  advs:  You  will  save  25  per  cent, 
and  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc;  printed  and  sold 
wholesale  at  [blank]  Card  and  Job  Printing  Office  Philad. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

906.  HOP  LITE  LOO.— OZe  Bull  and  ole  Dan  Tucker  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Little  Pigs". 

a.  As  sung  by  Frank  Lum,  the  celebrated  Ethiopian  come- 
dian; [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Charley  Gardner;  sheet  no.  920;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

907.  HOT  CODLINS.-A  little  old  woman  her  living  got 
(4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  I6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25 
X  16.2  cm. 

c.  Varying  "as  sung  by  the  great  Comic  Vocalist,  Tony 
Pastor";  sheet  no.  1183;  publ.  Wrigley  [without  address]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.7  x  15.4  cm. 

908.  THE  HOUSE  CARPENTER.- "WgH  met,  weU  met, 
my  own  true  love  (12  vs.) 


Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

909.  THE  HOUSEHOLD  ChOCK.-Oh!  the  old,  old  clock, 
of  the  household  stock  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  680;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

910.  HOW  ARE  YOU?  CONSCRIPT!!  HOP  DE  DOODLE 
DOO. -Hozo  are  you  Conscript,  hop  de  doodle  doo  (4  vs.) 

By  Don  Felix;  cop:   1863,  W.  Rodgers,  EDPa.;  adv: 
Cash  paid  for  Old  Books,  at  the  Cheap  Book  Stand,  Dela- 
ware Avenue,  bel.  Market  St.  Philadelphia. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

HOW  ARE  YOU  CONSCRIPT,  see  also  THE  CON- 
SCRIPT'S LAY. 

911.  HOW  ARE  YOU,  CONSCRIPTS?-Tfee  wheel  is  turn- 
ing round,  boys  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  had  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (1). 

a.  Composed  by  W.  J.  Wetmore,  M.D.,  and  dedicated  to 
his  friends  who  are  receiving  Prizes  in  the  Draft;  varying: 
"Music  published  by  S.  T.  Gordon  (1)";  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

d.  Composed  by  W.  J.  Wetmore,  M.D.,  and  dedicated  to 
his  friends  who  are  receiving  Prizes  in  the  Draft;  with 
"Conscript"  in  title;  [without  comma  after  "you";]  vary- 
ing: "Music  published  by  S.  T.  Gordon  (1)";  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border;  Union  guard.  24  x  15  cm. 

e.  [Without  comma  after  "you"  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1173; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.7 
X  15  cm. 

912.  HOW  ARE  YOU,  GREEN  BACKS?- We're  coming, 
Father  Abram,  one  hundred  thousand  more  (7  vs.) 

Music  had  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  [Without  comma  after  "coming"  in  first  line;]  cop: 
1863,  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  SDN.Y.;  publ.  Auner  (4)  [in 
small  caps] . 

A-J  border.   22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  question  mark  after  title;  imprint 
in  upper  and  lower  case.] 

T.  o.  border.   24.6  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  With  hyphen  in  title;  "One"  in  first  line;  last  2  lines 
of  each  vs.  marked  as  chorus;  varying:  "Music  obtained 
at  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  [Without  comma  in  title;  imprint  cropped.] 
A-J  border.  20  x  13  cm. 

e.  Cop:    1863,  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  EDPa.;  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

T.  0.  border.  22  x  13  cm. 


61 


f.  With  hyphen  in  title;  "One"  in  first  line. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  1,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.7  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.   Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
20  X  12,5  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  217,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  12.6  cm. 

i.    [As  above,  but  without  comma  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1120. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

913.  HOW  ARE  YOU,  HOLD  HINGLAND?-Tfee  British 
lion  loud  did  roar  (4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  comma  and  question  mark  in  title;]  sheet  no. 
1075;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

914.  HOW  ARE  YOU,  MAXIMILIAN?   OR,  OFF  FOR 
MEXICO.— Wom;,  "Uncle  Sam"  has  done  his  work  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Cop:    1865,  W.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;   music  publ.  Wm.  R. 
Smith;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23  x  14  cm. 

915.  HOW  ARE  YOU  OFF  FOR  IhE? -Strange  savings 
now  are  all  the  go  (6  vs.)  Air;  Yankee  Doodle. 

Written  and  sung  by  Fred  Rouse;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24.5  x  16.6  cm. 

916.  HOW  CAN  I  LEAVE  THEE? -ifow  can  I  leave  thee 
(3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (2). 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.8  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   25  x  16.3  cm. 

HOW  DEAR  TO  ME  THE  HOUR,  see  MEET  ME  BY 
MOONLIGHT  ALONE. 

917.  HOW  DELIGHTFUL  'TWOULD  BE  IF  YOU'D  LET 
ME.—/  ne'er  on  that  lip  for  a  moment  have  gazed  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "I'll  Let  You";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.3  cm. 

918.  HOW  DO  YOU  FEEL  MR.  DAVIS? -BZess  the  Lord, 
this  bloody  row  is  nearly  over  now  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air, 
"How  do  you  do  Alabama". 

Composed  and  sung  by  Charley  Rhoades;  cop:  T.  C. 
Boyd,  1865,  NDCal;  publ.  Boyd;  advs:  Boyds'  Novel  Ex- 
change, and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border;  man  seated  on  chair.  21  x  12  cm. 

919.  HOW  McCLELLAN  TOOK  MAHASSAS. -Heard  ye 
how  the  bold  McClellan  (10  vs.) 

By  Old  Napoleon. 

Red  ink.  29.2  x  22.5  cm. 

920.  HOW  SHERIDAN  WHIPPED  LONGSTREET.-/*  was 
just  before  the  day  break,  that  this  famous  fight  began 
(5  vs.)  Air:   Jeannette  and  Jeannot. 

By  John  Ross  Dix,  October  19th,  1864;  cop:    1864, 


Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink. 

a.  Hdpc.  Magnus  33,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

b.  Hdpc.  Magnus  41,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1).   20.7 
X  13  cm. 

c.  Hdpc.  Magnus  42,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1).  20.5 
X  12.8  cm. 

d.  Hdpc.  Magnus  44,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1).   20 
X  12.8  cm. 

e.  Hdpc.  Magnus  45,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

f.  Hdpc.   Magnus  47,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1).   19 
X  11.4  cm. 

g.  [Without  adv.;]  hdpc.   Magnus  159,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).   20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

921.  HOW  SHERMAN'S  VETERAN  TOOK  ATLANTA. -/n 
his  chair  of  Rebellion  sat  Jefferson  Davis  (4  vs.) 

Cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

a.  By  James  D.  Gay,  the  Celebrated  Army  Song  Publisher 
and  Vocalist. 

T.  o.  border;  charging  infantry  within  ornamental 
frame.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Air:   Lanagan's  Ball;  By  John  Ross  Dix. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;  publ.  Magnus 
(1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  145.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  black  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  145,  col.  20.5 
X  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above:  without  cop.;]  with  different  adv:  500  Illus- 
trated Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  158,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19.5  x  12.7  cm. 

922.  HOW  THE  MONEY  GOES.— Moreeji  is  your  only  friend 
(5  vs.)  Air:  Off  she  goes 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

923.  HOW  THE  VETERANS  BROKE  UP  JEFF  DAVIS' 
BALL.— i^ar  doion  in  the  South  there  lives  Jeffy  Davis 
(6  vs.)  Air— " Lanagan's  Ball." 

By  Mrs.  G.  P.  Hardwick;  adv:   Soldiers  can  receive 
14  of  our  beautifully  illustrated  Ballads  by  addressing 
G.  P.  Hardwick;  copyright  secured. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  eagle,  sailor  with  flag,  and 
Union  soldier  with  flag  lateral  to  text.  20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

924.  HOW  TO  CLOSE  THE  WAR.— Now  to  close  this  civil 
war  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Jordan  is  a  Hard  Road  to 
Travel. 

Written  by  George  P.  Hardwick,  Washington,  D.C. 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  23,  col.  20.5 

X  12.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  92,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  letter  paper;  red  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  153; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 


62 


925.  HOW  TO  CLOSE  THIS  CRUEL  ^AR.-How  to  close 
this  cruel  war  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Happy  Land  of 
Canaan. 

By  Mrs.  Geo.  P.  Hardwick. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  With  colon  after  "Air"  and  "land"  in  title;  sold  at 
T.  J.  Conry's;  publ.  DeMarsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  23.8  x  14. 2  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  See  Johnson's  New  Catalogue 
of  Songs. 

A-J  border.   23.6  x  14.5  cm. 

926.  HOW  TO  PUT  ON  AIRS.-Ofe.'  white  folks  listen,  will 
you  now,  this  darkey's  going  to  sing  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Letter  paper;  purple  ink;  woman  in  farm  scene  with 
flower  ornaments  in  upper  corners.  20.5  x  13  cm. 

927.  A  HUNDRED  YEARS  AGO.~Where  are  the  birds  that 
sang  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  454;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

928.  "A  HUNDRED  YEARS  AGO."-^  clay-built  cot!  how 
glory  comes  (6  vs.) 

Headed:   "The  Burns  Centennial  Celebration.   Poems 
for  the  Occasion.";  Dedicated  to  the  Burns  Association; 
By  Rev.  Edward  C.  Jones;  2nd  song:   "What's  Na  Proud 
O'Robin?  "  3rd  song:   "Monody  To  Robert  Burns,"  by 
Andrew  M'Makin,  Philadelphia,  January  25,  1859;  4th  song: 
"Stanzas,  For  the  Centennial  Anniversary  of  Robert  Burns, 
by  Daniel  Kane  O'Donnel,  January  25,  1859".   36.5  x 
18.7  cm. 

929.  A  HUNDRED  YEARS  HENCE. -We  meet  through  this 
world  with  men  of  all  kinds  (8  vs.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  With  commas  after  "meet"  and  "world"  in  first  line; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.7  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  25  x 
16.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  "A"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor;  5th  vs.  on  "Abe  Lincoln." 

A-J  border.   24  x  14  cm. 

d.  Title:   "New  Hundred  Years  Hence";  5th  vs.  on  "Andy 
Johnson";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  14.7  cm. 

e.  Varying:  "Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor,  with 
great  applause  at  the  American  Theatre,  444  Broadway, 
N.Y.;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  35,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.7  x  13  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  without  adv.;]  sheet  no.  1139;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  13.7  cm. 

h.   [As  above;  imprint  blank.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  15  cm. 

i.    9  vs.;  adv:   Cash  paid  for  Old  Books,  at  the  Cheap 
Book  Stand,  Delaware  Avenue,  bel.  Market  St.  Philadelphia. 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14  cm. 


930.  A  HUNKEY  BOY  IS  YANKEE  DOODLE. -ATom;,  white 
folks,  all,  both  great  and  sm.all,  come  listen  to  my  song 

(7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Frank  Kern's  at  the  Kossuth  Concert 
Saloon;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  varying  punctuation  in 
first  line;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   21.3  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Hunkey  Boy  is  Yankee  Doodle,  or,  Whack 
Row  De  Dow";  varying  punctuation  in  first  line;  as  sung 
by  Frank  Moran  of  Carncross  &  Dixey's  Minstrels  and 
Opera  Troupe;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball 
Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.   25.2  x  15  cm. 

931.  HUNKYDORY.-Owe  of  the  boys  am  I  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air:   Limerick  Races. 

Sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

932.  HUNT  THE  BUFFALO,  OR  THE  BANKS  OF  THE 
PLEASANT  OHIO. -Cowe  all  ye  likely  lads  that  have  a 
m.ind  for  to  range  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
23.6  x  15.2  cm. 

933.  THE  HUNTERS  OF  KENTUCKY -Ye  gentlemen  and 
ladies  fair,  who  grace  this  famous  city  (8- vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  503;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.4  cm. 

934.  HURRA  FOR  OUR  UNION. -Lei  all  good  Union  meti 
about  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:   "The  Dixie  of  Our  Union";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  21.5  x   15  cm. 

b.  Air,— "Dixie's  Land.";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Sam. 
Sandford's  New  Song  Books.  23  x  13.7  cm. 

c.  Title:  "The  Dixie  of  Our  Union";  sheet  no.  807;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stars  on  blue  ground  within  red 
stripes.   24.5  x   15.5  cm. 

d.  T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.7  cm. 

HURRA  FOR  OUR  UNION,  see  HURRAH  FOR  THE 
UNION. 

935.  HURRAH  FOR  ANDREW  CURTIN.-Come  vote  for 
Andrew,  one  and  all  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Who'll  be 
King  but  Charlie." 

By  Kate  Moncrieff;  headed:   "[Respectfully  dedicated 
to  the  Union  League.]";  Philadelphia,  Oct.  5th,  1863. 
Double-line  border.  21.7  x  11.9  cm. 

936.  HURRAH  FOR  OUR  UNION.  A  NATIONAL  SONG.- 
Hurrahfor  our  Union,  the  birthright  of  freedom  (3  vs.) 


63 


By  Martin  Andreas  Sarles;  publ.  Boyd  (1);  adv:    10,000 
Songs  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  12.2  cm. 

937.  HURRAH  FOR  THE  FLAG  OF  THE  FREE. -There's 
a  banner  that  gracefully  swells  to  the  breeze  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  207,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

938.  HURRAH  FOR  THE  LAND  WE  LOVE !-ffarra  [sic\ 
for  the  land  we  love  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  A  Life  on  the 
Ocean  Wave. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   25  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  772;  with  "Hurrah"  in  1st  line;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  14.6  cm. 

939.  THE  HURRAH!   FOR  THE  ("RED,  WHITE,  AND 
BLUE.")— Here's  a  health  to  them  that's  awa  (6  vs.  and 
chor.  with  music  to  first  z  vs.  and  chor.) 

An  Old  Friend  in  a  New  Dress;  Lines  by  Robert  Burns; 
Altered  and  adapted  to  suit  the  present  times  by  James  E. 
Murdoch. 

a.  Publ.  John  Church,  Jr.;  with  note:   "The  Poetry  and 
the  Arrangement  of  the  Music  of  this  Song  are  the  property 
of  the  Publisher";  adv;  An  Edition  of  this  Song,  with  full 
Piano-forte  accompaniment;  cop:    1864,  John  Church,  Jr., 
SDO.  29  X  19.7  cm. 

b.  With  title:   "Here's  a  Health  to  Them  that's  Awa'  "; 
publ.  for  the  Public  and  Private  School  Department  of  the 
Great  Central  Fair  in  Aid  of  the  U.S.  Sanitary  Commission. 

Stiff,  coated  paper;  purple  ink.  31.6  x  25.7  cm. 

940.  HURRAH  FOR  THE  ROAD. -Hurrah  o'er  Hounslow- 
heath  to  roam  (3  vs.) 

Sung  by  Mr.  Collins  in  Paul  Clifford;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   25  x  18.5  cm. 

941.  HURRAH  FOR  THE  UNION!  UNION  CAMPAIGN 
SONG.— Cowze,  brothers,  all  unite  with  us— come  join  us 
one  and  all  (8  vs.  and  chor  )  Air:  Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

By  William  Cosgrove. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners,  col.   24  x  15. 2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  exclamation  point  and  "Union  Campaign  Song' 
in  title;]  with  period  and  hyphen  after  "Air";   sheet  no. 
777;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23.5  x  13.8  cm. 

942.  HURRAH!   FOR  THE  VNIOtil-Up  boys,  hurrah!  the 
clouds  roll  back  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto 
"America."   22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

943.  HURRAH  FOR  USl-Cojne  listen,  all  you  Union  men 
(6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— "Bully  for  all." 

Composed  by  William  H.  Murphy;  can  be  bought  at 


Mrs.  Murphy's;  print.  J.  W.  Du  Bree. 
T.  o.  border.   22.4  x  13  cm. 

944.  THE  HURRAH  SO^G. -Grant  and  Colfax  boys  are  we 
(4  vs.)   18  X  11  cm. 

945.  THE  HURRAH  SONG. -Grant's  the  chief  to  lead  the 
way  (7  vs.  and  chor.)   24.9  x  14.5  cm. 

946.  THE  HUSBAND'S  DREAM.- lW2y,  Dermot,  you  look 
healthy  now,  your  dress  is  neat  and  clean  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.9  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

947.  HYMN  BY  OLIVER  WENDELL  HOLMES. -Faifeer, 
send  on  earth  again  (3  vs.  with  music  to  1st  vs.) 

Written  expressly  for  the  Great  Central  Fair;  cop: 
1864,  G.  W.  Childs. 

Pink  paper;  t.  o.  border;  seal  of  the  Great  Central 
Fair  for  the  U.S.  Sanitary  Commission.   28  x  14.7  cm. 

948.  HYMN  FOR  THE  NATIONAL  FUNERAL.-Wjife  humble 
heart  and  drooping  brow  (4  vs.)   Tune— Old  Hundred. 

By  the  Rev.  T.  H.  Stockton;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
Mourning  border;  weeping  woman  at  tomb.   23.4  x 
14.5  cm. 

949.  A  HYMN  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  PRESIDENT  LINCOLN. 
—0,  God!  our  grief  is  great  today  (6  vs.) 

By  James  Nicholson;  sung  at  Wharton  St.  M.E.  Church, 
April  16,  1865. 

a.  Mourning  border.   [7.3  x  14.8  cm.  inside  border.]   17 
X  10.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above:   16.6  x  10.2  cm.  inside  border.]  20  x  12  cm. 
(cropped) . 

950.  I  AM  DREAMraG,  SADLY  DREAMING.-/ aw  dream- 
ing, sadly  dream,ing  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Words  by  Geo.  Birdseye;  music  by  Fred.  Buckley. 

a.  Presented  for  publication  by  Robt.  Bennett;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1168;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

951.  I  AM  FIGHTING  FOR  THE  NIGGER.-/  calculate  of 
niggers  we  soon  shall  have  our  fill  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air:  Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

By  Wm.  Kiernan. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.3  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   22  x  13.8  cm. 

c.  With  dash  after  "Air";  sheet  no.  819;  sold  by  Part- 
ridge (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  15  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1112;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.2  x  13.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  14  cm. 


64 


952.  I  AM  LONELY  TO-NIGHT.—/  am  lonely  to-night,  in 
my  sad  little  cham.ber  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  S.  C.  Campbell;  2nd  song:   "The  Hero  When 
Fallen's  No  Longer  A  Foe". 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.4  x  16.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   26  x  17  cm. 

d.  [Without  chorus;]  Varying:  "As  sung  by  Charles  H. 
Pease,  of  Carncross  and  Dixey's  Minstrels";  2nd  song: 
"Meet  Me  To-Night";  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  1186. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23.2  x  13.7  cm. 

953.  I  AM  NOT  ANGRY.  ANSWER  TO  "DON'T  BE  ANGRY, 
MOTHER".—/  am  not  angry,  dearest  boy  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25.2  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  30;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

954.  I'AM  NOT  MYSELF  AT  ALL.-Ofc.'  I'm  not  myself 
at  all,  Molly  dear,  Molly  dear  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.6  x  16.2  cm. 

I  AM  WANDERING  ALL  ALONG,  see  also  THE  SOL- 
DIER'S RETURN. 

955.  I  AM  WANDRING  ALL  ALONG. -//ai^e  they  thought 

of  me  at  home  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  Do  They  Think  of  me 
at  Home. 

By  John  Smith;  sheet  no.  1074;  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  MEET  ME  AT  TWILIGHT  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

956.  I  CANNOT  CALL  HER  MOTHER.-TTze  marriage 
rite  is  over  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  866;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

957.  I  CANNOT  MIND  MY  WHEEL,  MOTHER.-/  cannot 
mind  my  wheel,  mother  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.6  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title;]   sheet  no.  1147;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

958.  I  CANNOT  SUPPORT  HIMI  CAN  YOU? -To  my 
comrades  who  nobly  do  battle  (11  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— 
Rosin  the  bow. 

Composed  by  M.  B.  Ladd,  (of  Jefferson  Co.   N.Y. 
State.)   Private  Co.M,  14th  Regt.   N.Y.  Artillery;  publ. 
James  D.  Gay;  cop:   1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

T.  o.  border;  election  platform  with  crowd  and 
speaker,  motto  "Grant's  Beverage  is  Meade".   24  x  15  cm. 

959.  I  CAN'T  SEE  ITl-Ofall  bywords  that  flee  it  (7  vs.) 
As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor,  with  unbound  [sic]  applause; 

publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  13.5  cm. 


960.  I  DREAM  OF  HOME.—/  dream  of  my  home,  happy 
home  of  my  childhood  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  G.  C.  Glendale,  at  Bryant's  Minstrels, 

Mechanics'  Hall,  472  Broadway;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  15.5  cm. 

961.  I  DREAMED  MY  BOY  WAS  HOME  AGMH. -Lonely, 
weary,  broken-hearted  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  Charles  Carroll  Sawyer;  music 
had  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.3  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.8  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  With  author's  first  name  spelled  "Gharles";  adv: 
Ten  Illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  43,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   18.3  x  11.5  cm. 

d.  Author's  name  as  above;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  144,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
19  X  12.2  cm. 

f.  Author's  name  as  above;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  double-line  border  with  ornamental 

corners;  hdpc.  Magnus  189,  col.  21  x  14  cm. 

g.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  [without  "Words 
and  Music  by  .  .  .";]  sheet  no.  845;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.4  x  14  cm. 

h.  Sheet  no.  1135;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

i.    [As  above;  imprint  blank.]  23  x  15  cm. 

I  DREAMED  MY  BOY  WAS  HOME  AGAIN,  see  also 
TELL  MOTHER  I  DIE  HAPPY. 

962.  I  DREAMT  THAT  I  DWELT  IN  MARBLE  HALLS.— 
/  dreamt  that  I  dwelt  in  marble  halls  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Beautiful  Venice";  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24.8  x  14.8  cm. 

963.  I  HAD  A  DREAM.-/  had  a  dream,  a  happy  dream 
(3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.3  X  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  679;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

964.  I  HARDLY  THINK  I  CAN.— I'll  tell  you  of  a  nice 
young  gal,  a  gal  that  I  have  seen  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  Frank  Spear,  and  sung  by  J.  H.  Bundworth; 
sheet  no.  998;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

965.  I  HAVE  A  SILENT  SORROW  HERE.-/  have  a  silent 
sorrow  here  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  637;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

966.  I  HAVE  FOUND  THEE  BUT  TOO  LATE. -Had  I  met 
thee  in  thy  beauty  (3  vs.) 


65 


(1). 


2nd  song:   "Jenny  Fair  and  Bright";  publ.  DeMarsan 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 


967.  I  HAVE  NO  MOTHER  NOWI-/  hear  the  soft  wind 
sighing  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Magnus  (1);  adv:   Magnus's  Ornamental  and 
Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  29, 
col.   19.5  X  11.7  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  199,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [Without  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;]  3  vs. 
A-J  border.  20.2  x  13  cm.  (cropped). 

968.  I  HAVE  SOMETHING  SWEET  TO  TELL  YOU.-/  have 
something  sweet  to  tell  you,  but  the  secret  you  must  keep 
(3  vs.) 

a.  Music  obtained  of  Firth  Pond  &  Co.  (2);  Astley's  im- 
print pasted  over  Andrews'. 

T.  o.  border.   24.7  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  693;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

969.  I  KNEW  THAT  I  WAS  DREAMING. -Dreaws  are  the 
strangest  things  in  life  (5  vs.) 

Sung  by  George  Leybourne;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.4  x  16.5  cm. 

970.  I  KNOW  NOT  IF  SHE  LOVES  ME.-/  know  not  if  she 
loves  m.e  (2  vs.) 

By  Henry  Morford;  sheet  no.  995;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

971.  I  KNOW  NOT  THAT  I  WISH  FOR  TmS.-With 
constancy ,  Adele  long  tim.e  I  loved  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  17  cm. 

972.  I  LEFT  MY  LOVE  IN  ENGLAND.-/  left  my  love  in 
England,  in  poverty  and  pain  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  909;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.7  cm. 

973.  I  LIKES  A  DROP  OF  GOOD  BEER.-/'ot  Roger  Rough, 
a  ploughman  (4  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

One  of  Harry  Pearson's  Celebrated  Comic  Songs,  as 
sung  by  H.  C.  Winton,  at  his  popular  Social  Soirees;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.2  x  16.4  cm. 

I  LONG  FOR  THE  MOUNTAINS,  see  TELL  ME, 
MARY. 

I  LOVE  THE  MERRY  SUNSHINE,  see  DARKEY  BOAT 
GLEE. 

974.  I  LOVED  THAT  DEAR  OLD  FLAG  THE  BEST.-ioofe 
within  my  knapsack  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Ednor  Rossiter;  music  by  B.  Frank  Walters; 
music  published  by  Lee  &  Walker. 

a.  With  exclamation  point  in  title;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  With  narrative  of  a  dying  soldier  by  Rev.  M.  P. 
Gaddis;  with  2  chors.;  adv:   New  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
24  X  15  cm. 


c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs. 

T.  o.  border.   25  x  15  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  adv:   Price  List  of 
Stephens'  Colored  Album  Drolleries;  [publ.]  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  flag,  part  of  fortress  by  the  sea,  col. 
23  X  14  cm. 

975.  I  MISS  THEE  SO.-/  miss  thee  so  in  our  cottage 
hom.e  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  162;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

976.  I  NEVER  SAYS  NOTHING  TO  tiOBODY. -What  a 
shocking  world  this  is  for  scandle  (6  vs.) 

By  Silent  Sam. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  Astley's  imprint  added.]  24.4  x 
15.3  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Silent  Sam,  or  I  Never  Says  Nothing  to  No- 
body"; with  7  vs.;  Sold  by  John  L.  Zieber. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  9.7  cm. 

977.  I  PROMISED  I  NEVER  WOULD  LEAVE  KER.—Now, 
look  on  this  warrior  bold  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

978.  I  REMEMBER  THE  HOUR  WHEN  SADLY  WE 
PARTED.  AN  ANSWER  TO  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS 
OVER.—/  rem.em.ber  the  hour  when  sadly  we  parted  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Words  by  Ednor  Rossiter,  music  by  B.  Frank  Walters. 

a.  Title:  "Answer  to  When  This  Cruel  War  Is  Over"; 
music  had  of  Lee  &  Walker;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  With  comma  after  "Hour"  in  title  and  in  first  line;  3 
chors.;  [Music]  published  by  Lee  &  Walker;  music  ob- 
tained of  Sawyer  &  Thompson;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.5  x  16  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13.7  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Answer  To  When  This  Cruel  War  Is  Over"; 
music  had  of  Lee  &  Walker;  adv:  600  different  kinds  of 
songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  with  "N"  in  imprint. 

A-J  border.   23  x  15.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  with  "North"  in  imprint.]  23  x  14.5  cm. 

f.  With  comma  after  "Hour"  in  title  and  in  first  line; 
with  colon  after  "To"  in  title;  [without  names  of  author 
and  composer;]  3  chors. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  59,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   18.2  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Mag- 
nus (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  72,  col.   20  x 
12.5  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  80,  col.   20.2  x  13.2  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.8  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  149,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   19.7  x  12  cm. 


66 


k.   Title:   "Then  Weep  Not,  Love,  Oh!  Weep  Not.  Answer 
To  When  This  Cruel  War  Is  Over";  [without  names  of 
author  and  composer;]  with  3  chors.;   sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  16.2  cm. 

I.     [Without  comma  after  "Parted"  in  title;]  with  comma 
after  "hour"  in  first  line;  [Music]  published  by  Lee 
&  Walker;  music  obtained  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson;  sheet 
no.  1132;  3  chors.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.4  cm. 

I  SAW  THEE  WHEN  THY  HEART  WAS  LIGHT,  see 
THOU  ART  GONE  FROM  MY  GAZE. 

979.  I  SEE  HER  STILL  IN  MY  DREAMS. -While  the 
flowers  bloom  in  gladness  and  springbirds  rejoice  (2  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Charles  Melville,  of  Matt  Peels  Campbells 
Minstrels;  sheet  no.  630;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

980.  I  SHOULDN'T  LIKE  TO  TELL.- 'Tw^as  in  the  early 
spring  time  (4  vs.) 

Words  by  T.  F.  K.;  print  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  13.3  cm.  (cropped) 

981.  I  SPY  YOUR  LITTLE  GAUE.-l've  something  now  to 
tell  you,  and  you'll  own  that  it  is  true  (6  vs.)  Air:  Does 
your  mother  know  you're  out? 

As  sung  by  J.  P.  Johnson,  at  the  American  Theatre, 
No.  444  Broadway,  New-York;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

982.  I  STOOD  AMID  THE  GLITTERING  THRONG.-/ stoorf 
amid  the  glittering  throng  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  660;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

983.  I  STOOD  IT  LIKE  A  LAMB.— Some  people  always 
grumble  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  985;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   21  x  14.3  cm. 

984.  I  STOOD  ON  THE  SHORE.-/  stood  on  the  shore, 
'midst  the  weeping  and  wailing  (3  vs.) 

As  sung  by  E.  T.  Thome;    [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   26  x  17  cm. 

985.  I  WANDERED  BY  THE  BROOK-SIDE.-/  wandered  by 
the  brookside  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

986.  I  WANT  TO  BE  A  SOLDIER.-/  want  to  be  a  soldier, 
and  go  to  Dixie's  Land  (3  vs.)  Air.— I  want  to  be  an  Angel. 

a.  Short  lines;  publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border;  Union  sentry  with  rifle,  eagle  with  flag. 
25.2  X  14.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title,  and  after  "Air";]  short 
lines;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  Union  sentry  with  rifle,  eagle  with  flag. 
23.5  X  14.5  cm. 

c.  Title  as  above;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards.  Circu- 
lars, Bill-Heads,  etc. 


A-J  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  between  two 
Union  guards  with  rifles.  21.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs . 

A-J  border;  battle  scene  of  fighting  cavalry.  24.2  x 
15.7  cm. 

e.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

f.  Short  lines;  [publ.]  Johnson  &  Co. 
Double-line  border.   18.7  x  10.7  cm. 

g.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  [without  period 
after  "Air";]  written  by  Walter  W.  Warren,  and  dedicated 
to  Miss  Melinda  Nagel,  and  sung  by  her  at  the  "Kossuth 
Exchange,  7th  &  Market;  publ.  Walter  Warren  (1),  (2),  (5). 

T.  o.  border;  Zouave  (Ellsworth)  with  flag  and  sabre. 
23  X  13  cm. 

h.  Varying:   "Air— 'Wait  for  the  Wagon' ";  with  3  addi- 
tional verses. 

T.  o.  border;  guard  with  rifle  by  tent.   25.5  x  12.5  cm. 
(cropped) 

987.  I  WANT  TO  BE  A  SOLDIER.—/  want  to  be  a  soldier, 
and  like  a  soldier  stand  (4  vs.)  Air:  I  want  to  be  an  Angel. 

a.  Short  lines;  By  P.  S.  Biglin;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.4  x  17.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  hyphen  after  "Air:";  sold  by  Partridge  (2);  sheet 
no.  575. 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  13  cm. 

d.  Air  as  above;  sheet  no.  1040;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15.3  cm. 

988.  I  WANT  TO  BE  AN  ANGEL.-/  want  to  be  an  angel 
(4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  444;  [publ.]   Partridge  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  25.5  x  15.8  cm. 

989.  I  WANT  TO  GO  HOME.—/  want  to  go  home  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Sung  with  great  Applause  by  Jim  Sandford,  of  Price's 
Minstrels. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  "Applause"  not  in  caps;   sheet  no.  422;  publ. 
Partridge  (4);  [with  THE  YOUNG  RECRUIT  on  verso.] 

T.  o.  border.  21  x  12.6  cm. 

990.  I  WILL  BE  TRUE  TO  THEE.-/  will  be  true  to  thee 
(3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Written  and  composed  by  Stephen  C.  Foster;  music 
had  at  Horace  Waters  (1);  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  2nd  vs.  and  chors.;]  As  sung  by  Charles  H. 
Pease,  of  Carncross  and  Dixey's  Minstrels;  long  lines; 
2nd  song:  "Oh,  Let  Me  Shed  One  Silent  Tear";  adv:   Ten 
Illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  223,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above,  without  adv.;]  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 

Magnus  247a,  col.   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 


67 


d.  Written  and  composed  by  Stephen  C.  Foster;  music 
had  at  Horace  Waters  (1);  sheet  no.  1134;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

991.  I  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW. -Comrade  I  will 
guard  thy  Mother  (3  vs.) 

Sold  at  Harry  S.  May's. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  14.5  cm. 

992.  I  WISH  HE  WOULD  DECIDE,  MAMMA.-/  wish  he 
would  decide.  Mamma  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]   De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24  x  15.6  cm. 

993.  I  WISH  THE  WAR  WERE  OVER.-T/ze  wish,  the  all- 
absorbing  wish  (4  vs.)  Air.— Auld  Lang  Syne,  or.  Do  they 
think  of  me  at  Home. 

Written  by  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia. 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   24.3  x  13.8  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs. 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

0.  Varying  in  title:   "I  Wish  the  War  Was  O'er!"  and 
"Air— Auld  Lang  Syne";  [dated]  December,  1862. 
T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  15.5  cm. 

994.  I  WOULD  NOT  DIE  AT  ALL.-/  would  not  die  in 
spring  tim.e  (4  vs.)  Air.— "I  would  not  die  in  Spring-time." 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.   21.7  x  15  cm.  (cropped) 

995.  I  WOULD  NOT  DIE  IN  SPRING.-/  would  not  die  in 
spring  time,  when  all  is  bright  around  (4  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "I  would  Not  Die  in  Winter";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  short  lines; 
advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpe.   Magnus  37,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  46,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

d.  With  "Spring  Time"  in  title;  sheet  no.  1035;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  FIGHT  FOR  THE  CHAMPIONSHIP 
on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15  cm. 

996.  I  WOULD  NOT  DIE  IN  SPRING.    PARODY  ON  "I 
WOULD  NOT  DIE  IN  SPRING-TIME".-/  wouU  not  die 
in  spring-tim.e  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1181;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

I  WOULD  NOT  DIE  IN  WINTER,  see  I  WOULD  NOT 
DIE  IN  SPRING. 

997.  I'D  BE  A  GIPSY. -/'rf  be  a  gipsy,  merry  and  free 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

998.  I'D  CHOOSE  TO  BE  A  BABY.-/'d  choose  to  be  a 
baby  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

With  the  "Original  Version"  and  "Tony  Pastor's 
Version". 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

b.  Tony  Pastor  Version  only,  first  verse  beginning:   "I'd 
choose  to  be  a  baby.  A  pretty  little  flower";  Published 
and  Sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  adv:  Gay's  Illustrated  Army 
Songs . 

Letter  paper;  flower  ornament  with  cupids.   19.7  x 
12.7  cm. 

c.  Cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  227,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  Advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  228,  col.   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

999.  I'D  CHOOSE  TO  BE  A  DAISY. -/'</  choose  to  be  a 
daisy  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  obtained  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Auner 
(3). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  G.  C.  Glendale,  at  Bryants'  Minstrels, 
Mechanics'  Hall,  472  Broadway,  N.Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16.4  cm. 

c.  Music  procured  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  adv:   500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  247c,  col.   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  255a, 

col.  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

1000.  I'D  MOURN  THE  HOPES  THAT  LEAVE  ME.-/'d 
mourn  the  hopes  that  leave  m.e  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  943;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x   15.6  cm. 

1001.  I'D  OFFER  THEE  THIS  HAND.— /'d  offer  thee  this 
hand  of  mine  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  "Of  Mine"  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.4  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single -line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  248b,  col.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1002.  IDA  GRAY.— Tfejs  mom  I  met  a  pretty  maid  (3  vs.) 
Air:   Bonny  Bessie  Gray. 

By  F.  C.  Long;  sheet  no.  708;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

1003.  IDA  MAY .  —  'Twas  down  by  the  river  side  (3  vs.  and 
2  chors.) 

As  sung  in  all  the  public  schools. 
A-J  border.  20  x  13.5  cm.    (cropped) 

1004.  IF  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  WERE  OVEK.-Dearest  Ella, 
I  remember  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— When  this  Cruel  War 
is  over. 

By  D.  C.  H.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Johnson's  New 
Catalogue  of  Songs. 

A-J  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1005.  IF  YOUR  FOOT  IS  PRETTY,  SHOW  IT  .—If  your  foot 
is  pretty,  show  it  (3  vs.) 

As  sung  by  W.  Arlington;  sheet  no.  944;  publ.  Wrigley 
[without  address]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 


68 


1006.  IF  YOUR  NOSE  IS  LONG,  YOU'LL  KNOW  IT. -If 
your  nose  is  long,  you'll  know  it  (3  vs.)  Air:  "If  your  foot 
is  pretty,  show  it." 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  dash  after  "Air";  By  Eugene  T. 
Johnston. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23.3  x  15  cm. 

1007.  I'LL  BE  A  SOLDIER.-/'^  be  a  soldier  and  march 
to  the  drum  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  the  Celebrated  and  most  popular 
author  Stephen  C.  Foster;  music  obtained  of  John  J.  Daly 
(1). 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   25  x  17  cm. 

I'LL  BE  NO  SUBMISSIVE  WIFE,  see  SALLY  IN  OUR 
ALLEY. 

1008.  I'LL  HANG  MY  HARP  ON  A  WILLOW  TREE.-i'H 
hang  my  harp  on  a  mllow  tree  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

I'LL  LET  YOU,  see  HOW  DELIGHTFUL  'TWOULD 
BE  IF  YOU'D  LET  ME. 

1009.  I'LL  NEVER  FORGET  THEE. -"i^or^ei  theeT'- 
Ifto  dream,  by  night  (3  vs.) 

With  Astley's  imprint. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1010.  I'LL  NEVER  GET  DRUNK  AGAIN.-/  once  did  have 
a  Fortune  I  ne'er  thought  I  should  want  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1005;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  FIRE- 
MAN'S DEATH  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.9  x  15. 7  cm. 

I'LL  REMEMBER  THEE,  see  AM  I  NOT  FONDLY 
THINE  OWN. 

1011.  I'LL  THROW  MYSELF  AWAY.-Woto,  ladies,  your 
attention  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.5  x 
14.3  cm. 

1012.  I'LL  TOUCH  MY  HARP.-0/<  in  that  calm  and 
gentle  hour  (2  vs.) 

a.  Sung  nightly  with  Shouts  of  Applause  by  W.  Vincent,  at 
his  New  and  Beautiful  Opera  House,  No.  49  Bowery,  di- 
rectly opposite  the  Bowery  Theatre;  2nd  song:  "False 
One,  I  Love  Thee  Still";  print.  Andrews. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  309;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THERE  IS  A 
FLOWER  THAT  BLOOMETH  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

I'LL  REMEMBER  THEE,  see  AM  I  NOT  FONDLY 
THINE  OWN. 

1013.  I'LL  WOO  THEE  IN  THE  SUMMER  TIME. -I'll  woo 
thee  in  the  Summer  time  (3  vs.) 


Words  by  R.  Scott  Cowenlock;  Music  by  Chas.  J. 
Hargitt;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.9  x   16.4  cm. 

I'M  A  MERRY  LAUGHING  GIRL,  see  JERSEY-BLUE 
HANDKERCHIEF. 

1014.  I'M  AFLOAT.— /'m  afloat,  I'm  afloat,  on  the  fierce 
rolling  tide  (3  vs.) 

a.' 2nd  song:  "Friendship's  Wish";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15.2 
cm. 

c.  Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.1  x  11.8  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  476;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1);    [with  MY  EMMA  LOUISE  on  verso]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

1015.  I'M  DOWN  ON  DOUBLE-QUICK. -Since  /  have  be- 
com.e  a  soldier,  things  have  went  rather  queer  (6  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen,  and  with  exclamation  point  in  title;] 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

1016.  I'M  GOING  TO  FIGHT  MIT  SIGEL.-/'i;e  come 
shust  now  to  tell  you  how  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— The  Girl 
I  left  behind  Me. 

Written  by  John  F.  Poole,  and  sung  by  H.  W.  Egan. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   23  x  14  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  colon  after  "Air";  "me"  in  Air;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.2  x  15.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]   [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  15.8  cm. 

e.  [Without  "Air"  and  names  of  author  and  singer;]  pub- 
lished and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  [with  FLAG  OF  OUR 
UNION  FOR  EVER  on  recto.] 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  16  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  with  GOOD  LAGER  BIER  on  recto.]  23.6 
X  17.3  cm. 

g.  Publ.  [J]ohnson  (2),  without  Johnson's  initials. 
T.  o.  border.  22.3  x  12.8  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  A-J  border.   21.2  x  12.6  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue. 
T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  12.7  cm. 

j.    Publ.  Johnson  (2),  with  Johnson's  initials;  adv:   600 
different  kinds  of  songs. 

A-J  border.   23.7  x  14. 8  cm. 

k.   With  comma  after  "Air";  "girl"  and  "me"  in  Air; 
varying:   "sung  by  W.  H.  Eagan,  Ethiopian  Comedian,  with 
usual  success,  at  the  American  Theatre,  444  Broadway"; 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  102,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 


69 


1.    [Without  names  of  author  and  singer;]  with  dash  after 
"Air";  and  "me"  in  Air;  sheet  no.  831;  publ.  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  15.5  cm. 

m.  [As  above;]  sheet  no.  1116;   [imprint  blank.] 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22.8  x  15  cm. 

1017.  I'M  HAPPY  AS  THE  DAY  IS  LONG.-/'m  happy  as 
the  day  is  long  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music,  sung  at  Bryants'  Minstrels,  obtained  of  Wm.  A. 
Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  17  cm. 

1018.  I'M  LONELY  SINCE  MY  MOTHER  DrED.-7'm 
lonely  since  my  mother  died  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  publ.  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.;  obtained  of  Firth, 
Son  &  Co.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.6  x  16.2  cm. 

1019.  I'M  OFF  FOR  BALTIMORE.- 'Ttoas  on  one  ehening 
in  de  month  oh  June{3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.8  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.7  x 
15  cm. 

c.  With  first  line  beginning:  "It  was  one  ebening";  and 
"ob"  spelled  "of";  From  A.  W.  Auner's  Stationery  and 
Newspaper  Store  (6). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

d.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

e.  S.  Garrigues'  Cheap  Stationery,  Periodical  and  Song 
Store;  print.  Thompson  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  20  x  11  cm. 

1020.  I'M  OFF  FOR  CAhlFOBNIA.-Now,  darkies  gather 
round  me— I  got  a  thing  to  tell  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Ohl 
Susannah. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24  x  14  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.7  x  16  cm. 

1021.  I'M  OFF  FOR  CHARLESTON. -My  massa  an'  my 
m.issus,  dey  both  am  gone  away  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23  x  14.6  cm. 

c.  Sung  nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.2  era. 

e.  [Without  comma  after  "missus"  in  first  line;]  publ. 
Johnson  (3);  advs:  You  will  save  25  per  cent,  and  Cards, 
Circulars,  Billheads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.   21  x  12  cm. 

f.  With  "and"  in  first  line;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  21.3  x  15.5  cm. 


1022.  I'M  SADDEST  WHEN  I  SING.-roM  think  I've  a 
■merry  heart  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

1023.  I'M  SURE  I  SHALL  GO  CRAZY!-/'/re  sure  I  shall 
go  crazy  (3  vs.)  Air.— "I'd  choose  to  be  a  Daisy." 

Sheet  no.  1387;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1024.  I'M  THINKING  OF  HOME. -I  am  thinking  of  home, 
I  am  thinking  (3  vs.) 

Words  by  J.  Simmonds;  Music  by  F.  Buckley;  Music 
sold  by  Horace  Waters  (2). 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x   15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.4  x 
15.2  cm. 

1025.  I'M  TURNING  GRAY  DEAR  KATE. -Time's  hand  is 
even  there,  sweet  Kate  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4);  with  Boyd's  imprint  added  (1). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  26.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  638;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1026.  AN  IMPLORATION  FOR  OUR  COUNTRY. -Hozo 
slowly  drag  these  dreary  days  along  (5  vs.) 

[Signed]  Charles  Gibbons,  Philadelphia,  November  6, 
1862. 

Laid  paper.  25  x  10.7  cm. 

1027.  IN  DIE  SCHLACHT.-SoWafen.'  frisch  auf  zum 
Schachtfeld  hinajis  (5  vs.)  Nach  der  Melodie:   "Jetzt  gang  i 
an's  Briinnele  &c." 

Ein  Unionslied  von  John  Singer,  Jr.;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.   25  x  16.3  cm. 

1028.  IN  HAPPY  MOMENTS.— /«  happy  moments  day  by 
day  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  Lee  &  Walker's. 
A-J  border.  20.2  x   12.9  cm. 

IN  HAPPY  MOMENTS,  see  SWEET  HOME  RECEIVE 
ME,  and  O,  LET  ME  LIKE  A  SOLDIER  FALL. 

1029.  IN  MEMOR1A.M,  ABRAHAM  LINCOLN.-MoMrra, 
Sons  of  Columbia!  mourn  for  your  Chief  (5  vs.) 

Mourning  border;  bust  of  Lincoln  between  "Sixteenth 
President  of  the  United  States."  and  "Born:   Feb'ry  12, 
1809.   Died:   April  15,  1865."  16.5  x  10.5  cm. 

1030.  IN  MEMORIAM.   CAPTAIN  F.  A.  DEPEYSTER, 
LATE  GOVERNOR  OF  SAILORS'  SNUG  HARBOR,  STATEN 
ISLAND.— FZo^.f  veil  your  starry  glories  now  (4  vs.) 

Headed:   "The  Memory  of  Depeyster";  with  explana- 
tion "The  melancholy  death  of  this  most  estimable  gentle- 
man and  accomplished  sailor,  carried  deep  grief  .  .  ."; 
[signed]  Capt.  Saml.  Whiting,  Jacksonville,  East  Florida, 
June  10th,  1868.   24.8  x  13.4  cm. 

1031.  IN  MEMORIAM  COL.  J.  LAFAYETTE  RIKER,  62d 
REGIMENT,  N.Y.S.V.  (ANDERSON  ZOUAVES,)  KILLED 
AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  FAIR  OAKS,  MAY  31,  1862. -One  by 
one  the  roll  is  filled  (5  vs.) 

[Signed]  W.  E.  P.;  Harlem,  N.Y.,  June  4th,  1862. 
Double-line  border.  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 


70 


IN  MEMORIAM,  THE  BEARING  FAMILY,  see  THE 
DEARING  FAMILY. 

1032.  IN  MEMORY  OF  COL.  ELLSWORTH,  FIRE 
ZOUAVES,  ASSASSINATED,  MAY  24TH.   1861. -Fall'n 
when  his  course  had  just  begun  (4  vs.) 

a.  With  "of  N.Y."  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.;  allegorical  hdpc.  of 
tablets  of  law,  sword,  sceptre,  etc.  25.6  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  With  period  after  Zouaves  in  title;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Notice.  Persons  out  of  the  City,  sending  for  Songs 
or  other  Goods. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  Ellsworth.   25  x  14.3  cm. 

c.  With  varying  punctuation  in  title;  sheet  no.  511;  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  weeping  woman  at  tomb.  21.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  Title  as  above;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.; 
mourning  border  around  text;  cemetery  scene.  21.3  x 
13  cm. 

1033.  IN  MEMORY  OF  COL.  E.  E.  ELLSWORTH. -T/wm 
youthful  Hero!  deep  in  grief  (3  vs.) 

By  G.  Gumpert;  cop:  EDPa.  J.  Magee,  1861;  publ. 
Magee. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  death  of  Ellsworth  in  red  and 
blue.  20.7  X  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  bust  of  Ellsworth  within  wreath  in  red  and 
blue.  20  X  13.2  cm. 

1034.  IN  OUR  OWN  DEAR  HOMES  AGAINl-For  the  grand 
old  Union  fighting  (3  vs.)  Air:   The  Cottage  by  the  Sea. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  (5),  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  113,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1035.  IN  THE  DAYS  WHEN  I  WAS  HARD  UP.-/n  the  days 
when  I  was  hard  up,  not  many  years  ago  (6  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Hard  Up";  short  lines;  chorus;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.6  x  16.8  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc. 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

1036.  IN  THE  DAYS  WHEN  WE  WENT  GIPSYING. -/w  the 
days  when  we  went  gipsying  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

1037.  "IN  THE  LIBBY  PRISON  SADLY. "-/n  the  Libby 
prison,  sadly,  a  dying  Soldier  lay  (4  vs.)  Air.   "Bingen  on 
the  Rhine". 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.; 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  79,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19  x  11.3  cm. 

1038.  IN  THE  LOUISIANA  LOWLANDS. -Way  down  in 
Louisiana,  not  many  years  ago  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

A-J  border.  20.5  x  13.8  cm.    (cropped) 


1039.  INDEPENDENCE  DAY  .-Squeak  the  fife  and  beat 
the  drum  (6  vs.) 

a.  With  last  two  verses  headed  "Encore  Verses";  publ. 
Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  horse-drawn  cannon  and  mounted  soldiers 
on  parade.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  With  last  two  verses  headed  "Encore  Verses";  as 
sung  by  Mrs.  Barney  Williams  and  Mrs.  Florence,  through- 
out the  States;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border;  marchers  carrying  banners  in  a  parade. 
23.5  X  15  cm. 

1040.  INDEPENDENT  RANGERS'  SONG. -Oar  Country 
is  now  in  great  danger  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Frank  Whitaker,  Esq;  Dedicated  to  Captain  Wm. 
McMuUin. 

Sailor  nailing  flag  to  masthead.  23  x  9  cm.  (cropped?) 

1041.  THE  INDIA  RUBBER  UAH.—McFinny's  wife  was 
ever  prone  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Cop:    1863,  Winner  &  Co.,  EDPa;  sold  by  Winner  &  Co. 
(3). 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

1042.  THE  INDIAN  GIRL.  OR  BRIGHT  ALFARATA.- 
Wild  roved  an  Indian  Girl  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

1043.  THE  INDIAN  HUNTER.-Lei  me  go  to  my  home  in 
the  far  distant  west  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25  x  17  cm. 

b.  With  "No.  2"  after  title;  sheet  no.  689;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

THE  INDIAN  HUNTER,  see  also  THE  INDIAN 
WARRIOR'S  GRAVE. 

1044.  INDIAN  HUNTER.  NO.  2-Oh,  why  does  the  whtte 
man  follow  my  path,  like  the  hound  on  the  tiger's  track 
(4  vs.  uneven  length) 

2nd  song:   "Indian  Warrior's  Grave". 
A-J  border.  20.3  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

1045.  THE  INDIAN  LASS. -As  /  was  a  walking  on  a  fair 
distant  shore  (8  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

1046.  INDIAN  MAID  OF  THE  CHAPPARAL.-Noif  since 
you  have  asked  a  song  of  m,e  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Mary 
Blane. 

Written  and  sung  by  George  Bombarger,  in  the  City  of 
Mexico;  cop:   1852,  Thomas  M.  Scroggy,  EDPa.;  publ. 
Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   25.8  x  13  cm. 

1047.  THE  INDIAN  WARRIOR'S  GRAVE. -Green  is  the 
grave  by  the  wild  dashing  river  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  2nd  song:   "Indian 
Hunter."  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15  cm. 


71 


INDIAN  WARRIOR'S  GRAVE,  see  also  INDIAN  HUNTER, 
NO.  2. 

1048.   THE  INFANT  LTE'EKTY  -When  first  infant  Liberty 
dropped  upon  earth  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  665;  As  sung  by  James  R.  White;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.6  X  13.5  cm. 

INITIATION  ODE,  see  THE  BATTLE  CRY  OF  FREE- 
DOM. 

1049;   INNOCENT  MIKE.— I  am  a  wandering  Irishman, 
they  call  me  innocent  Mike  (5  vs.)  Air.  — Low  Backed  Car. 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  "Innocent"  in 
first  line;  words  by  G.  W.  Anderson;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  is  cm. 

b.  With  quotes  around  Air;  sheet  no.  900;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1050.  THE  INVALID  CORPS. -Ofe,  listen  to  me  while  I 
sing  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Matt.  Gebler,  The  Favorite 
Comic  Vocalist;  print.  Johnson  (2). 

a.  Eagle  with  shield  and  motto  "United  States  of 
America".  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Advs:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.,  and  Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor.   22.3  x  13.5  cm. 

INVITATION  TO  THE  GROVE,  see  COME,  MAIDEN, 
WITH  ME. 

1051 .  THE  IRISH  BRIGADE  \-Did  you  see  the  grand  parade 
(8  vs.  with  3  narrated  parts  in  between)  Air.— "The  Bould 
Soger  Boy." 

By  Contempt  O'Court,  Esq.;   Respectfully  dedicated  to 
the  blood  of  the  Tylers,  always  barring  that  on  the  hands 
of  the  guardians  of  the  Poor. 

Double-line  border;  civilians  watching  parading  sol- 
diers.  25.7  X  16  cm. 

1052.  THE  IRISH  BRIGADE. -ffidenzia.'  bright  gem  of  the 
ocean  (5  vs.  and  chors.)   Tune— Red,  White  and  Blue. 

Sheet  no.  543;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  12.5  cm. 

1053.  THE  IRISH  BRIGADE. -M%e?i  brave  hearts  shall  be 
a  reproach  to  a  nation  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

1054.  IRISH  BRIGADE. -Fe  sons  of  green  Erin,  assemble 
(3  vs.)  Air-Red,  White  and  Blue. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  "The"  in  title.   18  x  10. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

1055.  THE  IRISH  BRIGADE.  NO.  2. -There's  an  Island  on 
earth,  which  clearly  has  shown  (6  vs.)  Air:    The  meeting 
of  the  waters. 

By  John  Flanagan. 

a.  Title:   "The  Irish  Brigade";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.3  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Title:   "The  Isish-Brigade";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   24.3  x  16  cm. 


c.  With  exclamation  point  after  "Brigade"  in  title;  with 
"Waters"  in  Air;  publ.  Partridge  (2);  sheet  no.  597. 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15.4  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  after  "Brigade"  and  "2"  in  title;] 
sheet  no.  891;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

1056.  THE  IRISH  HAY -MAKE  R.-Ati^  did  you  ne'er  hear 
of  the  Irish  hay-maker  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  623;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1057.  IRISH  MOLLY,  O.—As  I  walk'd  out  one  morning,  all 
in  the  m.onth  of  May  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

1058.  IRISH  PATRIOTS  OF  98. -Ke  heroes  brave  of 
ninety-eight  {5  vs.)  Air:   Bruce's  Address. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  flag  border  with  central  star,  col.   25.2 
X  16.8  cm. 

1059.  THE  IRISH  PICKET.-Z'jm  sthanding  [sic]  in  the 
m.ud,  Biddy  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  786;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19.9  x  12.6  cm. 

1060.  THE  IRISH  REFUGEE.   OR  POOR  PAT  MUST  EMI- 
GRATE.—Fare  you  well,  poor  Erin's  Isle  (6  vs.)  Air: 
Podge  e  and  Rhu. 

Sung  by  J.  S.  Berry;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.6  x  16.4  cm. 

1061.  THE  IRISH  SOAP  FAT  MAN. -Ocfe  I  am  a  grate 
Irishman,  from  Cork  I  have  come  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:   "Soap  Fat  Man.";  Air- Bould  Irishman;  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:   600  different  kinds  of  Songs. 

A-J  border.  24.4  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  With  "Form"  in  place  of  "from"  in  first  line;  sheet 
no.  967;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

1062.  THE  IRISH  TOAD. -Now,  Ladies  and  Gents,  pay 
attention  (4  vs.)  Air:   Cupid  took  lodgings  in  Dublin. 

2nd  song:  "My  Friend  And  Pitcher";  publ.  De  Marsan 

(1). 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

1063.  IRISH  VOLUNTEER.-ye  daughters  of  Old  Ireland 
(5  vs.)  Air.— "The  Yankee  Man  of  War." 

Composed  by  Arthur  McCann. 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  20.7  x  13.1  cm. 

b.  With  "Volunteers"  in  title;  advs:   "Pennsylvania 
Battle  Cry",  and  New  Songs  [publ.]  Johnson  (2).   23.3  x 
16.2  cm. 

c.  Title  as  above  with  "McCann"  spelled  "M'Cann"; 
advs:   "Pennsylvania  Battle  Cry",  and  Cards,  Bill  Heads, 
Circulars,  etc.  [publ.]  Johnson  (2).   20.2  x  13.1  cm. 

d.  Copyright  Secured. 
Multi-line  border.  23  x  13. 1  cm. 

1064.  THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEER.  NO.  S.-I'll  sing  of  a  sol- 
dier, both  gallant  and  brave  (5  vs.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 


72 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25.5  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  [Without  periods  after  "Volunteer"  and  "3";]  sheet 
no.  1068;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above,  with  THE  FIREMAN'S  DEATH  on  recto.] 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.9  x  15  cm. 

IRISH  VOLUNTEERS,  see  GALLANT  PENNSYLVANIA 
69TH,  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS. 

1065.  THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS.-Fom  gallant  sons  of 
Erin's  Isle,  attend  to  what  I  say  (7  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21.8  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.4  x  18.3  cm. 

c.  By  Michael  O'Riely;  sheet  no.  525;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [Author  as  .above;]  sheet  no.  887;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

1066.  THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS.  NO.  2. -The  blast  of  war 
is  sounding  now  o'er  valley,  hill  and  dell  (7  vs.)  Air:   The 
Valley  of  Inkerman. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.1  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  By  Timothy  B.  O'Regan;  sheet  no.  1054;  [with  SILVER 
MOONLIGHT  WINDS  on  recto;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22  x  13.7  cm. 

1067.  THE  IRISH  WIDE -AWAKE . -As  /  walked  out  one 
evening  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Billy  O.  Rourke. 

By  Harry  M.  Palpier;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.1  x  16.2  cm. 

1068.  IS  IT  ANY  BODY'S  BUSINESS? -/s  it  any  body's 
business,  if  a  gentleman  should  choose  (6  vs.) 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  "Any  Body's"  spelled  "Anybody's"  in  title; 
sheet  no.  1065;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

1069.  IS  THAT  MOTHER?-/s  that  Mother  bending  o'er  me 
(5  vs.) 

a.  Presented  for  publication  by  Robt.  Bennett;  with  a 
short  explanation  of  song's  history,  beginning:   "The  fol- 
lowing touching  lines  were  suggested  by  an  affecting  scene, 
in  one  of  the  Army-Hospitals.";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.8  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Is  That  Mother,  Bending  O'er  Me?"  5  vs.  in 
3  with  variations  in  wording  of  text;  sheet  no.  821;  Music 
publ.  by  permission  of  O.  Ditson  &  Co     owners  of  copy- 
right; Words  publ.  by  permission;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  15.9  cm. 

1070.  ISABELLA,  WITH  THE  GINGHAM  UMBRELLA. 
OR  THE  BARBER'S  DAUGHTER  OF  WEEHAWKEN.-0«  a 
Monday  afternoon,  in  the  latter  part  of  June  (6  vs.  and  6 
chors.) 


a.  As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.5  x  17  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Wee-Haw-Ken";  sheet  no.  1188;  as  sung  by 
the  great  Comic  Vocalist,  Tony  Pastor. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   23  x  15.1  cm. 

1071.  ISN'T  IT  A  VJONDER? -Sister  Norf  and  Sister  Souff 
(4  vs.) 

Written  by  Henry  Wood,  Esq.  and  sung  by  Wood's 
Minstrels,  with  the  most  enthusiastic  applause. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.6  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  With  "nightly"  inserted  after  "sung",  and  quotation 
marks  around  "Wood's  Minstrels";  sheet  no.  1030;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.8  x  13.7  cm. 

1072.  IT  IS  BETTER  TO  LAUGH  THAN  BE  SIGHING. -fi 
is  better  to  laugh  than  be  sighing  (2  vs.  and  chop.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  adv: 
Ten  Illustrated  Songs;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  236,  col.;  publ. 
TVIagnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

1073.  IT  REMINDS  HIM  OF  A  STORY.- We're  in  Rebellion 
now  the  greatest  one  in  history  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Limerick  Races. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

1074.  IT  WAS  MY  FATHER'S  CUSTOM. -Cowie.  hither 
bring  the  holly  bush  to  decorate  the  hall  (4  vs.) 

a.  Subheaded:  "A  Merry  Christmas  Song";  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Short  lines;  adv:   600  different  Kinds  of  Songs;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  25  x  15. 1  cm. 

1075.  IT  WAS  MY  MOTHER'S  CWOICE. -Oh!  Mother  dear, 
I  had  a  drink  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  It  was  my  Mother's 
voice. 

By  J.  Cross  Casten;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.I  cm. 

1076.  IT  WAS  MY  MOTHER'S  VOICE. -0  Mother  dear! 
I  had  a  dream  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  at  the  Store  of  the  Composer  and  Pub- 
lisher, Frederick  Blume  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

1077.  IT'S  WONDERFUL  HOW  WE  DO  IT,  BUT  WE  DO.- 
Napoleon  used  to  say:   There's  no  such  ivord  as  Fail  (5  vs.) 

Sung  by  Tony  Pastor  at  his  Opera-House,  201  Bowery; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25.7  x  15.8  cm. 

I'VE  KISSED  HIM,  AND  LET  HIM  GO,  see  THE 
NATION'S  LAST  CALL. 

1078.  I'VE  WANDERED  BY  THE  HUT  SIDE. -/'re  tcan- 
dered  by  the  hut  side  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.   Sung  with  tremendous  applause  by  Charles  Melville, 
of  Kemble's  Celebrated  Minstrels;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.7  cm. 


73 


b.   [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.9  x  16.1  cm. 

1079.  THE  rVY  GREEN.-Ofe.'  a  dainty  plant  is  the  ivy 
green  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.8  cm. 

1080.  JACK  LANNIGAN'S  WAKE.-In  the  town  of  Mayo 
Jack  Lannigan  liv'd  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.8  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs.  20.5 
X  12.7  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1187. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23.1  x  15.1  cm. 

1081.  JACK  MUGGINS  OR  THE  DONKEY-BALANCER.- 
Of  all  the  strange  tales  about  asses  (9  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.   24.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1082.  JACK  BAG.— Although  my  name  is  Jack  Rag,  if  you 
will  list  a  while  (9  vs.)  Air:— Jim  Crow. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.9  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  626;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

JACKEY,  DE  BUTCHER  BOY,  see  PARODY  ON:   PUT 
ME  IN  MY  LITTLE  BED. 

1083.  JACOB  GETS  THE  MITTEN.-/  thank  you,  Mister 
Jacob,  but  I'm,  not  inclined  to  go  (4  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

a.  Answer  to  "Wait  for  the  Wagon";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  Reply  to,  "Wait  for  the 
Wagon.";  pubis.  Johnson  (2),  and  Auner  &  Johnson. 

Double-line  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

1084.  JANE  MONROE.— /i  was  doum  in  Louisiana  (3  vs.) 
and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.4  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24  x  15  cm. 

c.  With  first  line  beginning:   "When  I  lived,"  and  other 
minor  variations  throughout;  3  chors.;   Tune— The  Low 
Back'd  Car. 

T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  14.3  cm. 

1085.  JANE  0'MALLEY.-/'n  tell  thee  a  tale  of  a  maiden's 
veil  (4  vs.) 

a.  With  chorus;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  Title:  "She  Sleeps  In  The  Valley." 
Double  t.  o.  border.  22.5  x  13  cm. 

c.  [Without  apostrophe  in  "maiden's"  in  first  line;]  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  woman  courted  by  two  men.   24  x  15  cm. 


d.   Title:   "She  Sleeps  In  The  Valley";  sheet  no.  521; 
music  publ.  by  E.  H.  Wade;  sold  by  Partridge  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  14.3  cm. 

1086.  JEANNETTE  AND  JEANNOT.-roM  are  going  far 
away,  far  away  from  poor  Jeannette  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "The  Answer." 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.6  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  782;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.4  x  15.2  cm. 

1087.  JEFF  DAVIS.— Jeff  Davis  is  a  great  old  boy  (3  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

Headed:   "True  Blue  Melodies,  No.  1  .  .  .  Price,  One 
Cent";  [sold  by  Wm.  V.  Spencer.] 
T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

1088.  JEFF  DAVIS.— Jeff  Davis,  he  was  lately  seized  with 
a  fit  (7  vs.) 

Sung  by  Matt  Gebler,  Mobile,  Alabama. 
T.  o.  border.   19.7  x  11.3  cm. 

1089.  JEFF  DAVIS.— Owce  /  could  eat  my  fill  of  good  meat 
(4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

Yellow  paper;  A-J  border.  23.2  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  t.  o.  border.     24.1  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  With  "Air:  Nell  Flaugherty's  Drake";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.9  x  14.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   23.3 
X  15.5  cm. 

e.  [Air  as  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

f.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  period  after 
"Jeff";  "Brought  These  Hard  Times  On  Me"  added  to 
title;  "Tune.— Nell  Flaughterty's  Drake";  adv:   Johnson's 
New  Catalogue  of  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  25.3  x   15.4  cm. 

g.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  3.   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

h.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  3a,  col.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

i.    Sheet  no.  1015;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.   23.6  x  15.2  cm. 

1090.  [JEFF  DAVIS  &  CO.]— Jeff  Davis  &  Co.  once  were 
citizens  of  credit  and  repute  (14  vs.)  25  x  13  cm. 

1091.  JEFF  DAVIS  AND  HIS  UNCLE. -/'ZZ  tell  you  of  a 
story  that  happened  in  its  day  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Root 
Hog  or  Die. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.7  x   14.3  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   26.6  x  16.4  cm. 

c.  [Without  period  after  "Uncle";]  with  period  and  dash 
after  Air;  by  Isadore  Leopold;  sheet  no.  797;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   22.3  x  13.4  cm. 

JEFF  DAVIS  BROUGHT  THESE  HARD  TIMES  ON  ME, 
see  JEFF  DAVIS. 


74 


1092.  JEFF  DAVIS  IN  CRINOLINE.-/  have  just  got  time 
to  address  you  in  rhyme  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Ossa- 
watomie  Brown". 

Words  by  Gen.  W.  H.  Hayward;  publ.  Doyle  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  13.8  cm. 

1093.  JEFF.  DAVIS  IN  HIS  WIFE'S  ChOTKES.-Jefferson 
Davis  took  to  the  woods  (6  vs.  uneven  length) 

Adv:   Wanamaker  &  Brown's  Clothing  Store;  publ. 
Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.8  cm. 

1093A.  JEFF  DAVIS,  IS  GETTING  TIRED  OF  THE  WAR.- 
Our  flag  as  ever  floats  on  high  (5  vs.)  Air— "Maryland, 
My  Maryland." 

T.  o.  border;  seated  woman  and  girl.  30.5  x  8.7  cm. 

1094.  JEFF  DAVIS,  OI  MY  JOE  JEFF. -Jeff  Davis.  O! 
my  Joe  Jeff  (4  vs.)  Air:   The  girl  I  left  behind  me. 

Sung  by  Billy  Matthews,  Ethiopian  Comedian,  at  Klein's 
Exchange  Concert  Rooms,  Philada.;  Words  by  Wattie 
Rusher;  advs:  Warren's  New  Grotto;  and  Pike's  Vegetable 
Tooth  Ache  Drops;  publ.  Warren  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  14.1  cm. 

1095.  JEFF  DAVIS  ON  ARMING  THE  mGGFn.— Jeff  Davis, 
he  swore,  in  his  wrath,  he  would  arm  (10  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Air:— Happy  Land  of  Canaan. 

By  M.  B.  Ladd;  February,  1865;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.   22.6  x  12.3  cm. 

1096.  JEFF  DAVIS  OR  THE  KING  OF  THE  SOUTHERN 
DOMINIONS.— Come,  listen  now,  and  you  will  hear  (2  vs.) 
Air:  The  King  of  the  Cannibal  Island. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clovni  border.  25  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  With  title  of  Air  in  quotation  marks  and  "Cannibal" 
spelled  "Canibal";    [without  commas  in  first  line;]  sheet 
no.  799;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border;  stars  on  blue  ground  within  red 
stripes,  col.  23.8  x  15. 1  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.7  cm. 

1097.  JEFF  DAVIS'  'DKF.AM.-'Twas  one  winter's  night, 
Jeff  Davis  he  lay  (5  vs.)  Air— Lord  Lovel. 

a.  Written  and  sung  by  Frank  Spear,  Ethiopian  Comedian; 
publ.  Auner  (3). 

Yellow  paper;  t.  o.  border.   23.2  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  With  "Davis' "  spelled  "Davis's";  and  a  colon  after 
"Air";  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  22.9  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  "Winter's"  in  first  line;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  I6.8  cm. 

d.  With  period  after  "Jeff"  in  title;  Respectfully  dedi- 
cated to  Horace  B.  Haydon,  who  Is  now  in  the  Secession 
Army;  advs:   the  largest  assortment  of  Sentimental  and 
National  Songs;  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  and 
Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   23.2  x  15.8  cm. 

e.  Title:   "Dream  of  Jeff  Davis.";  Sung  by  the  Great 
Wray,  at  Canterbury  Hall,  cor.  5th  &  Chestnut;  adv:   Pike's 
Vegetable  Tooth  Ache  Drops;  publ.  Warren  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.2  x  13.3  cm. 

f.  [Without  period  after  "Dream";]  but  with  "Davis' " 
spelled  "Davis's'';  Written  and  Sung  by  Frank  Spear, 


Ethiopian  Comedian,  at  the  National  Music  Hall;   sheet  no. 
862;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.4  x  14.5  cm. 

g.   [Without  period  after  "Dream";]  with  period  after 
"Jeff"  in  title  and  quotation  marks  around  Air. 
T.  o.  border.   19.9  x  13  cm. 

1097A.  JEFF  DAVIS'S  DREAM,  AFTER  HIS  CAPTURE. - 
From,  their  graves  m.any  thousands  had  risen  (6  vs.) 
[Air:]   Try  the  Red,  White  and  Blue. 

Subheading:   "The  Dream";  composed  by  George  G. 
B.  DeWolfe,  of  Nashua,  N.H.;  two  lines  of  verse  in  caps  at 
foot. 

Double-line  border;  Justice  with  scales  and  sword. 
11.9  X  19.9  cm. 

1098.  JEFF  DAVIS'  LAMENT.-Zn  de  cotton  state  oh  ole 
Mis-sip-py  (3  vs.)  Air.— "Carry  me  Back  to  Old  Virginia 
Shore." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.6  x  13.5  cm. 

1099.  JEFF  DAVIS'S  PROCLAMATION. -0/aH  ifte  Souife 
"I'm  President  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— 'Teddy  O'Rourke's 
the  boy,  sirs' 

With  last  verse  headed:  "Yankee  Doodle's  Reply". 
T.  o.  border,  cartoon  of  devil.  38.5  x  12.3  cm. 

1100.  JEFF  IN  PETTICOATS.— Jeff  Davis  was  a  hero  bold, 
you've  heard  of  him.,  I  know  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Henry  Tucker.] 

a.  Music  obtained  at  the  Music-Store  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  & 
Co.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  With  period  after  "Jeff";  sheet  no.  1338;  music  pub- 
lished by  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  14.9  cm. 

1101.  JEFFERSON  "Ty."  — You're  a  traitor  convicted,  you 
know  very  well  (4  vs.) 

By  Wm.  B.  Justice;  cop:   1861,  Marsh,  EDPa.;  [sold 
by]  Marsh's  Music  Store  (1);  printed  by  permission;  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.8  cm. 

1102.  JEFFIE  D.  OR,  THE  PETTICOATED  PRESIDENT. - 
With  Bowie-knife,  in  guise  of  wife  (8  vs.  and  chor.)   Tune: 
"Yankee  Doodle." 

T.  o.  border.  27.4  x  12.1  cm. 

1103.  JEMIMA  BROWN.  — 'Tz/jos  at  a  rail-way  station 
(7  vs.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Harry  Clifton;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.4  x  16.4  cm. 

1104.  JENNIE,  THE  FLOWER  OF  KILDARE.-/'m  thinking 
of  Erin  to-night  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Frank  Dumont;  Music  by  J.  E.  Stewart; 
[print.]  W.  J.  Schmidt;  with  Trade  Mark. 

T.  o.  border,  woman  with  flower.   20.7  x  11.7  cm. 

1105.  JENNIE  WITH  HER  BONNIE  BLUE  E'E.-I  stroll'd 
on  the  banks  of  the  bright  rolling  Tweed  (2  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Sung  by  T.  B.  Prendergast,  at  Bryant's  Minstrels,  472 
Broadway,  N.Y.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 


75 


b.  "JENNIF"  in  title;   [without  period  at  end  of  title;] 
sheet  no.  192;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

JENNY  FAIR  AND  BRIGHT,  see  I  HAVE  FOUND  THEE 
BUT  TOO  LATE. 

1106.  JENNY  LANE.— Wfeere  /  was  young  and  in  my  prime 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Wm.  A.  Wray,  the  Celebrated  Banjoist  with 
great  applause;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x  17.1  cm. 

1107.  JENNY  LIND'S  WELCOME. -From  Sweden's 
northern  city  (6  vs.)  Air— Lucy  Neale. 

Headed:   "Torr's  Popular  Songs,  1";  publ.  J.  Torr  (1); 
with  six  songs  on  verso. 

Three  negro  singers,  seated,  with  instruments,  en- 
closed in  t.  o.  border.  24.5  x  1S.8  cm. 

1108.  JENNY  JONES. -M3;  name's  Edward  Morgan  I  live 
in  Llangollen  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  687;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

1109.  JENNY  WHO  LIVES  IN  THE  DELL.-Ofe.'  the  fairies 
have  not  all  departed  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  1079;  Music  obtained  of  C.  M.  Tremaine; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers.  22.3  x 
15  cm. 

1110.  JEREMY  DIDDLE R.-Mzss  Nicholls  lodged  on  the 
first  floor  (7  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Frank  Lum,  the  celebrated  comic  vocalist; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.6  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  968;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  25.6  x  15.6  cm. 

1111.  JERSEY-BLUE  HANDKERCHIEF. -Co we  all  you 
vifes  and  maidens,  and  attention  give  to  me  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "I'm  A  Merry  Laughing  Girl";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Written  by  S.  S.  Sanford  and  sung  at  Sanford's  Opera 
House,  Philadelphia;  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Billheads, 
etc.   [printed  twice;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  13  cm. 

1112.  JERSEY  CALVES.-/  am  a  jolly  roving  hlade,  and 
in  Jersey  I  was  bred  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x  16  cm. 

1113.  THE  JERSEY  FISHERMAN. -OoM;rz  near  the  Battery 
(4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Dick  McGowan,  the  great  Favorite 
Banjoist. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  cop.]    25  x  17  cm. 

1114.  THE  JERSEY  LOVERS. -0/ a  heart-rending  tradgidy 
(6  vs.) 


A  pathetic  ballad,  composed  by  Eug.  T.  Johnston,  and 
sung  by  Bryant's,  Wood's  and  Campbell's  Minstrels;  music 
obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.9  x  16.3  cm. 

1115.  "JERSEY  SAM"  OR,  50  YEARS  PlGO.— Oh  I  was 
bom  in  Jerssey  [sic],  and  of  that  I  am  going  to  sing  (5  vs.) 
and  chor.) 

Advs:  By  sending  Johnson  40  cts.  and  Cards,  Circu- 
lars, Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (2).   20.6  x  12.3  cm. 

1116.  JESSIE  THE  FLOWER  OF  DUMBLANE.-Tfee  snn 
[sic]  has  gone  doum  on  the  lofty  Ben  Lomond   (6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.4  cm. 

1117.  JIM  CROW.— Cowe  listen,  all  ye  gals  and  boys,  I'm 
just  com.e  from  Tucke-o  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.2  x  14.8  cm. 

1118.  JIM  HOLMES.  A  PARODY  ON  BEN  BOLT.-Ofe, 
don't  you  remember  the  b'hoys,  Jim  Holmes  (4  vs.) 

By  one  of  the  B'hoys. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Without  commas  in  first  line  and  apostrophe  in 
author's  name;]  sheet  no.  299;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.8  x  16  cm. 

1119.  JIMMY  RIDDLE.— Wow,  I'll  tell  you,  if  I  can,  of  a 
pretty  girl  called  Nan  (5  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Harry  Richmond;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.4  x  16  cm. 

1120.  THE  JOCKEY  HAT  AND  FEATHER.-As  I  was 
walking  out,  one  day  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Ben  Cotton. 

a.  Varying:   "Sung  by  W.  N.  Smith,  the  great  bone-player, 
of  Bailey's  Circus;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  "THE"  in  title,  comma  in  first  line,  and 
singer's  name;]  music  publ.  by  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  25  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  226,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  in  bronze  ink.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  952;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1121.  JOE  BOWERS.— My  name  is  Joe  Bowers,  I've  got  a 
brother  Ike  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.   25  X  16  cm. 

1122.  JOE  BUGGIN'S  WEDDING. -My  tulips  all,  I'll  tell  a 
ditty  (9  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  16.8  cm. 

1123.  JOE  HARDY.  — yes,  /  know  that  you  once  were  my 
lover  (6  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co.;   [sold]  also  at 
Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 


76 


a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.3  x  17  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.6  x  16  cm. 

1124.  JOHN  ANDERSON,  MY  JO.— John  Anderson,  my  Jo, 
John  (4  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  With  ",  John"  added  to  title;  3  additional  vs.;  long 
lines;  advs:  You  will  save  25  per  cent,  and  See  these  New 
Songs,  just  published;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  15  cm. 

1125.  JOHN  BROWN.— /niiarper's  Ferry  section,  they 
have  had  an  insurrection  (10  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.— "The 
other  side  of  Jordan." 

a.  By  C.  A.  Boggs;  Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  Young 
Monkey  Craze  Association,  and  the  public  in  general; 
Published  for  the  diffusion  of  facts  as  they  are,  and  to 
let  people  know  what  they  aint.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  With  semi-colon  after  "BROWN"  in  title  and  with 
"Or,  The  Happy  Land  of  Canaan"  added;  [without  Air;] 
publ.  Walter  Warren  (4);  printed  above  border:  "The  Song 
called  the  Wish  just  out". 

T.  o.  border.  21  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

1126.  JOHN  BROWN.— So  many  things  were  written  about 
heroes  of  old  (10  vs.)  Can  be  sung  to  the  tune  of  "Caroline 
of  Edingburghtown, "  "New  Jersa, "  or  "Root  Hog  or  Die." 

By  John  L.  Zieber;  headed:   Zieber's  Popular  Editions; 
publ.  John  L.  Zieber;  adv:  original  song,  called  "Handy 
Andy". 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  14.7  cm. 

1127.  JOHN  BROWN  SONG.— Jote  Brovm's  body  lies  a 
m.ouldering  in  the  grave  (6  vs.  and  chors.  with  first  line 
repeated  in  the  second) 

a.  Title:  "Glory  Hally,  Hallelujah!  Or  The  John  Brown 
Song.";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.5  x 
16.5  cm. 

c.  Title:   "John  Brown's  Original  Marching  Song"; 
Tune.— Brothers,  will  you  meet  me;  with  one  chorus;  with 
hyphen  between  "a  mouldering"  in  first  line;  publ.  Auner 
(5). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  14.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks' 
Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  different  adv:  Johnson's  New  Cata- 
logue of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  21  x  12  cm. 

f.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  95,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  Title:  "Glory  Hally,  Hallelujah,  or  the  John  Brovm 
Song";  subheaded  "Hip,  Hip,  Hip,  Hurrah!";  sheet  no.  519; 
publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15.5  cm. 

h.   Title:  "John  Brown  and  Jeff  Davis";  one  chorus;  with 
"mould'ring"  in  first  line;  publ.  Walter  Warren  (2). 
T.  o.  border;  ornate  fountain.   24.3  x  15.7  cm. 


1.    With  "Brown's"  in  title;  sheet  no.  868;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15. 5  cm. 

1128.  JOHN  BROWN  SO^G .-Old  John  Brown  lies 
a-mouldering  in  the  grave.  (5  vs.)   Words  that  can  be  sung 
to  the  "Hallelujah  Chorus." 

Headed:   "Original  Version  of  the";  the  author  of  the 
original  John  Brown  Song  is  H.  H.  Brownell,  of  Hartford; 
published  by  the  Supervisory  Committee  for  Recruiting 
Colored  Regiments.  24  x  I6  cm. 

1129.  JOHN  BROWN  SONG.  NO.  2. -John  Brown's  body 
lies  a  mouldering  in  the  grave  (6  vs.  and  chor.  with  second 
line  starting  "while  weep  the  sons  of  bondage".) 

a.  Title:   "Glory  Hallelujah.  No.  3.   Or  New  John  Brown 
Song";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  17  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  964;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  22.4  x  13.2  cm. 

1130.  JOHN  BULL,  OR  ANY  OTHER  MAN.-Oar  Country, 
is  in  trouble,  which  no  one  can  deny  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  20.5  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Title:   "Any  Other  Man.  Or  John  Bull";  with  colon 
after  "trouble"  in  first  line;  By  Walter  W.  Warren;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.3  x  17  cm. 

c.  "Or  Any  Other  Man"  in  quotation  marks;  publ.  John- 
son (2);  adv:  Jolinson's  New  Catalogue. 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  14.6  cm. 

d.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  Composed  by  Walter  W. 
Warren,  and  dedicated  to  James  Thomas,  Esq.;  Sung  by 
Bill  Worrell  at  the  Music  Hall,  N.W.  Cor.  6th  and  Chestnut; 
publ.  Walter  Warren  (6). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  13  cm. 

e.  Title:  "Any  Other  Man.  Or  John  Bull";  with  colon 
after  "trouble"  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  956;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.2  x  14  cm. 

1131.  JOHN  BULL'S  BLOCKADE  PLAYED  OVT.-Cheer 
up,  you  Sons  and  Daughters ,  we  have  the  battle  won  (7  vs.) 
Air:   Lovely  Molly,  O! 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  varying  punctuation  in 
Air;  By  F.  Collins;   sheet  no.  918;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

1132.  JOHN  DEAN  AND  HIS  OWN  MARY  ANN.  OR,  THE 
GALLANT  YOUNG  COACHMAN  AND  THE  CRUEL 
FATHER.— Oft  listen  to  me  while  a  story  I  tell  (16  vs.) 
Air- Villikins  and  his  Dinah. 

With  2  lines  of  "Moral". 

a.  Print.  Andrews.  23.7  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title  or  period  at  end;]  with 
"FAHER"  and  "&"  in  title;  headed:   "Only  Complete  Edi- 
tion Published!";  publ.  Johnson  (3).  22.5  x  14  cm.  (cropped) 

1133.  JOHN  DEAN  AND  HIS  OWN  MARY  ANN  NO.  2.-Tts 
of  a  rich  merchant  who  in  Gotham  did  dwell  (10  vs.)  Air— 
Villikins  and  his  Dinah. 

From  the  New  York  Picayune. 


77 


a.  Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15  cm. 

1134.  JOHN  DEAN  THE  GALLANT  YOUNG  COACHMAN 
AND  HIS  OWN  MARIANNA.  NO.  3. -In  Westchester 
County  a  merchant  did  dwell  (11  vs.)  Air— Villikins  and 
his  Dinah. 

By  John  F.  Doyle. 

a.  PubL  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.6  x  15  cm. 

1135.  JOHN  JONES,  THE  COMPANION  TO  "BEN 
BOhT."— Don't  you  remember  lame  Sally,  John  Jones 
(5  vs.) 

Publ.  C.  Clausen  Myers. 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1136.  JOHN  MITCHEL,  THE  IRISH  PATRIOT  AND 
EXILE.— He's  come,  he  has  come,  the  Steamer  is  landing 
(3  vs.)  Air.— Hail  to  the  Chief. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1137.  JOHNNY  BULL  AND  BROTHER  JONATHAN. -Come, 
Sogers,  take  your  muskets  up  (4  vs.)  Air:   Yankee  Doodle. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  punctuation  and  capitalization  of  "Sogers"  in 
first  line;]  By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  669;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1138.  JOHNNY  DOYLE.—/  am  a  fair  maiden,  all  tangled 
in  love  (11  vs.) 

a.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  864. 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23  x  15.4  cm. 

1139.  JOHNNY,  FILL  UP  THE  BOWL  I— i46ra»z  Lincoln, 
what  yer  'bout  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  publ.  Auner. 
A-J  border;  eagle.  20  x  13.9  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  Composed  by  Saul  Sertrew;  Free-and-Easy  Song; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26.3  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.  22  x  14.2  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.   25.5  x  16  cm. 

g.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Trumpeter  with  sign  "Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor, 
price  15  cents".  24  x  16  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  with  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor.  24.5  x  15  cm. 


i.    Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs . 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  motto  "E   Pluribus  Unum". 
24.5  X  15.5  cm. 

j.    Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  the  Ringgold 
Artillery  of  Reading,  Pa.;  first  line  beginning  "Abraham"; 
adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  41a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  176,  col.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  175,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12  cm. 

m.  Title  varying:  "Johnny,  Fill  up  th  [sic]   Bowl.";  by 
Saul  Sertrew;  Free-and-Easy  Song;  first  line  beginning 
"Abraham";  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus 
(2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  176,  col.  20.3 
X  12.7  cm. 

n.   [Without  exclamation  mark  in  title;]  by  Saul  Sertrew; 
Free-and-Easy  Song;  sheet  no.  1152;  publ.  Wrigley 
[address  blank]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  14.2  cm. 

1140.  JOHNNY,  FILL  UP  THE  BOWLI-Je/^.  Davis  is  a 
stupid  fool  (5  vs.)  Tune.— When  Johnny  Comes  Marching 
Home. 

a.  Headed:  "New";  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill 
Heads,  Circulars,  etc.,  the  Largest  and  best  selection  of 
Songs,  and  Ball  Room  Monitor,  by  Prof.  C.  Brooks. 

Angel  blowing  trumpet,  with  globe  and  eagle.  24  x 
15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  but  without  adv.  for  Ball  Room  Monitor.] 
Eagle  with  flag.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  comma  and  exclamation  mark  in  title.] 
Eagle  with  shield  and  motto  "United  States  of  Amer- 
ica".  16  X  13  cm.  (cropped) 

1141.  JOHNNY  FILL  UP  THE  BOWL.  NEW  VERSION.- 
Up  Freem,an,  up  and  volunteer  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  tjorder;  eagle  with  shield  and  military  symbols. 
24  X  15.5  cm. 

1142.  JOHNNY,  I  HARDLY  KNEW  YE.-When  on  the  road 
to  Switarthy,  ahoo,  ahoo!  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1641;  2nd  song:   "Beautiful  Sally". 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1143.  JOHNNY  IS  GONE  FOR  A  SOLDIER.-/'Zi  trace 
these  gardens  o'er  and  o'er  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  Union  soldier  with  rifle.  21  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (4).  24  x  15  cm. 

c.  Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia; 
[with  ROCK  ME  TO  SLEEP,  MOTHER  on  verso.] 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  22  x  13.5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  soldier  with  plumed  hat.  25  x  I6  cm. 

e.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  sold  by  Par- 
tridge (2);  sheet  no.  703. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 


78 


1144.  JOHNNY  hAVJ.— Now  if  you'll  listen,  while  I  sing 
(4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   The  Baby-Show. 

As  sung  by  Dick  Parker,  Ethiopian  Comedian;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

1145.  JOHNNY  SCUMOKER.-Johnny  Schmoker,  Johnny 
Schmoker  (65  lines) 

a.  With  59  lines;  publ.  Auner  (5);   [with  SECESSIA  LAND 
on  verso.] 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  With  narrative  beginning:   "In  this  song,  an  old  German 
musician  tells  his  friend,  Johnny  Schmoker";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Long  lines;  sheet  no.  812;  publ.  Partridge  (6). 
T.  o.  border.  22.9  x  16.9  cm. 

1146.  JOHNNY'S  PRAYER.-"OMrFaifeer.'"  (19  lines) 
Copied  from  a  Soldier's  Letter. 

a.  Multi-line  border.  23.1  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

1147.  JOHNNY'S  SO  BASHFULI-Tfeey  tell  me  the  roses 
are  leaving  my  cheek  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border;  comic  figure  of  a  man. 
25.6  X  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  960;  2nd  song:   "Flowing  Hair";  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

1148.  JOLLY  DOGS.-r/jere  is  a  lot  of  jolly  dogs  (6  vs. 
and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  i6.5  cm. 

1149.  JOLLY  JACK  THE  ROVER.-Kere  /  am  one,  and 
still  will  be  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1150.  THE  JOLLY  OLD  CROW.-On  the  limb  ob  an  oak 
sat  a  jolly  old  crow  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  nightly  with  shouts  of  applause,  by  Charley  White, 
at  his  Opera  House,  49  Bowery,  N.Y.;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.8  cm. 

1151.  THE  JOLLY  RAFTMEN  OF  THE  SUSQUEHANNA 
RIVER.— Our  honest  Pennsylvanians ,  to  labor  they're 
inclined  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Root  Hog  or  Die." 

Composed  for  the  hardy  sons  of  Pennsylvania  by 
James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  13.5  cm. 

1152.  THE  JOLLY  69TH. -Cowe,  ould  Erin,  raise  your 
head  (9  vs.)  Air:   Paddies  Evermore. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  25.5  x  15.7  cm. 

1153.  JOLLY  SPREE.— My  song  relates  about  the  time 
(8  vs.) 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25  x 
16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  191;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.4  x   16.2  cm. 

1154.  THE  JOLLY  YOUNG  WATERMAN.-Anrf  did  you  not 
hear  of  a  jolly  young  waterman  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  583;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THAT'S  WHAT'S 
THE  MATTER  NO.  3  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1155.  JORDAN  IS  A  HARD  ROAD  TO  TRAVEL.-/  am 
guine  to  sing  a  song  and  I'l  [sic]  make  it  as  I  go  (6  vs.  and 
chor.) 

As  written  and  sung  by  Phil  Rice,  the  Celebrated  Ban- 
joist;  [publ.]  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   25.6  x  14.5  cm. 

1156.  JORDAN  IS  A  HARD  ROAD  TO  TRAVEL.  NO.  3.- 
Abraham  and  Isaac  sat  down  to  play  the  cards  (6  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

1157.  JORDAN  IS  A  HARD  ROAD  TO  TRAVEL.  NO.  4.- 
Of  all  the  banjo  songs  that  have  been  sung  of  late  (7  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.8  x  15  cm. 

1158.  JORDAN  IS  A  HARD  ROAD  TO  TRAVEL.  NO.  5.- 
Oh,  I  lookee  to  de  East,  an'  I  loookee  [sic]  to  de  West 

(7  vs.  and  chor.) 
Print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  15  cm. 

1159.  JORDAN  IS  A  HARD  ROAD  TO  TRAVEL.  NO.  6.- 
/  am.  going  to  sing  a  song,  and  funny  it  will  be  (5  vs.  and 
2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15  cm. 

1160.  JOSEPH  TUCK.—/'  am  Joseph  Tuck,  the  tailor's  son, 
a  poor  but  honest  blade,  sirs  (8  vs.)  Air:   Bow  wow  wow. 

As  sung  by  Gus.  Shaw;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

1161.  JOSIAH  BROWN. -0/!.'  here  I  am  a  county  gal  (6  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— My  Mary  Ann. 

Words  by  G.  W.  Anderson,  Irish  Vocalist;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

1162.  JOYS  THAT  WE'VE  TASTED. -Joys  that  we've 
tasted  may  sometimes  return  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Pirate's  Chorus". 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.5 
cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  987;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1163.  JUBAL  E.—Oh,  Gray  backs,  did  you  sec  Old  Early, 
with  his  Beef  steak  colored  face  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air- 
Kingdom's  Coming. 


79 


By  John  L.  Zieber;  published  and  sung  by  James  D. 
Gay;  adv:   Gay's  illustrated  Army  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  battle  scene  of  cavalry  within  orna- 
mental frame.   19.7  x  12.7  cm. 

1164.  JUDGE  NOT  A  MAN  BY  THE  COST  OF  HIS 
CLOTHING.— Jwd^g^e  not  a  man  by  the  cost  of  his  clothing 
(6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]   sheet  no.  691;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

1165.  JUDY  BAKER.— 7  did  love  a  pretty  girl  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25.4  x  17  cm. 

1166.  JUDY  CALLAGHAN'S  ANSWER  TO  BARNEY 
BRALLAGHAN.— Poor  Judy  in  a  fright,  at  Barney's  voice 
awaking  (7  vs.) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   23  x  14.2  cm. 


1167.  JUDY  O'DOGHERTY.-7'w  going  to  sing  about 
Paddy  O'Rafferty  (4  vs.) 

A  Favorite  Comic  Song— as  sung  by  Edward  Berry. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  [Without  "A  Favorite  Comic  Song  .  .  .";]  sheet  no. 
295;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.7  x  16  cm. 

1168.  JULIUS'  BRIDE. -RTzeK  /  liv'd  'way  down  in  old 
Virginny  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.   23.7  x  19.3  cm. 

1169.  JULIUS'S  TRIP  TO  THE  WORLDS'S  FAIR.  — Twelve 
months  ago  I  left  this  place  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   23.8  x  15.5  cm. 


1170.  JUMP!   JUMP!    JUMP!  OUR  FRIENDS  ARE 
COMING.— 0«  the  island,  here,  we  sit  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air:   Tramp!    the  Prisoner's  Hope. 

Written  in  the  Bummer's  Cell,  on  Blackwell's  Island, 
by  One  of  'em. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   26  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  With  "Bummer's  Cell"  and  "One  of  'em"  in  quotation 
marks;  sheet  no.  1333;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

1171.  JUNEY  AT  THE  GATE,  IN  MISSISSIPPI  STATE. - 
Pearl  River's  side  is  far  away,  in  Mississippi  State  (5  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Pubis.  Johnson  (2),  and  Auner  and  Johnson;  adv:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15.8  cm. 


1172.  JUST  AFTER  THE  BATTLE,  MOrHER.-Still  upon 
the  field  of  battle  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  George  F.  Root.] 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "Mother"  in  title;]  music  obtained  of  Fred- 
erick Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De  IVIarsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

d.  [Title  as  above;]   [publ.]  Doyle  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  22  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  [Without  "Just"  in  title  and  comma;]  music  published 
by  Root  &  Cady  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  adv:   600  different  kinds  of  songs;  with 
Johnson's  imprint  cropped. 

A-J  border.  20  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  [Without  "Just"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  21.8  x 
11.5  cm. 

h.   Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  166,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

i.    Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Bal- 
lads [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  193,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20  x  12.6  cm. 

j.    [Without  "Mother"  in  title;]  sheet  no.  910;  music  by 
Root  &  Cady;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19  x  12.7  cm. 

1173.  JUST  AS  OF  OhD\— Just  as  of  old,  the  moments 
come  and  go  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner];  publ.  Auner 
(5);  Music  obtained  at  Winner's  Music  Store  (3). 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1174.  JUST  BEFORE  THE  BATTLE,  MOTHER. -Jwsi 
before  the  battle,  mother  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;   eagle  with  flag.  23  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  without  period  at  end  of  title,  and  eagle.] 
23  X  14.7  cm. 

c.  With  "Mother"  in  first  line;  Music  obtained  of  Fred- 
erick Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  26  x  16.6  cm. 

e.  Publ.  Doyle  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.4  cm. 

f.  Adv:  Soldiers  can  receive  14  Songs  by  addressing 
G.  P.  Hardwick. 

Letter  paper;  green  ink;  t.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  Music  published  by  Root  and  Cady  (2);  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  t.  o.  border.   23.5  x  13.2  cm. 

i.     [As  above;]  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  24.5  x  14  cm. 

j.     By  Geo.  F.  Root;  published  by  Root  &  Cady  (2);  adv: 
500  Illustrated  Ballads;  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 


80 


Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  39,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  152,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

1.    [As  above;  without  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads;]  hdpc. 
Magnus  174,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

m.  [As  above;  without  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;]  hdpc. 
Magnus  120,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

n.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  172,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  11.7  cm. 

1175.  KATE  KEARNEY.-O;;.'  did  you  ne'er  hear  of  Kate 
Kearney^  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "The  Answer";  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1176.  KATE  WAS  ONCE  A  LITTLE  GIRL.-ifate  was  once 
a  little  girl  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.5  x 
16.5  cm. 

1177.  KATHLEEN  MAVOUREEN  [sic]. -Kathle en  Mavour - 
ne en!  the  gray  daum  is  breaking  (4  vs.) 

A  Popular  Irish  Ballad;  [print.  Andrews;]  with  Astley'E 
imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15.3  cm. 

1178.  KATTY  O'RANN.-Was  not  Patrick  O'Lilt,  sure,  a 
broth  of  a  lad  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1195;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1179.  KATY  DARLING. -O,  they  tell  me  thou  art  Dead, 
Katy  Darling  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.2 
cm. 

1180.  KATY  DEAN.-/'w  deep  in  lub  wid  a  colored  gal  dat 
came  from  Tennessee  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music,  with  Piano  Forte  Accompaniment,  published  by 
Wm.  Hall  &  Son,  New  York;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border  with  ornamental 
corners;  hdpc.   Magnus  222,  col.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

KEARSARGE  AND  ALABAMA,  see  THE  SINKING  OF 
THE  PIRATE  ALABAMA. 

1181.  KEEP  THE  COUNTRY  FREE.-Ofc,  you're  gentle 
and  simple,  noble  and  sublime  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Dedicated  to  Captain  Timothy  Mealley. 

a.  Headed:    "Second  Edition";  adv:  Song  can  be  had  at 
440  Monroe  Street;  print.  J.  W.  Du  Bree. 

Double-line  border.  22.9  x  13.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  heading  "Third  Edition".  22.6 
X  13.5  cm. 


1182.  KEYSTONE  BRIGADE. -Hurrah  for  our  brave 
Pennsylvanians  (7  vs.)  Air— Columbia,  the  Gem  of  the 
Ocean. 

a.  Composed  by  Lieut.  Jas.  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia; 
Copyright  Not  Secured;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border,  seal  of  Pennsylvania.  22.8  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "Columbia"  in  Air;]  Composed 
by  Lieut.  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia;  formerly  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Ringgold  Artillery  .  .  .  ;  Copy  Right  Secured. 

A-J  border;  seal  of  Pennsylvania.   23.5  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  adv:  Sold  Wholesale  at  300  North 
20th  St.   21  X  12.7  cm  (cropped) 

d.  [As  above,  with  "Pennsylvanian's"  in  first  line;]  publ. 
for  the  Union  Soldiers  by  James  D.  Gay;  with  four  verses. 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  43  [without  figure  of  man], 
col.  21  X  13.3  cm. 

e.  With  6  vs.  and  chor.;  composed,  published  and  sung  by 
James  D.  Gay;  adv:  All  Of  Gay's  war  songs;  [with  BATTLE 
CRY  OF  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  RESERVES  on  recto.] 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  24.7  x  17.4  cm 

f.  Title:   "The  Union  Soldiers'  Song";  composed  by 
Lieutenant  James  D.  Gay  of  Philadelphia;  Formerly  a 
member  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery  .  .  .  ;  Copy  Right  Se- 
cured; cop:   1861,  J.  Magee,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border  with  motto  "Liberty 
and  Union  Forever"  and  flags  in  red  and  blue  at  upper 
corners.  20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

1183.  THE  KILLED  BY  THE  ACCIDENT  ON  THE  NORTH 
PENNSYLVANIA  RAIL  ROAD,  JULY  17TH,  1856. -Come, 
all  ye  m.en  and  ladies,  pay  attention  to  these  lines  (13  vs.) 

With  a  list  of  the  dead  at  top  of  page. 

T.  o.  border,  mourning  woman  at  tomb.  26  x  17.2  cm. 

1184.  KIND  FRIENDS  ARE  NEAR  HER.-SZee/)  noble  hero 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Answer  to  "Who  will  care  for  Mother  now?";  words 
by  Ednor  Rossiter;  music  by  B.  F.  Walters. 

a.  Music  may  be  had  at  Lee  &  Walker's  Music  Store; 
Lee  &  Walker,  Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  22.9  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Without  quotes  around  "Who  will  care  .  .  .";]  with 
"Know"  instead  of  "now";  with  4  vs.  in  2  and  2  chors.; 
music  obtained  at  Lee  and  Walker's;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
advs:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  and  Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  15. 1  cm. 

1185.  KIND  RELATIONS.- W^e  all  have  our  share  of  the 
ups  and  downs  (6  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

1186.  KIND  WORDS. -O/z,  give  me  kind  words  for  my 
morning  meal  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Kinds  Words  Can  Never  Die";  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15.5  cm. 

1187.  KINDLING  WOOD  MAN.— In  Netv-York  city,  there 
used  to  live  a  gen'rous  man  who  made  (3  vs.  and  1  vs. 
spoken) 

a.  2nd  song:  "Dashing  White  Sergeant";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 


81 


b.  By  John  W  Cross,  and  sung  bj'  C  Hilton  the  favorite 
banjoist;  2nd  song:  "Scenes  That  Are  Brightest";  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.9  x  15.5  cm. 

1188.  KINGDOM  COMING.— S23;,  darkeys,  hab  you  seen  de 
Massa  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Henry  C.  Work.] 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3);  with  street  number  in  wood- 
block. 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x   16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  street  number  in  type.   25.7  x 
16.5  cm. 

c.  With  first  line  reading:   "Say  Darkies!  did  you  see  ole 
massa";  As  Originally  Sung  by  Mrs.  C.  Henri,  Arch 
Street  Theatre;  adv:   Cash  Paid  For  Old  Books  Of  All 
Descriptions,  at  the  Cheap  Book  Stand,  Delaware  Avenue, 
below  Market  St.  Philadelphia. 

Soldier  with  sword,  in  right-hand  column.   19.7  x 
13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  but  with  figure  of  soldier  with  sword,  in 
left-hand  column.   24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  but  with  advs:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Cir- 
culars, etc.,  and  Ball  Room  Monitor;  [publ.]  Johnson  (2). 

Seated  man  waving  top  hat.  23.9  x  14.8  cm. 

f.  [As  above,  without  advs.;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  2nd  song. 
"That's  What's  The  Matter".  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

g.  With  first  line  reading:   "Say,  darkies!  did  you  see  old 
massa";  [publ.  Johnson;]  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.2  cm.  (cropped) 

h.  [As  above,  without  adv.;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  19.6  x 
11.7  cm. 

i.    Copied  by  permission  of  Root  &  Cady,  Music  Pub- 
lishers (2),  owners  of  the  copyright;  As  sung  by  Dan 
Bryant;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  167,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  13. 1  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  but  with  rule  above  adv.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

k.  [As  above;]  but  with  different  adv:  Magnus' Orna- 
mental and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  167,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.9  cm. 

1.    Sheet  no.  778;  Sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19  x  10.7  cm. 

m.  Sheet  no.  1087;  copied  by  permission  of  Root  &  Cady, 
Music  Publishers  (2),  owners  of  the  copyright;  As  sung  by 
Dan  Bryant;  publ.  Wrigley  [without  address]. 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1189.  THE  KISS.— Tfee  kiss,  dear  maid,  thy  lips  have  left 
(2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  969;  2nd  song:  "When  We  Dwell  On  The 
Lips";  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.6  x  14.3  cm. 

THE  KISS,  see  also  THE  SPELL  IS  BROKEN. 

1190.  KISS  AND  BE  FRIENDS.-/,  from  childhood,  was 
always  to  friendship  inclin'd  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  836;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.2  x  14.1  cm. 


1191.  KISS  ME  GOOD-NIGHT,  MOTHER. -Mof/zer,  dear 
Mother,  the  day  has  seemed  long  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet-Music  published  by  Russell  &  Patee,  owners  of 
the  copyright. 

a.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "Good-Night"  in  title;  and 
hyphen  in  "copy-right";  without  "Sheet"  before  "Music";] 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  sheet  no.  118;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with 
COME,  OH!  COME  WITH  ME  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

KISS  ME,  MOTHER,  AND  LET  ME  GO,  see  THE 
NATION'S  LAST  CALL. 

1192.  KISS  ME  MOTHER,  KISS  YOUR  DARLING. -if iss  me, 
m.other,  kiss  your  darling  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Tommy  Bree;  publ.  Boyd  (2);  advs:   Boyd's 
Novel  Exchange,  and  2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  13.3  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  points  in  title;  3  chors;  sheet  no. 
700. 

T.  o.  border.   17.3  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

1193.  KISS  ME  QUICK  AND  GO.-The  other  night  while  I 
was  sparking  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  by  Silas  S.  Steele;  music  had  of  Firth,  Pond  & 
Co.  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.9  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Copied  by  permission  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1),  music 
publishers. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  242a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.2  X  12.7  cm. 

1194.  KISSING  ON  THE  SLY.— ffis  manly  whiskers  swept 
her  cheek  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  Music 
Publishers,  owners  of  the  copyright;  adv:   500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  247a,  col.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

1195.  KISSING  THRO'  THE  BABS.  —  'Twas  in  a  grove,  I 
m.et  my  love  (8  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  Winner  &  Kerk's;  written  by  Gen. 
Wm.  F.  Small. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  24.9  x  16.3  cm. 

1196.  KITES  ARE  Y\nWG.— Kites  are  flying  through  the 
air  (4  vs.)  Air:   Highland  Laddie. 

An  Acrostic  [Kate  Emma  Shindler];  by  Archibald 
Scott;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.2  x  16. 8 
cm. 

1197.  KITTY  CLYDE. -O,  who  has  not  seen  Kitty  Clyde 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 


82 


Written  and  composed  by  L.  V.  H.  Crosb}';  music  had 
of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.9  x  15.8  cm. 

1198.  KITTY  KIMO. —Dar  was  a  frog  lived  in  a  spring 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  arranged  by  Charles  White,  and  sung 
nightly,  by  Old  Dan  Eramit,  with  thunders  of  Applause.   If 
you  want  to  spend  a  pleasant  evening  and  enjoy  a  hearty 
laugh,  go  to  White's  Melodeon,  53  Bowery. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.2  x  16.8  cm. 

1199.  KITTY  WELLS. -KoM  ask  what  makes  this  darkie 
weep  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21.8  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  Music  by  Chas.  E.  Atherton;  publ.  S.  T.  Gordon  (1). 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  224a,  col.  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  224b,  col.  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

1200.  KNOW  NOTHING  SOHG.-Our  banner  stiU  waves,  the 
proud  boast  of  our  nation  (4  vs.)  Air— Grave  of  Bonaparte. 

Adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc.  printed  and 
sold  wholesale  at  [blank  space);  publ.  Johnson  (2)  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  24.8  x  15.1  cm. 

1201.  KNOW  YE  THE  LAND. -ifraow;  ye  the  land  where  the 
red  men  late  roam.ed  (4  vs.) 

By  the  late  Hezekiah  Niles  of  Baltimore. 
Triple-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   18.5  x 
12.1  cm. 

1202.  KOLE  OIL  TOMMY. -/'ve  come  from  Pennsylvania 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  E.  C.  Melville,  at  the  Metropolitan 
Theater;  publ.  Boyd  (2);  advs:  Boyd's  Novel  Exchange,  and 
2,000  Plays  for  Sale;  music  publ.  by  M.  Grey. 

T.  o.  border.   21.5  x  13  cm. 

1203.  DIE  LADIES  IN  AMERIKA.-Ja,  das  schonste  Leben 
(3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  69;  [publ.]  Magnus  (2),  Deutsche  und 
englische  Buchdruckerei;  zu  haben  bei  A.  Maierhofer, 
Buchhandler. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border.   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

1204.  THE  LADIES'  MAN.-/'»n  quite  a  ladies  man,  in  fact, 
the  belles  they  all  declare  (2  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.4  x  15.8  cm. 

1205.  LADIES'  WELCOME l-WeZcome,  welcome,  ladies, 
here  (9  vs.) 

Written  expressly  for  the  occasion  by  J.  B.  Quinby, 
and  sung  by  the  audience  at  the  great  meeting  of  the 
National  Union  Association  at  Smith  &  Ditson's  Hall,  on 
Friday  Evening,  May  8th,  1863;  The  Ladies  by  Special 
Invitation  being  Present.   19  x  7.5  cm.  (cropped  unevenly) 

1206.  THE  LADS  WHO  LIVE  IN  IRELAND,  OR  WHERE 
THE  APPLE  PRATIES  GROW.-A/y  name  is  Ned  O'Nanney, 
I  was  bom  in  sweet  Killarncy  (4  vs.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Jas.  Seymour,  at  Niblos,  in  the 
"Duke's  Motto";  music  to  be  had  of  H.  B.  Dodworth;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 


De  Marsan  ship  border  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

1207.  LAGER-BEER  JACOB. -Oey  sing  apout  dere 
Champagne  Swells,  all  ofer  in  dis  town  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Parody  on  Champagne  Charley  by  J.  L.  S.;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1208.  LAGER  BIER  'S.O^Q.—Now  ladies  and  gentlemen, 
just  in  tim.e  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Jerry  Merrifield,  Sanford  and  Rochez,  Come- 
dians and  Vocalists,  at  the  Arcade  Concert  Saloon,  127 
Grand  Street,  with  unanimous  approbation;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.7  x  16  cm. 

1209.  THE  LAKE  OF  THE  DISMAL  SWAMP. -TAey  made 
her  a  grave,  too  cold  and  damp  (8  vs.) 

a.  Title:   "Dismal  Swamp!";  8  vs.  in  4  vs.;  slight  varia- 
tions in  te.xt. 

A-J  border.  20.3  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  With  narrative  at  top  beginning:   "They  tell  of  a  young 
man  who  lost  his  mind  upon  the  death  of  a  girl  he  loved 

.  .  .";  footnote  at  bottom  beginning:   "The  great  Dismal 
Swamp  is  ten  or  twelve  miles  distant  from  Norfolk  .  .  ."; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

1210.  THE  LAKE-SIDE  SHORE.— Suwzmer's  breath  is 
lightly  fallin  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

1211.  LAMENTATION  FOR  J.  P.  DONNELLY. ->1Z/ you, 
who're  tender  heaHed,  come  and  listen  to  my  song  (7  vs.) 
Gaelic  Air. 

Words  by  H.  J.  Howard;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  23  x  15. 3  cm. 

1212.  LAMENTATION  OF  JAMES  RODGERS. -Come  all 
you  tender  Christians,  I  hope  you  will  draiv  near  (12  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  879. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22.6  x  13.8  cm. 

1213.  A  LAMENTATION  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  JAMES  P. 
DONNELLY,  WHO  WAS  HANGED  AT  FREEHOLD,  N.J., 
ON  THE  EIGHTH  OF  JANUARY,  1858. -Come  all  you 
tender  Christians ,  I  pray  you  lend  an  ear  (7  vs.) 

Headed:   "A  New  Song";  "It  is  generally  thought  inno- 
cent, for  the  Murder  of  Alfred  S.  Moses,  at  the  Sea  View- 
House"  after  title;  Copy  Right  secured  by  the  author 
D.  M'D. 

T.  o.  border.   21.7  x  12.2  cm. 

1214.  LAND  OF  THE  WEST. -Oft,  come  to  the  West, 
love-oh,  come  there  with  me  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.6  x  I6.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  601;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

1215.  THE  LANDLORD'S  PET.-/  was  once  the  landlord's 
pet  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.— There  was  a  Jolly  Miller. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.7  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1022;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 


83 


1216.  LANNEGAN'S  BALL.— 7«  the  town  of  Asthoy  lived 
one  Johnny  Lannegan  (7  vs.) 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  Illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

0.  Adv:   Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border;  gold  ink.   19.4  x  13.2  cm. 

d.   Sheet  no.  1094;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1217.  LARRY  MAGEE'S  WEDDING.-Pay  attention  a  while, 
and  I'll  sing  you  a  ditty  (6  vs.)  Air:    Lannegan's  Ball. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;   hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20  x  12.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1106;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [2-line  imprint]. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  3-line  imprint  upside-down.]   24.3  x 
15  cm. 

1218.  LARRY  MAKER'S  BIG  FIVE-GALLON  JAR.-Come, 
all  you  jolly  sailors  bold,  that  lives  both  near  and  far 

(6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Irish  Jaunting  Car. 

a.  [With  "jaunting  car"  in  Air;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen  between  "Five"  and  "Gallon";]  by 
G.  W.  Watson;  sheet  no.  1144;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1219.  LARRY  O'BRIEN.—/  have  lately  returned  from  the 
ocean  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

1220.  LARRY  O'GAFF.-ATeaj-  a  bog  in  old  Ireland,  and 
sure  I  was  bom  (4  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  649;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  OULD  IRISH  STEW  on  verso.]  22.3  x 
15.5  cm. 

1221.  THE  LASS  OF  GOWRIE. -TuJas  on  a  simmers 
afternoon  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.2  x  16  cm. 

1222.  THE  LASS  THAT  LOVES  A  SAILOR.-T/ze  moon  on 
the  ocean  was  dimmed  by  a  ripple  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "The  Lass  For  A  Sailor";  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.6  x  16. 1  cm. 

1223.  THE  LAST  DITCH!  OR,  DAVIS,  BOOTH  AND  LEE.- 
The  Man  who  once  did  loudly  boast  (3  vs.)  Tune— 'The  Harp 
that  once  thro  Tara's  halls' 

Headed:   "Songs  by  DeWolfe,  the  Wandering  Poet  of 
New  Hampshire";  adv:   some  sour  apple  trees;  2nd  song: 
"-The  President  Who  Wore  His  Wife's  Petticoat." 

Figure  of  a  man  above  each  column;  a  hand  holding  a 


letter  above  1st  song;  and  two  pairs  of  scissors  above  2nd 
song.   20.3  X  11.9  cm. 

1224.  THE  LAST  LINK  IS  BROKEN. -T;!e  lait  link  is 
broken  that  bound  me  to  thee  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "Good  Night." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  13. 7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  [Without  "The"  in  title.] 

A-J  border.   20.3  x  12.3  cm.  (cropped) 

1225.  THE  LAST  OF  THE  ' Kl^hZKUK.' -Off  Cherbourg 
port,  one  summ-er's  day  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

Published  by  Permission  of  J.  Marsh,  Proprietor  of 
the  Copyright;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   23.3  x  15.8  cm. 

1226.  THE  LAST  POTATO.  — 'Tts  my  last,  last  potato 
(3  vs.) 

a.  Parody  on:   'Tis  the  last  Rose  of  Summer';  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.9  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Parody  on  "The  Last  Rose  of  Summer";  sheet  no. 
1199;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  with  2nd  line  of  imprint  beginning 
"Small  Playing  Cards". 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  2nd  line  of  imprint  beginning  "Valen- 
tines".] 24.3  X  15.5  cm. 

1227.  THE  LAST  ROSE  OF  SUMMER.-'Tjs  the  last  rose 
of  summer  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  23.9  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.6  x  16.1  cm. 

c.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  253a,  col.  20.3 

X  12.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  but  with  illustration  of  a  rose  in  place  of 
word  in  title; 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  256, 
col.   20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

1228.  THE  LAST  WORDS  OF  A  GALLANT  SOLDIER. - 
A  father's  gift— in  sunnier  hours  (6  vs .) 

With  preface  beginning:   "Drawing  a  brace  of  pistols 
from  his  breast";  print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  14.7  cm. 

1229.  LATHER  AND  SHAVE. -«  was  in  this  city  not  far 
from,  this  spot  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

1230.  LAUGHING  SONG.— Mj)  story,  yes,  c'est  amoureuse 
(3  vs.) 

From  Auber's  Manon  Lescaut;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clovra  border.   26.1  x  17  cm. 

1231.  LAY  ME  DOWN  AND  SAVE  THE  7'LA.G\-They 
arose,  whose  name  was  legion  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 


84 


Publ.  Boyd;  advs:   Boyd's  Novel  Exchange,  and  2,000 
Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border.   21  x  H.8  cnn. 

1232.  LAZY  CLUB.— My  wife  is  such  a  lazy  turk  (7  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air:   Green  Grow  the  Rushes,  oh! 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  conaic  heads  border.   24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  word  "Air";]  with  quotation  marks  around 
title  of  Air;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   600  different  kinds  of 
Songs. 

A-J  border;  man  scolding  woman.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

LEAFLETS  FOR  SOLDIERS  AND  THEIR  MOTHERS, 
see  THE  NATION'S  LAST  CALL. 

1233.  LEAVE  ME  TO  SLEEP,  BIDDY.  A  PARODY  ON: 
ROCK  ME  TO  SLEEP,  UOTiiEK.-Backward  and  forward 
I'm  reeling  and  tight  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  and  colon  in  title;]  with  quotation 
marks  around  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  1161;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.7  x  15. 5  cm. 

1234.  LEE'S  REBEL  RAID  IN  PENNSYLVANIA. -Greaf 
Lee  came  through  to  the  Keystone  State  (6  vs.)  Tune.— 
"The  Mistletoe  Bough." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc.   24  X  15.5  cm. 

1235.  THE  LEGEND  OF  THE  CLOCK.-T^ze  old  clock 
stands  in  the  library  wall  (8  vs.) 

By  B.  J.  Leedom;  with  narrative  preceding  song  be- 
ginning: "This  clock  was  brought  over  from  England  by 
the  writer's  ancestor  in  1862" 

T.  o.  border  within  two  double-line  borders;  clock. 
25.5  X  19.5  cm. 

1236.  LEONORE.-O^z.'  hie  thee  swiftly  where,  lightly 
falling  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.   26.2  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  adv.  for  the  "Monthly  Singers' 
Journal,"  signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.]  24.5  x 
16.2  cm. 

1237.  LET  ME  DIE  AT  HOME. -A  noble  youth  of  twenty - 
four  (7  vs.)   Tune.  — Farewell,  'tis  a  lonely  sound. 

Written  by  A.  Anderson,  Phila.;  on  the  death  of 
Charles  J.  Wendell,  26th  Regiment  P.  V.   By  special  re- 
quest; Oct.  1863. 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1238.  LET  ME  KISS  HIM  FOR  HIS  MOTHER.-Let  me  kiss 
him,  for  his  m.other  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  3  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border.   23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  With  narrative  preceding  song  beginning:  "The  inci- 
dent which  prompted  this  ballad";  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia; 
[with  DO  THEY  MISS  ME  AT  HOME  on  recto.] 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.   21.5  x  13.5  cm. 


d.  With  narrative  preceding  song  beginning:  "The  inci- 
dent which  prompted  this  ballad";  "Mother"  in  first  line; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.   23  x  15.5  cm. 

e.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  194,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

f.  Advs:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2),  and 
Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  246, 
col.  20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

g.  With  narrative  preceding  song  beginning:  "The  inci- 
dent which  prompted  this  ballad";  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  246, 
col.   21  X  13  cm. 

h.   [Without  period  at  end  of  title.] 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1239.  LET  ME  KISS  HEVI  FOR  HIS  MOTHER. -7«  a  lone 
and  dreary  chamber  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   20.1  x  14.8  cm.  flower  half  of  page 
unevenly  torn). 

1240.  LET  ME  KISS  THIS  MAN  AND  BROTHER. -Z,ei  me 
kiss  this  "Man  and  brother"  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Let 
me  kiss  him  for  his  mother. 

With  narrative  preceding  song  beginning:   "The  inci- 
dent which  prompted  this  ballad";  Composed  by  John  C. 
Cross;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

1241.  LET  THE  REBELS  PUT  THAT  IN  THEIR  PIPES. - 
We  are  the  boys  for  defeating  'em,  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air: 
I  was  the  Boy  for  bewitching  'em. 

By  John  Ross  Dix. 

a.  Advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  116,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  158,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1242.  LET  US  BE  HAPPY  TOGETHER. -Come,  let  us  be 
happy  together  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  933;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1243.  LET  US  LIVE  WITH  A  HOPE.-Lef  us  live  with  a 
hope  for  a  better  day,  Mary  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  3  chors. 
A-J  border.  20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  Johnson 
(3);  advs:   You  will  save  25  per  cent,  and  Cards,  Circulars, 
Billheads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  15.7  cm. 

d.  [Without  comma  after  "day"  in  first  line;]  sheet  no. 
271;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

LET'S  BE  GAY,  see  SLAVE'S  DREAM. 


85 


1244.  THE  LETTER.— jPare  thee  well,  love,  now  thou  art 
going  (7  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Write  To  Me". 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  witii  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1245.  LIBERTY-ALL  HAIL.  NO.  3.— "Great  brother 
guardian  of  old  Afric's  clime  (51  lines) 

Beginning:   "Joel  Barlow,  in  the  Eighth  Book  of  his 
Columbiad";  New  York,  June  10,  1861. 

Red  and  blue  ink;  double-line  border  in  red  and  blue. 
25  X  18  cm. 

1246.  LIBERTY  &  UNION!— Be  traitors  cursed',  accursed 
of  God  (13  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Coyyright  [sic]  Secured;  to  be  had  at  Franklin  Job 
Printing  Establishment. 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  fiag  and  motto 
"Our  Country".  23.3  x  19.2  cm. 

1247.  THE  LIBERTY  POLE.— America's  Bird  has  alighted 
(6  vs.)  Air.- Rosin  the  Bow. 

Sheet  no.  776;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.   21.5 
X  12.6  cm. 

1248.  LIBERTY  TREE.-7«  a  chariot  of  light  from  the 
regions  of  day  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  tree.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  tree.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Publ.  A.  M.  Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  tree.  22.5  x  14  cm.  (cropped) 

1249.  EIN  LIEDLEIN  FUR  DIE  GESCHWISTER  IM  HERRN. 
—Liebe  Geschwister  in  dem  Herm  (20  vs.) 

[Signed]  William  Gross,  Fountainville,  Pa. 

T.  o.  border;  ornament  below  title.   29  x  24.5  cm. 

1250.  A  LIFE  ON  THE  OCEAN  WAVE. -A  life  on  the 
ocean  wave  (3  vs.) 

A-J  border;  bust  of  sailor  with  oar  in  hands.   20  x 
13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

1251.  THE  LIGHT  HOUSE. -Tte  scene  was  more  beautiful 
far  to  my  eye  (3  vs .) 

Sheet  no.  548;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

1252.  LILLIE  BAWN. -Sarf  is  my  heart  with  care  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  681;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  ROUSE!  BROTHERS,  ROUSE!  on 
verso.]  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1253.  LILLIE  BELL. —Ore  the  grave  near  massa's  dwelling 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "The  Heart  Bow'd  Down  by  Weight  of  Woe"; 
publ.  De  IVIarsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25  x  16  cm. 

1254.  LILLY  AND  HER  SOLDIER. -Z>ear  Soldier,  to  night 
(6  vs.)  Air.— Bony's  Awa. 


Arranged  from  R.  M.  Caldwell,  Philadelphia;  Reply  by 
A.  Anderson,  late  of  82d  Regt.  P.V.,  May,  1863. 

a.  A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Print.  Harris. 

T,  o.  border.   24  x  15.2  cm. 

1255.  LILLY  DALE.  — 'T;<;as  a  calm,  still  night,  and  the 
m.oon's  pale  light  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  sold  at  Gould  &  Berry's;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  16. 6  cm. 

1256.  LILLY  WOOD.— Darfejes  my  heart  am.  lonely  and 
feels  as  if  'twould  break  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Composed  for  the  Charley  White  Minstrel  Association; 
by  John  C.  Cross,  And  Sung  by  John  Kirkwood;  sheet  no. 
831;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.6  x  14.5  cm. 

1257.  THE  LILY  OF  THE  WEST. -FeVsi  when  I  came  to 
England  some  pleasure  for  to  find  (7  vs.) 

Woodcut  of  man  and  woman  in  garden.  30  x  9.5  cm. 

1258.  THE  LILY  OF  THE  WEST.-Zjzisi  came  down  from 
Louisville,  some  pleasure  for  to  find  (6  vs.)  Air.— Caroline 
of  Edinburgh  Town. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,   SDN.Y.  24.7  x  16.5  cm. 

1259.  LIMERICK  RACES. -/'»z  a  simple  Irish  lad,  resolved 
to  see  som.e  fun,  sirs  (6  vs.) 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13. 1  cm.  (cropped) 

1260.  hWCOl^N. -Though  he  lies  lowly  now  (4  vs.) 
[Signed]  W.  H.,  New  York,  April  20,  1865. 
Mourning  border.  24  x  10  cm. 

1261.  LINCOLN  AND  F'REEDOM.— Lincoln,  upon  the  roll 
of  fame  (17  lines) 

By  Miss  M.  A.  O'Conner,  for  the  Sanitary  Fair, 
Brooklyn,  Feb.  1864;  adv:   Price  20  cents. 
Triple-line  border.   20.7  x  13  cm. 

1262.  LINCOLN  AND  HAMLIN. -Come,  all  ye  friends  of 
freedom  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25  x  16.8  cm. 

1263.  LINCOLN  LIES  SLEEPJNG. -Up,  from  the  homes  of 
the  land,  a  cry  (4  vs.  and  4  chors.)  Air:   Under  the  Willow. 

By  Nathan  Upham. 

a.  [With  "willow"  in  Air;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border;  symbolic  objects,  includ- 
ing tablets  of  law,  sword,  sceptre,  etc.   25.5  x  17  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners;  house,  flag,  woman  leaning  on  tomb.  23.8  x 
14.9  cm. 

c.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  period  and  dash 
after  Air;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  We  have  reduced  our 
Wholesale  Prices  of  Songs. 

Bust  of  Lincoln.   20.5  x  10.3  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1305;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  13.5  cm. 


86 


1264.  THE  LINCOLN  STATUE.  AN  ODE. -In  Rome,  among 
his  many  statues,  stands  (11  parts,  each  with  heading) 

By  T.  Buchanan  Read.  39  x  27.5  cm. 

1265.  LINDA  HAS  DEPARTED. -Death  with  his  cold  hand, 
hath  robb'd  m.e  of  every  hope  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co  (1). 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1);  Boyd's  imprint  added. 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  PubL  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.4  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  153;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

d.  As  above;    with  RETURN  OF  THE  69TH  on  verso.] 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

1266.  LINDA  THE  PRIDE  OF  THE  MILL.-/'w  standing 
by  the  cottage  door  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  881;  pubL  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

1267.  LINDA'S  GONE  TO  BALTIMORE. -Ofe,  Linda's  gone 
to  BaUimore  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[PubL]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.4  x  16.7  cm. 

1268.  LINES  DEDICATED  IN  MEMORY  OF  MY  HUSBAND, 
NATHAN  SWAIN,  WHO  DIED  AND  WAS  BURIED  AT  SEA, 
FROM  ON  BOARD  THE  SCHOONER  SARAH  T.  GARRISON, 
AUGUST  30,  \%&2.—My  Husband's  gone,  why  should  I  mourn 
(9  vs.) 

[Signed]   L.  A.  Swain,  July,  1863;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
Mourning  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1269.  LINES  IN  MEMORY  OF  THE  PHILADELPHIA 
VOLUNTEER  REFRESHMENT  SALOON. -See  where  it 
lies',  while  roughest  workm.en  toil  (16  vs.) 

Suggested  by  its  ruins;  dedicated  to  the  Managers  and 
Contributers . 

a.  Double-line  border;  red  ink.   26.5  x  22.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  blue  ink.   24.7  x  21.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  gold  ink  on  black  glazed  paper.  26.3 
X  23  cm. 

1270.  LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  A.  LINCOLN,  PRESI- 
DENT OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.-Father  Abr'am's  gone; 
his  voice  no  more  (7  vs.) 

[Signed]  W.  H.  Clark,  April  16,  1865.  26.5  x  II.7  cm. 

1271.  LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  CAPT.  MICHAEL 
DMYEY .  —  Waruder  with  me,  when  the  flowers  (7  vs.) 

Print.  Johnson  (2).   18.8  x  11.5  cm. 

1272.  LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MRS.  GEN.  J.  KIL- 
PATRICK. —  'TztJas  near  the  classic  Rapidan  (15  vs.) 

[Signed]  Geo.  G.  B.  DeWolfe. 

Soldier  on  horseback  with  tents  in  background.   27.5 
X  14  cm. 

1273.  LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  HON.  COL.  E.  D. 
BAKER,  KILLED  IN  THE  BATTLE  OF  BALL'S  BLUFF, 
OCTOBER  21,  1861.— 'Tzfas  a  calm  October  morning 
(13  vs.) 

By  his  brother,  Dr.  A.  C.  Baker,  Surgeon  of  the  First 
California  Regiment,  71st  P.V.;  adv:    Handbills,  Pro- 
grammes, Bill-Heads,  etc. 


a.  Publ.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  With  "Killed  in  the  Battle  ..."  in  parentheses;  first 
line  beginning;  "It  was";  publ.  W.  Warren  (2);  adv:  This 
song  can  be  had  in  any  quantity  at  1019  Spruce  St. 

T.  o.  border.  20  x  13.3  cm. 

1274.  LINES  ON  THE  MURDER  OF  PRESIDENT  A. 
LINCOLN.— Our  Chief  was  murdered  because  that  he 
(5  vs.) 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border.  21.7  x  12.5  cm. 

LINGER  IN  BLISSFUL  REPOSE,  see  ELLE  LEENE. 

1275.  LINGER  NOT  DARl.mG. —Linger  not  darling,  awake 
from,  thy  sleep  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Subheaded:   "Serenade";  Words  by  George  Cooper; 
Music  by  J.  R.  Thomas;  music  published  by  John  Church, 
Jr.;  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1448;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  14. 8  cm. 

1276.  THE  LIQUOR  DEALER'S  RIGHTS. -Cowe,  all  you 
loyal  freem,en,  wherever  you  may  be  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Wait  for  the  Wagon." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  25  x  15  cm. 

1277.  LISTEN  TO  THE  MOCKING  Bm.D\— When  the  charms 
of  spring  awaken,  awaken,  awaken  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner];  sold  by 
Partridge  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  20.6  x  12.3  cm. 

1278.  LITTLE  ALICE.— Ofc.'  knew  you  Little  Alice  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Words  by  George  Cooper;  Music  by  Henry  Hyatt. 

a.  Presented  for  publication  by  Bennett  Bro's;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1063;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  MY  GUM  A 
RUBBER  BOOTS  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1279.  LITTLE  BAS.E-YOOT .—Standing  where  the  bleak 
winds  whistled  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  Frank  Howard;  Sung  by  Miss 
Maggie  Mitchell  in  the  popular  Drama  of  that  name; 
Music  publ.  by  H.  T.  Merrill  &  Co.;  with  narrative  pre- 
ceding text  beginning:   "Who  has  not,  while  traversing  the 
crowded  thoroughfares  of  our  different  cities  —  ";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.4  x  16.3  cm. 

1280.  THE  LITTLE  BLACKSMITH.-We  heard  his  hammer 
all  day  long  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  699;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER  NO. 
2  on  verso.]  25  x  14.3  cm. 

1281.  LITTLE  BROWN  CHURCH. -TAere's  a  church  in 
the  valley  by  the  wildwood  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 


87 


Words  and  Music  by  S.  Pitts;  Music  Published  by  J.  L. 
Peters  (1);  adv:  Jos.  Servoss  &  Co.,  Importers  and  Jobbers 
in  Toys,  Watches,  Musical  Instruments,  etc.;  print.  Auner 
(5);  [with  Catalogue  of  Songs  on  verso  publ.  by  Johnson.] 
24.2  X  15  cm. 

1282.  LITTLE  DOG  STRAY. -Oe  mom  ub  life  is  best 
(3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.9  x  16.2  cm. 

LITTLE  EVA  IN  HEAVEN,  see  LITTLE  EVA  TO  HER 
PAPA. 

1283.  LITTLE  EVA.  TO  HER  PAPA.  — When  your  daughter's 
ta'en  away,  and  your  heart  is  filled  with  care  (3  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Little  Cordelia  Howard,  in  the  successful 
Drama  of  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin",  at  the  National  Theatre, 
N.Y.;  2nd  song:   "Little  Eva  in  Heaven". 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   22.7  x  15  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Little  Eva's  Song  to  her  Papa";  sung  with 
immense  applause  by  Little  Cordelia  Howard,  at  the  City 
Museum,  in  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin";  adv:   assortment  of 
Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

Single-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   17.5  x 
10.5  cm. 

1284.  LITTLE  JENNY  DOW.— Little  Jenny  Dow  lives  be- 
yond the  mill  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Horace  Waters  (1);  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

1285.  LITTLE  KATY  OR  HOT  CORN.-"0/z,  hot  corn! 
nice  hot  corn  ivho  will  buy  my  hot  com  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Music  obtained  of  Horace  Waters  (2). 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.   24.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  Pubi.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   23.6  x  16.2  cm. 

1286.  THE  LITTLE  LOW  ROOM  WHERE  I  COURTED  MY 
WIFE.— My  brow  is  seam'd  o'er  with  the  iron  of  years 

(4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.3  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  694;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1287.  LITTLE  UAID.-There  was  a  little  maid,  and  she 
had  a  little  bonnet  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  658;  2nd  song:   "He  Tells  Me  He  Loves  Me"; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

1288.  LITTLE  MAJOR. -Af  his  post  the  little  major  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  968;  Music  obtained  at  Root  &  Cady  (2), 
owners  of  the  copyright. 

T.  o.  border.   21.1  x  14.5  cm. 

1289.  A  LITTLE  MORE  CIDER.-/  love  the  white  gal  and 
the  black  (3  vs.  and  chor.' 


Sung  nightly,  with  tremendous  applause,  by  Buckley's 
celebrated  band  of  Minstrels;  [publ.]  DeMarsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  Yankee  Pedlar  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

1290.  LITTLE  NELL.   THE  HEROINE  OF  THE  OLD 
CURIOSITY  SHOP  .-They  told  him  gently  she  was  dead 
(3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Words  by  Casserly;  music  by  T.  Bissell;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

1291.  THE  LITTLE  ONES. -A  sound  of  fifes-a  sound  of 
drums  (8  vs.) 

By  Walter;  with  narrative  preceding  song  beginning: 
"After  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  .  .  .";  Flag  Ship  Philadel- 
phia, off  Morris  Island,  October  24,  1863. 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs . 

A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1292.  LITTLE  VIGS.-Oh!  there  was  an  old  Sow  she  had 
five  pigs,  igs  {snort)  igs  {whistle)  igs  (5  vs.) 

Headed:  "Trio";  as  sung  by  Messrs.  Osier,  Garman 
and  Dettro,  of  the  Fayette  Glee  Club  of  Kensington;  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Billheads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  running  pig.   19.5  x  10.5  cm. 

LITTLE  PIGS,  see  also  HOP  LITE  LOO. 

1293.  A  LITTLE  SONG  FOR  THE  SAmTS.-'Twas  the 
Sabbath  mom.  On  his  way  to  church  (7  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15  cm. 

1294.  LITTLE  TOPSY'S  SOUG.—Topsy  neber  was  bom, 
neber  had  a  m.oder  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

a.  Words  by  Eliza  Cook;  music  by  Hutchinson;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Words  and  music  as  above;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.5  x  16.8  cm. 

1295.  THE  LIVELY  FLEA.-Ofc,  a  dainty  old  chap  is  the 
lively  flea  (6  vs.,  3  chors.  and  4  vs.  spoken) 

Sheet  no.  643;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  iDorder.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1296.  A  LOAF  OF  BREAD.-///  had  but  a  small  loaf  of 
bread,  Bobby  Buff  (5  vs.)   Duett.  Air:   Robin  Ruff. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  written  by  Frank 
Spear;  varying:  "Duet-Air.  'Robin  Roughl.";  sheet  no.  928; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1297.  THE   LONE  HEART.— As  the  wide  ocean,  tost  by  the 
tempest  (3  vs.) 

Words  and  music  by  Eastburn;  cop.  1865,  W.  R.  Smith, 
EDPa.;    [sold  by]  W.  R.  Smith. 
A-J  border.   20  x  12.9  cm. 

1298.  LONE  STA^.— Lovely  star  so  pure  and  bright 
(16  vs.) 


88 


By  John  Anderson,  of  the  U.S.S.  Connecticut;  print. 
Johnson  (2). 

Star.   20.5  x  13.5  cm. 

1299.  THE  LONE  STARRY  HOURS. -O,  the  lone  starry 
hours  give  me,  love  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Thou  Art  Gone  From  My  Gaze". 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x 
15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  129;  Words  published  by  permission  of 
Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);   sold  by  Partridg[e]   (4). 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1300.  LONG  LIVE  McCLELLAN!-Z^?z^  life  to  McClellan! 
he  will  soon  put  down  Rebellion  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Happy  Land  of  Canaan. 

By  P.J.C. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.6  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

c.  [Without  author's  initials;]  with  period  and  dash  after 
Air;  sheet  no.  951;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

1301.  LONG  LIVE  THE  SIXTY-NINTH. -Haii  to  the  men 
now  in  triumph  returning  (4  vs.) 

Words  by  Mr.  Mullaly;  music  by  John  J.  Daly. 

a.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  author's  names;]  sheet  no.  851;  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  15.8  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1133;   publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.3  x  14  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x 
13  cm. 

1302.  LONG,  LONG  WEARY  DAY. -The  long,  long  weary 
day  is  passed  in  tears  away  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24  x  I6  cm. 

1303.  LOOK  ALWAYS  ON  THE  SUNNY  SWE.-Look  always 
on  the  sunny  side  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  92;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  16.2  cm. 

1304.  LOOK  OUT!  THE  REBELS  ARE  COMING. -T/za^ 
fierce  Guerrila,  Jim  Jenkins,  I  hear  (16  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Air:  Campbells  are  Coming. 

By  Lewis  Stoehr,  116th  Regt.  O.V.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
24  X  16  cm. 

1305.  LOOK  WITH  THY  FOND  EYES  UPON  UE.-Look 
uiith  thy  fond  eyes  upon  me  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

Words  and  Music  by  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus 
Winner];  cop:   1864,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;  [sold  by]  Sep. 


Winner  (3);  publ.  Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.8  cm. 

1306.  LOOKOUT  MOUNTAIN.— Good  evening  kind  friends, 
it's  how  do  you  do  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— White  Star,  or 
Billy  Barlow  in  Tennessee. 

Composed  by  John  M.  Valleau,  Co.  C,  109th  Penna. 
Vol.;  print.  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border.   20.5  x  12  cm. 

1307.  LORD  LOVEL.-Lord  Lovel  he  stood  at  his  castle 
gate  (10  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  788;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  SAY  A  KIND 
WORD  WHEN  YOU  CAN  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  15.6  cm. 

1308.  LORD  LOVELL.  NO.  2.. -Lord  Lovell  he  sat  in  St. 
Charles'  Hotel  (12  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.2  x  17.5  cm. 

1309.  LORENA.  — r;ze  years  creep  slowly  by,  Lorena  (6  vs.) 
[By  Rev.  H.  D.  L.  Webster.] 

a.  By  permission  of  the  publisher,  H.  M.  Higgins;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

1310.  LOSS  OF  THE  ARCTIC— Tfee  gallants  of  the  Arctic, 
each  tale  we  hear  denotes  (6  vs.)  Air.— Caroline  of  Edin- 
burg  Town. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1311.  LOSS  OF  THE  STEAM  SHIP  CENTRAL  AMERICA. 
NEARLY  500  LIVES  hOST.-Many  a  league,  many  a  league, 
many  a  league  onward  (6  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1312.  THE  LOST  AMBASSADORS. -O/z,  brothers  of  the 
Old  Bay  State  (33  vs.) 

With  explanation:  "Showing  how  they  went  forth  and  in 
what  manner  they  returned";  A  Ballad,  after  the  model  of 
Johnny  Gilpin;  By  Anti-Secesh;  Boston,  Nov.  25,  1861. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.  34.4  x  17.4  cm. 

1313.  LOST  RASABEL.-r^ey  have  given  thee  to  another 
(3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   17.7  x  16  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

1314.  LOTTIE  IN  THE  LANE.— TAe  Sun  was  going  doum 
to  rest  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 

As  sung  by  Bryant's  Minstrels. 

a.   [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25  x  16.2  cm. 


89 


b.   Sheet  no.  1247;  with  "sun"  in  first  line;  publ.  Wrigley 
(3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

1315.  LOUEY  NAPOLEON.— LoMej)  Nap  is  trying  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  S.  S.  Purdy. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1323;  with  comma  after  "Nap"  in  first  line; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

1316.  LOUISVILLE  JOURNAL  CARRIERS'  ADDRESS. - 
Beside  my  quiet  hearth  to-night  (16  vs.  and  5  vs.  of 
"Invocation") 

Headed:  "New  Year,  1864";  print.  Hull  &  Brother. 
Text  on  background  of  shield  with  American  flag  de- 
sign, red  and  blue  with  gold  border.  43  x  35.5  cm. 

1317.  LOVE  ME  LITTLE  LOVE  ME  LONG.-Saji  not,  life 
is  dark  and  dreary  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  622;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1318.  LOVE  'HOT .—Love  not!  love  not!  ye  hapless  sons  of 
clay  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.6  cm. 

1319.  LOVE  THEE.— Love  thee?— so  well,  so  tenderly 
(2  vs.) 

a.  Adv:   Soldiers  can  receive  14  of  our  beautifully  illus- 
trated Ballads  [publ.]  G.  P.  Hardwick  (1). 

Letter  paper;  purple  ink;  single-line  border  with 
fleuron  comers;  woman  standing  by  column.   20.2  x  12.7 
cm. 

b.  With  question  mark  in  title;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  double-line  border  with  ornaments; 

hdpc.  Magnus  247d,  col.   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  248a, 
col.   20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  253b,  bronze  ink.  20.4  x 
12.6  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  hdpc.  col.]   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  bronze  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  254,  col.  20.3 
X  12.5  cm. 

1320.  LOVELY  DOLLY  DAY.-I've  told  you'bout  de  banjo 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  13. 5  cm. 

1321.  LOVELY  LILLY  DONNELLY.-O.'  lovely  Lilly 
Donnelly,  it's  you  I  love  the  best  (9  vs.)  Air— "Willow 
Tree." 

By  W.  H.  Conrad,  Pupil  of  the  Pennsylvania  Institution 
for  the  Blind,  Philad'a.;  adv:  Cards  and  Job  Printing,  exe- 
cuted with  neatness  and  dispatch  at  Johnson  (3);  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1322.  LOVELY  MARY. -77/  taste  no  more  of  the  poison'd 
cup  (4  vs.)  Air.— "Highland  Mary". 

Sheet  no.  911;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  14.5  cm. 


1323.  LOVELY  SWEET  BANKS  OF  THE  SUIR.-The  very 
first  time  I  left  Carrick  (4  vs.) 

Headed:   "A  New  Song  called  the  ";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1324.  LOVELY  WOMA^.— How  dearly  I  love  woman  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  585;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.4  x  16.8  cm. 

1325.  THE  LOVER'S  DEPARTURE. -As  /  roved  out,  one 
evening,  in  the  springtime  of  the  year  (8  vs.)  Air:   The 
River  Roe. 

Dedicated  to  one  of  the  Boys  of  Co.  C,  69th  Volunteers. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  commas  in  first  line;]  By  P.  M.  Daly;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

1326.  LOVER'S  HALL.— Come  all  you  gallus  fellows,  and 
listen  to  my  song  (12  vs.)  Air.— Root  Hog  or  Die. 

a.  [Without  hyphen  after  "Air";]  Composed  by  John 
Smith;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  25.1  x  17.1  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  695;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.  24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  LOVER'S  WISH,  see  THE  BARD'S  LEGACY. 

1327.  LOVE'S  FAREWELL,  A  REPLY  TO  LOVE'S 

C HIDINGS.— Meei  m,e  to-night,  when  dewy  stars  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Words  by  Finley  Johnson;  Music  composed  by  Jno.  W. 
Odiorne;  cop:  1864,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;    [sold  by]  Sep. 
Winner's  Music  Store  (3). 

A-J  border.   20.2  x  12.8  cm. 

1328.  THE  LOVES  OF  JEMMY  JENKS  AND  BETSEY 
BALLS— Ai  a  shop  in  Cranboum  Alley,  where  they  hangs 
goods  in  and  out  (8  vs.)  Air.— John  Thomas. 

Sheet  no.  758;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  25  x  15. 5  cm. 

1329.  LOVE'S  YOUNG  DREAM. -Ofe.'  the  days  are  gone, 
when  Beauty  bright  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1330.  LOVING  JESUS.  A  PARODY  ON  KATY  DARLING. - 
O,  they  tell  me  thou  art  gone,  loving  J esu^  (3  vs.) 

By  Rev.  L.  C.  Lockwood;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1331.  LOVING  WELL  AND  DEARhY. -Love  of  my  heart, 
with  the  starry  eyes  (3  vs.) 

By  Wandering  Willie;  sheet  no.  996;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

1332.  THE  LOW  BACK'D  CAR.-When  first  I  saw  sweet 
Peggy  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15  cm. 


90 


c.  Sheet  no.  375;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  YANKEE  MAN- 
OF-WAR  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

1333.  LOW  NECKED  DRESS. -When  first  I  saw  Miss  Delia 
(3  vs.)  Air:  The  Low  Backed  Car. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  hyphenafter  "Air";  quotation  marks 
around  Air;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  22  x  14.2  cm. 

1334.  LUCY  LONG.— O/z,  I  jist  come  out  before  you,  to 
sing  a  little  song  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  nightly,  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands;  with  5  lines  below  text  headed  "Conun- 
drums". 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   23.7X15.6 
cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   23.8  x  I6  cm. 

1335.  LULA  IS  GOtiE.  — With  a  heart  forsaken,  I  wander 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1047;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  POOR  BLACK 
BESS  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1336.  LULU  IS  OUR  DARLING  PBIDE.-Lulu  is  our  darling 
pride  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.7  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.3  x 
15.2  cm. 

c.  [Without  "IS"  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

1337.  THE  LUSHY  OLD  COBBLER. -0  lama  lushy  old 
cobbler  that  you  can  tell  be  my  face  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  94;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   25.1  x  14.3  cm. 

1338.  LUTZOW'S  WILD  HUNT. -From  yonder  dark  forest 
what  horsemen  advance?  (3  vs.) 

Revised  and  Printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools. 
A-J  border.  23  x   14.3  cm. 

1339.  MABLE  ChAHE.— Brighter  than  the  hues  of  morning 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24  x  16.5  cm. 

1340.  MCCAWLEY'S  BRIDE -4  widow  lived  in  Jersey 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  Written  by  Frank  Spear, 
and  Sung  by  him  at  the  Canterbury  Music  Hall;  sheet  no. 
884;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24.7  x  15.3  cm. 

1341.  MCCLELLAN  &  FREEDOM. -Kes,  we'll  rally  for 
the  cause  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  — "Battle  Cry  of  Freedom." 


Headed;    "A  Campaign  Song";  sheet  no.  3;  adv: 
McClellan  Campaign  Songster;  [publ.]  Mason  &    Co. 
T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1342.  M'CLELLAN  &  VICTORY!!  OR  THE  BATTLE  OF 
SOUTH  MOUNTAIN  AND  THE  UPRISING  OF  THE  KEY- 
STONE STATE.— I'll  sing  a  song,  how  brave  McClellan 
(8  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Dan  Tucker." 

a.  Cop:   1861,  J.  Magee,  Philadelphia. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  flags 
and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union"  in  red  and  blue.   19.5  x 
12.4  cm. 

b.  .With  12  vs.,  and  comma  after  "song"  in  first  line; 
cop:   1862,  J.  Magee,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  bust  of  McClellan. 
25  X  18.5  cm. 

1343.  MCCLELLAN  CAMPAIGN  SONG.-H^ji  are  we  so 
strong  and  sanguine  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   "Who  will  care 
for  Mother  now?  " 

By  "Our  Ned";  Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  McClellan 
Glee  Clubs  and  "White  Boys"  of  the  United  States;  [publ.] 
Mason  and  Co.;  Copyright  Secured. 

a.  A-J  border;  bust  of  McClellan.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "the"  before  "McClellan"  in  dedication;] 
and  "United  States"  abbreviated  in  dedication;  adv: 
McClellan  Campaign  Songster. 

T.  o.  border;  bust  of  McClellan.   22.5  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  quotation  marks  around  title  of  Air.] 
Double-line  border.  24.5  x  11.5  cm. 

1344.  MCCLELLAN  FOR  WeSl-Kind  folks ,  I  pray  atten- 
tion give, I'll  not  detain  you  long,  sirs  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air:   Billy  O'Rourke. 

By  J.  Lovelock. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.3  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  comers.  26  x  16.3  cm. 

1345.  MCCLELLAN  FOR  VKESIDE^T  .-Kind  folks ,  if  you 
will  listen,  I'll  sing  to  you  a  song  (3  vs.)  Air:   Pompey 
Moore. 

By  John  C.  Cross. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.7  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  [Without  commas  in  first  line;]  Sung  by  Cool  Burgess, 
of  Sam  Sharpley's  Minstrels;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus, 
SDN.Y.;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  15,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1346.  MCCLELLAN,  THE  PRIDE  OF  "JERSEY  BLUE."- 
Arouse  now  Conservatives,  the  contest  is  begun  (6  vs.  and 
chor.)   Tune:— "Hoist  up  the  Flag." 

Adv:   McClellan  Campaign  Songster;  [publ.)   Mason  & 
Co. 

A-J  and  multiple-line  borders.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

1347.  MCCLELLAN  WILL  BE  PRESIDENT. -H'e  want  a 
man  for  President  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Whack,  row  de 
dow ! 

By  M.  J.  Million. 

a.   [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 


91 


b.  With  2  chors.;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  11,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1348.  MCCLELLAN'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  ARMY. -Mere  who 
have  with  Siegel  bled  (6  vs.)  Air:   Bruce 's  Address. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

1349.  M'CLELLAN'S  BAND.-O/z,  keep  your  flag  out  to  the 
breeze  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Gideon's  Band. 

By  "Our  Ned";  [publ.]  Mason  &    Co.;  Copyright 
Secured. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  McClellan.   23  x  15.5  cm. 

1350.  MCCLELLAN'S  BATTLE  &  VICTORY  AT 
ANTIETAM,  MD.,  SEPT.  17TH,  \%%2.-0n  Antietam's 
mountains,  what  armies  advance  (4  vs.) 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia;  Arranged  from  Lutzow's 
Wild  Hunt;  music  obtained  at  No.  722  Chestnut  Street, 
Philadelphia;  advs:  all  pieces  bearing  his  name,  and  He 
will  sing  his  own  pieces  at  Fairs;  print.  Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   25.5  x  14.5  cm. 

1351.  M'CLELLAN'S  FAREWELL  TO  THE  ARMY  OF  THE 
POTOMAC  — We're  the  boys  who  are  firm  and  ready  (5  vs. 
and  2  chors.)  Air.— Gay  and  Happy. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  "McClellan's"  in  title;  with  colon  after  title  of  Air; 
narrative  following  song,  beginning:  "Major  General 
Burnside's  opinion  .  .  .";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  13.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   23  x  14  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc.,  and  Johnson's  New  Catalogue. 

A-J  border.   24.5  x  13.5  cm. 

e.  "Mc'Clellan's"  in  title;  with  colon  after  title  of  Air; 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  15,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1352.  MAC  DIL  DARREL.— Dar  was  an  old  darkey  libed 
out  in  de  west  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Charley  Fox,  with  unbounded  applause;  2nd 
song:   "Mac  Dil  Darrel  No.  2";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

1353.  MAC  DIL  DARREL.  NO.  Z.  — There  was  an  ole 
darkie  lived  in  de  west  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  W.  N.  Smith,  of  Van  Amburgh's  Menagerie; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

1354.  MCDONALD'S  RETURN  TO  GLENCO.-vls  /  went 
a  walking  one  evening  of  late  (11  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

1355.  MAGGIE,  THE  PRIDE  OF  THE  VALE. -7  once  loved 
a  dam,sel  whose  raven  black  hair  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  T.  B.  Prendergast,  at  Bryants'  Minstrels; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.8  x  16.3  cm. 


b.   Sheet  no.  543;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24,6  x   16.1  cm. 

1356.  MAGGIE'S  SECRET. -Ofc,  many  a  time  I'm  sad  at 
heart  (3  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  741;  Music  obtained  of  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co. 
(1);  publ.  Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.   21.6  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  With  "I  Am"  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  1076;  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  15  cm. 

1357.  MAGGY  BY  MY  SIDE.  — T/ze  land  of  my  home  is 
flitting,  flitting  from.  m.y  view  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.3  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

1358.  MAGINNIS'S  RAFFLE.  — Wora  Saturday  night,  we'd  a 
bit  of  a  fight  (5  vs.)   Tune— Old  Leather  Breeches. 

Composed  &  sung  by  J.  F.  Poole;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

1359.  THE  MAID  OF  ERIN.— Mji  thoughts  delight  to  wander 
(4  vs.)  Air— "The  Maid  of  Loch." 

a.  Sheet  no.  611;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  imprint.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15. 2  cm. 

MAIDEN  WILT  THOU  ROAM,  see  WHEN  THE  MOON 
WITH  GLORY  BRIGHTENS. 

1360.  THE  MAIDEN'S  SONG.— Gjt;e  me  the  pleasant  wild- 
wood  and  the  flowers  I  loveso  [sic]  well  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  488;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  22.3  x  15.1  cm. 

1361.  THE  MAJOR  AND  HIS  MEN.-/?z  Charleston  bay 
Fort  Sumter  stood  (6  vs.  and  chors.) 

Headed:  "National  Songs  issued  by  the  Loyal  National 
League";  with  music  and  words  of  first  vs.  and  chor.; 
Music  of  1776;  Issued  from  the  Offices  of  the  Rebellion 
Record.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

1362.  MAJOR  ANDERSON  THE  BOLD.-/  have  often  been 
told  (5  vs.)  Tune— Landlady  of  France 

By  Louis  P.  Marto. 

T.  o.  border.   21.3  x  12  cm.  (cropped) 

1363.  MAJOR  ANDRE'S  ARREST  AND  EXECUTION.- 
Com.e  all  you  gallant  heroes,  I  pray  you,  lend  an  ear  (11  vs.) 
Air:   Dog  and  Gun. 

[Publ.]   De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:   1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16.6  cm. 

1364.  MAKE  ME  NO  GAUDY  CHAPLET.-Mafee  me  no 
gaudy  Chaplet  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   24.6  x 
16  cm. 

1365.  THE  MAN  IN  THE  MOON— WTzew  a  bumper  is 
ordered,  'tis  vexing  to  doubt  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  757;   publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 


92 


1366.  THE  MAN  THAT  COULDN'T  GET  COOL. -AH  you 
who  love  your  liquor  strong  (6  vs.)  Air:   King  of  the  Canni- 
bal Islands. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24  x  16  cm. 

1367.  THE  MAN  THAT  COULDN'T  GET  WARM. -row  that 
are  fond,  in  spite  of  price,  of  pastry,  creams,  and  jellies 
nice  (5  vs.)  Air:   King  of  the  Cannibal  Islands. 

As  sung  by  Gus.  Shaw;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24  x  16  cm. 

1368.  MAN  THE  LIFE  BOAT. -Maw  the  life  boat!  man  the 
life  boat  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.7  x  15.2  cm. 

1369.  THE  MAN  WHO  NEVER  KISS'D.-O/z.'  say,  where 
was  that  being  born  (3  vs.)  Air:— The  Harp  that  once  through 
Tara's  Halls. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  an  excerpt  from  a  testimony  of  a 
witness  on  the  Stephen's  trial. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  adv.  for  the  "Monthly  Singers'  Jour- 
nal", signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.] 

T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15. 2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  327;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  16.4  cm. 

1370.  A  MAN'S  A  MAN  FOR  A'THAT— /s  there  for  honest 
poverty  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  395;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  16.8  cm. 

MAN'S  LOVE,  see  WOMAN'S  LOVE. 

1371.  MANTLE  SO  GREEN.— As  /  went  a  walking  one 
evening  in  June  (11  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  834;  pubL  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

1372.  MARCH  AWAY  CHEERILY!— Marc/z  away  merrily 
(2  vs.  and  chors.) 

New  Patriotic  War-Song  written  and  sung  by  George 
H.  Russell,  with  great  applause,  at  the  Palace-Garden 
Concerts;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

1373.  MARCH  DOWN  SOUTH  TO  DIXIE. -O/;,  Treason 
foul  now  floats  her  banner  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— "Dixie's 
Land." 

Headed:   "The  War  Minstrel";  publ.  John  W.  Du  Bree. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

1374.  MARCH  OF  THE  NEW-YORK  VOLUNTEERS. - 
March,  Boys,  march!  the  way  is  straight  before  you  (3  vs.) 
Air:   Cheer,  Boys,  cheer. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.   25.6  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen  in  title  and  commas  in  Air;]  with  title 
of  Air  in  quotation  marks;  sheet  no.  806;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
25  X  15.5  cm. 


1375.  MARCH  ON  FOR  THE  UNION. -Saji;  can  this  Union 
sever  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air;  Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars  and 
stripes,  col.   21.3  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   25.3  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  dash  after  "Air" 
and  comma  after  "Say"  in  first  line;  By  Thomas  Leslie; 
sheet  no.  832;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1376.  MARCH  ON  TO  VICTORY.- Ve  soldiers  of  the  North 
in  the  army  of  the  brave  (4  vs.  and  chor.)   Tune— Glory 
Hallelujah. 

By  F.  H.  Thompson;  sheet  no.  737;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.3  x  12.2  cm. 

1377.  MARCH  TO  THE  BATTLE  FIELD I-GZonoMS  Repub- 
lic, land  of  the  free  (3  vs.)  Air- Viva  L'America. 

Words  by  H.  Webster  Canterbury,  and  as  sung  by  him 
every  night  at  Healey's  Colossal  Panorama  of  the  War. 

22  X  12  cm.  (cropped) 

1378.  MARCHING  ALONG.— T/ze  army  is  gathering  from 
near  and  from,  far  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  5  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  22.3  x  14.2  cm. 

c.  Words  by  Mrs.  M.  A.  Kidder;  music  by  Wm.  B.  Brad- 
bury; music  had  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  [publ.] 

De  Marsan  (3) . 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  "G"  in  place  of  "C"  in  title,  and 
exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  published  by  permission 
of  Mr.  Wm.  B.  Bradbury  Author  of  the  Music  and  owner 
of  the  Copy-right;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.8  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  With  "gath'ring"  and  "Army"  in  first  line;  2  chors; 
publ.  Doyle. 

Scroll-type  t.  o.  border.  21.2  x  12.8  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  ornamented  blackground  t.  o.  border. 

23  X  14  cm. 

g.  Title:   "We're  Marching  Along";  music  published  by 
Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  advs:   Persons  out  of  the  City, 
sending  for  Songs,  and  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  21  x  12  cm. 

h.   [Title  as  above;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   19.7  x  10.5  cm. 

i.    [Title  as  above;]  publ.  Magnus  (1);  adv:   Magnus' 
Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  134, 
col.   20.7  X  12  cm. 

j.    With  "No.  1"  after  title. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  149,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   19.5  x  11.8  cm.  (cropped) 

k.  Sheet  no.  512;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  16. 2  cm. 


93 


1.  Title:  "We're  Marching  Along";  as  sung  by  the  Can- 
terbury Minstrels,  at  the  Canterbury  Hall,  N.W.  Cor.  5th 
&  Chestnut  Sts.;  publ.  Walter  Warren  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  woodcut  of  "First  Regiment  of  Volunteer 
Artillery".  24.3  x  n  cm. 

ra.  [Title  as  above;]  As  Sung  by  The  Old  Folks  with 
immense  success. 

T.  o.  border.   17.5  x  11.7  cm.  (cropped) 

1379.  MARCHING  ALONG.  NO.  2.— Our  Country  has  called 
her  brave  sons  to  the  field  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  James  Walden. 

a.  [Without  author's  name  and  period  after  "NO"  in  title;] 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
be  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  97,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  133,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

f.  Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  161,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  [Without  period  after  "2"  in  title;]   sheet  no.  1007; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1);    [with  WE'LL  HAVE  A  LITTLE  DANCE 
TO-NIGHT,  BOYS  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1380.  MARCHING  ON  OR  SOUND  THE  BATTLE  CRY.- 
Marching  on,  marching  on,  glad  as  birds  on  the  wing 

(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  Johnson  &  Cartlitch,  and  Johnson  (2).  20.5 
X  10  cm. 

1381.  MARCHING  THROUGH  GEORGIA-Brsra^  i/ze  ^oorf 
old  bugle,  boys!  we'll  sing  another  song  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  Henry  C.  Work;  published  by 
Root  &  Cady  (2). 

a.  Print.  Johnson  (2).   19.5  x  10.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2).  20  x  12  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  period  at  end  of  title;  adv:  Notice, 
New  Songs  not  on  our  Catalogue.  20.8  x  12  cm. 

1382.  MARIA,  THE  DUSTMAN'S  VflFE. -Oh!  once,  there 
lived,  in  Bowling-Green  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

1383.  THE  MARINER'S  GRAVE.— 7  remember  the  night 
was  stormy  and  wet  (6  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x   15.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25  x   I6  cm. 

1384.  LA  MARSEILLAISE. -AKores,  enfants  de  la  patrie 
(7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Par  Rouget  De  L'Isle. 

a.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 


b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 

1385.  THE  MARSEILLES  HYMN.-7e  sons  of  Freedom, 
wake  to  glory;  3rd  line;    Your  children,  wives,  and  grand- 
sires  hoary  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  25  x  15  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  24.6  x  I6  cm. 

d.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]   sheet  no.  242;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  14  cm. 

1386.  MARSEILLES  HYMN,  NO.  2.-"Ye  sons  of  Freedom 
wake  to  glory;  3rd  line:    The  rebels  with  your  blood  are 
gory  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  John  W.  Du  Bree;  adv:   an  Illuminated  edition  of 
Volunteer  Cards,  etc. 

Double-line  border  with  fleuron  comers.   24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  679;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1387.  THE  MARTYRS  OF  FREEDOM.-CoiM>n6wz's  gallant 
Martyrs  (7  vs.) 

An  Anthem,  dedicated  to  "The  Grand  Army  of  the  Re- 
public"; By  Henry  O'Rielly;  [print.]  National  Telegraphic 
Office,  New-York,  June  1869.  21.4  x  13.3  cm. 

1388.  MARY.— T/zji  beauty  hath  not  faded,  Mary  (2  vs.  and 
chor.) 

As  sung  by  Bryant's  Minstrels;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.1  x 
16.9  cm. 

1389.  MARY  BLANE.-Ofe.'  Once  I  loved  a  yellow  gal 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Headed:   "New  Song";  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's 
imprint  added. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  183;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1390.  MARY  BLANE.-/  once  did  love  a  yaller  gal 
(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:   Price  One  Cent.   All  the  New  Songs  constantly 
on  hand. 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  13.7  cm. 

1391.  MARY  UACB.K'E'E.-The  flower  of  the  valley  was 
Mary  Machree  (3  vs.)  Air:   Come  home  to  me.  Love. 

[Publ.)  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.9  x  15.3  cm. 

1392.  MARY  OF  ARGYLE.— /  have  heard  the  mavis  singing 
(2  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupld  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 


94 


1393.  MARY  OF  THE  WILD  MOOR.— It  was  on  one  cold 
winter's  night  (4  vs.) 

a.  Subheaded:   "A  Beautiful  Ballad";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.5  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24  x  15.4  cm. 

1394.  MARY,  WILT  THOU  HAVE  ME? -Mary,  tho'  I'm 
doomed  to  languish  (5  vs.) 

Headed:   "Acrostic." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  21.2  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
22.5  X  15.6  cm. 

1395.  MARY'S  DREAM.— The  moon  had  clim'd  the  highest 
hill  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  306;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);    [with  THE  DRUMMER 
OF  ANTIETAM  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x  15.7  cm. 

1396.  "MARYLAND."— O/t,  how  I  wish  that  strife  would 
cease  (11  vs.)  Air— "Maryland,  my  Maryland." 

By  W.  H.  Hayward.   24.1  x  8.9  cm. 

MARYLAND  BATTLE  CRY,  see  PENNSYLVANIAN 
BATTLE  CRY. 

1397.  MARYLAND,  MY  MARYLAND— T/ie  Rebel  horde  is 
on  thy  shore  (7  vs.) 

a.  Cop:    1862,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;  Printed  by  Permission; 
Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (2);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  Winner  &  Go's  Music  Store  (3);  publ. 
Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  20.8  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  period  at  end  of  title;  Sep.  Winner, 
Dealer  in  Music  and  Musical  Instruments  (3);  publ.  Auner 
(5). 

A-J  border.  22.8  x  14.6  cm. 

d.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  music  publ.  by  Winner  & 
Co.  (3);  cop:    1862,  Sep  Winner,  EDPa.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  16  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  but  without  cop;]  As  Sung  in  the  Public 
Schools;  "Notice.  Persons  out  of  the  City  .  .  .";  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  but  without  adv.  and  publ.]  23  x  15  cm. 

g.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  music  publ.  by 
Winner  &  Co.  (3);  Printed  By  Permission;  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  adv:   New  Songs.   24.2  x  13.2  cm. 

h.   [Title  and  music  publ.  as  above;]  As  Sung  in  the  Public 
Schools;  [publ.]  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads, 
Circulars,  etc.   21.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1398.  MARYLAND,  MY  MARYLANDl-Come.' /or  f/zji 
shield  is  bright  and  strong  (6  vs.)  Air:— My  Normandy! 

With  3  vs.  as  questions  and  3  as  answers;  adv:   500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  241,  col.   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

1399.  [MARYLAND]  MY  MARYLANDI-T/je  traitor's /oot 
is  on  thy  shore  (7  vs.)  Air.  — "My  Normandy." 

[Signed]  W. 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  13.9  cm. 


1400.  THE  MASONIC  ADIEU.- Adieu',  a  heart-warm,  fond 
adieu  (4  vs.) 

By  Rob  Burns;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.2  cm. 

1401.  MASSA,  MASSA,  HALLELUJAH!  THE  FLAG'S 
COME  BACK  TO  TENNESSEE!— Mot;e  my  arm  chair, 
faithful  Pompey  (4  vs.) 

a.  Music  composed  and  sung  by  D.  A.  Warden;  music  had 
of  D.  A.  Warden  (2);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Cop:   1862,  David  A.  Warden,  EDPa.;  adv:   Music  of 
this  and  tne  following  Songs;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.7  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Our  Flag's  Come  Back  To  Tennessee";  [publ.] 
Johnson  &  Co. 

Double-line  border.   19.9  x  11.6  cm. 

d.  Title:   "Our  Flag's  Come  Back  To  Tennessee";  Music 
composed  and  sung  by  D.  A.  Warden;  adv:   Copy  of  the 
Music  of  this  beautiful  Song;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  2nd  song: 
"Unfurl  the  Stars  and  Stripes".  23.7  x  15.7  cm. 

e.  Title:   "On  The  Shore  of  Tennessee";  with  7  additional 
verses.  24.6  x  19. 5  cm. 

1402.  MASSACHUSSETTS  [sic\   FIFTY-THERD. -From  the 
verdant  hills  and  vallies  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Annie 
Lisle. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  22.8  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  By  J  Ward  Childs;  with  spelling  in  title  correct;  sheet 
no.  1082;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.4  x  15  cm. 

1403.  THE  MASSACHUSETTS  LINE.— Still  first,  as  long 
and  long  ago  (4  lines  of  music  and  4  vs.)  Air.— Yankee 
Doodle. 

From  the  Atlantic  Monthly;  Boston:   publ.  and  for  sale 
by  Wm.  V.  Spencer,  and  Russell  &  Patee. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border  with  rounded  corners; 
blue  ink;  four  flags  and  bayonets  with  motto:  "Camp  Songs 
1861",  col.   15.1  X  10.2  cm. 

1404.  THE  MASSACHUSETTS  VOLUNTEERS. -Come 
brothers,  all  unite  with  us  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Wait 
for  the  Wagon." 

Written  by  W.  P.  Cherrington;  adv:   For  Sale  By  All 
Periodical  Dealers;  cop:   1861,  H.  T.  Foster,  DOMass. 
T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  16.3  cm.  (cropped) 

1405.  MASSA'S  IN  THE  COLD  GROVNU.- Round  the 
meadows  am  a  ringing  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title.] 

T.  b.  [Andrews]  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.7  x  15.8  cm. 

1406.  MATILDA  BAKER,  THE  PRETTY  LITTLE  HOOP- 
SKIRT  MAKER.— I've  fallen  in  love  with  a  pretty  young 
girl  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Tony  Pastor  at  his  Opera-House,  201  Bowery; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24.9  x  16.1  cm. 

1407.  MATRIMONIAL  SWEETS.  A  DUETT. -£>o  cease 
your  clack  and  hold  your  tongue 


95 


Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  25.1  x  16.8  cm. 

1408.  MEAGHER  IS  LEADING  THE  IRISH  BRIGADE.- roM, 
true  Sons  of  Erin,  awake  from  your  slumbers  (5  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air:   The  Shamrock  Shore. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "You"  in  first  line;]   By 
Timothy  B.  O'Regan;  sheet  no.  1050;  publ.  Wrigley  (1) 
[printed  upside-down]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22.1  x  13.5  cm. 

1409.  MEET  ME  AT  THE  LANE.-/7Z  meet  thee  at  the 
lane,  love,  when  it  strikes  nine  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  publ.  by  Sep.  Winner  &  Co.;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
Star.   20.4  x  11.4  cm. 

1410.  MEET  ME  AT  TWILIGHT. -Meei  me  just  at  twilight 
(3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  188;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.9  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  2  vs.;  [with  I  AM  WANDRING  ALL 
ALONE  on  recto;] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

1411.  MEET  ME  BY  MOONLIGHT  ALONE. -Meei  me  by 
m.oonlight  alone  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "How  Dear  to  Me  the  Hour!";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.   24.6  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.3  x 
16.8  cm. 

1412.  MEET  ME  IN  HEAVEN,  OR  THE  DYING  NEGRO. - 
Down  in  a  southern  valley,  at  quiet  close  of  day  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Sheet  no.  762;  Words  copied  by  permission  of  Oliver 
Ditson,  owner  of  copyright;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  14.6  cm. 

1413.  MEET  ME  TO-NIGHT. -Meef  me  to-night,  dearest, 
down  by  the  gate  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

2nd  song:   "The  Rover's  Grave";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.9  cm. 

MEET  ME  TO-NIGHT,  see  also  I  AM  LONELY 
TONIGHT. 

1414.  MEETING  OF  OLD  FRIENDS. -AToz*  old  friend  we 
meet  again  (16  vs.) 

Composed  by  John  Anderson;  with  explanation  begin- 
ning: "These  lines  were  written  on  meeting  an  old  ship- 
mate .  .  .";  print.  Johnson  (2). 

Steam  boat.  19.9  x  12.5  cm. 

1415.  MEETING  OF  THE  WATERS. -Tfeere  is  not  in  the 
wide  world  a  valley  so  sweet  (4  vs.) 

a.   2nd  song:   "Remember  Theel";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  14.9  cm. 


b.  Taken  from  "Moore's  Melodies";  sheet  no.  939;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15. 1  cm. 

1416.  MELINDA  MAY.— Z/Of'iy  Melinda,  come  now,  my 
dear  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  977;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.1  x  15.2  cm. 

1417.  MEMORIES  OF  THE  PAST.-O,  memories  of  the 
past!  ye  com,e  (2  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.8  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  sheet  no.  779;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13.3  cm. 

1418.  MEMORY  OF  THE  DEAD.  "WHO  FEARS  TO  SPEAK 
OF  NINETY-EIGHT?  "-W%o /ears  to  speak  of  Ninety-Eight 
(6  vs.) 

Headed:   "Fenian  War  Echoes";  Music  obtained  of 
Daly's  (2). 

A-J  border.   20.4  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

1419.  MEN  AND  KHhVES.- The  people  rise,  the  storm's 
unchained  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  105,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).    19.6  x  12.4  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  116,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  150,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.9  X  13.3  cm. 

1420.  THE  MENAGERIE.— ATom;  Folks,  come  listen  to  me, 
and  as  you  stand  around  (11  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Dearest 
Mae." 

A-J  border.  20.1  x  12.4  cm, 

1421.  THE  MERCHANT'S  DAUGHTER. -7fs  of  a  Merchant's 
daughter  in  London  town  did  dwell  (9  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  511;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  REASON 
WHY  SHE  LEFT  HIM  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   25  x  16.4  cm. 

1422.  THE  MERMAID.— Owe  Friday  morning  we  set  sail 
(8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25  x   16.3  cm. 

MERRY  AND  WISE,  see  SMILES  AND  KIND  WORDS. 

1423.  MERRY  MONTH  OF  MAY.-'TM;as  in  the  merry 
m.onth  of  May  (5  vs.) 

As  Sung  By  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1023;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.8  x 
16.4  cm. 

1424.  MERRY  SWISS  BOY.-Come,  arouse  thee,  arouse 
thee,  my  brave  Swiss  boy  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  2nd  song:   "Merry  Swiss  Girl";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o,  border.   23.5  x  14.2  cm, 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   25  x  15.2  cm. 

1425.  THE  MESSAGE  OF  VICTORY.-^//  was  so  gloomy, 
dead  and  drear  (5  vs.) 

a.  Adv:   Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  4,  bronze;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).   20.9  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  5,  col.  20.2  x 

12.6  cm. 

1426.  MICK  UPON  THE  B.AlhB.OAD-When  furst from 
Limerick  I  com.e  here  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  770;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.9  x  15.6  cm. 

1427.  MICKEY'S  DEAD-BROKE  AT  THE  DOOR.-Fowrfer 
comes  a  dead-broke  soldier  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Brother's  fainting  at  the  door. 

By  John  C.  Cross;  with  explanation  beginning:  "A  few 
months  ago,  a  young  French  nobleman,  from  New-Jersey, 
named  Monsieur  Mickey  de  Potshooligan  .  .  .";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

1428.  MICKEY'S  GONE  FOR  A  LABORER. -Bemg-  out  of 
work  it  was  no  fun  (6  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "Johnny  has 
gone  for  a  Soldier." 

Written  by  John  C.  Cross,  and  sung  by  Billy  McAllis- 
ter; sheet  no.  1451;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15. 1  cm. 

1429.  MICKEY'S  GONE  FOR  A  SAILOR. -^s  /  was  walking 
down  St.  George's  lea  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  J.  F.  Conlin  and  G.  W.  Anderson;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   25.4  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]   sheet  no.  273;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.3  x  16.4  cm. 

MIDNIGHT  HOUR,  see  'TIS  MIDNIGHT  HOUR. 

1430.  THE  MIDNIGHT  SENTINELl-0.^  in  the  midnight 
hour  (4  vs.)  Air— Oft  in  the  Stilly  Night. 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philadelphia;  March  2d,  1863. 
T.  o.  border.   24.9  x  15  cm. 

1431.  MILBURN'S  MOTTOI  OR,  WHILE  I  LIVE  I'LL 
CROVJ .—I've  found  a  plan  to  make  you  wise  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

As  sung  by  J.  H.  Milburn;  publ.  by  San  Francisco 
News  Company;  print.  B.  F.  Sterett. 
T.  o.  border.   28.8  x  11.7  cm. 

THE  MILKMAID,  see  PARODY  ON  I'M  LONELY 
TO-NIGHT. 

1432.  MILL  MAY.  — The  strawberries  grow  in  the  mowing. 
Mill  May  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.9  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  adv:  for  the  "Monthly  Singers'  Journal" 
signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.]  25.2  x  15.7  cm. 


1433.  THE   MILLER  OF   T^^  UY.1,.  — There  dwelt  a  miller 
hale  and  bold  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24  x  16  cm. 

1434.  MILLER'S  SONG.-O/z,  don't  you  remember,  Lilly 
dear  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Fred  Shaw;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.6  x  I6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  631;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.   23.5  x  15.8  cm. 

1435.  MWaiE.  — When  the  sun's  beam.ing  high  o'er  the 
cloudless  blue  sky  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:    Lilly  Dale. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.3  x  16.3  cm. 

1436.  MINNIE  CLYDE,  KITTY  CLYDE'S  SISTER. -Oft, 
long  have  I  sung  of  sweet  Kitty  Clyde  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  850;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  BEAUTEOUS 
LIZZIE  FANE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

1437.  MINNIE  DEAR.— Mzranie  dear  has  left  us  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   25.1  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  367;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.1  x  16.7  cm. 

1438.  MINNIE  MOOBS..  — The  rose  on  thy  cheek  grows 
pale,  Minnie  Moore  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  J.  H.  Hidley;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24.9  x 
15.9  cm. 

1439.  MINSTREL.-TSe  Minstrel  saw  as  damp  the  night 
descended  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  by  the  "Adelphi  Glee";  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.    (printed  twice). 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.9  cm. 

1440.  THE  MINSTREL  BOY.-77ze  minstrel  boy  to  the  war 
is  gone  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  618;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25.4  x  15.7  cm. 

1441.  THE  MINSTREL'S  RETURN'D  FROM  THE  WAR.- 
The  Minstrel's  return'd  from  the  war  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  1021;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1442.  MISFORTUNES  OF  BARNEY  O'NEIL.-O/;,  listen 
now,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Broth 
of  a  Boy. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  period  and  dash 
after  Air;  by  J.  Clark,  of  Clark's  Opera  Troupe,  Brooklyn; 
sheet  no.  931;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 


97 


1443.  MISS  DEBORAH  DIDDLE.  AND  SIR  GILBERT  GO- 
SOFTLY.— Fom  may  talk  of  sweet  passion,  and  wishing  and 
wooing  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air;   Our  Grand -fathers'  days. 

Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  pubL  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.1  x  15.9  cm. 

1444.  MISS  JINK'S  SUNDAY  OUT.-/'m  Jenny  Jinks,  the 
kitchen  maid  (8  vs.) 

PubL  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  w^ar  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   24.8  x   16.2  cm. 

1445.  THE  MISSING  STEAMER  PACIFIC. -O;;.'  how  long 
will  the  mystery  last?  (5  vs.) 

By  Charles  Hedges. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.2  x 
15.5  cm. 

1446.  MISSISSIPPI  BOAT  SONG-Sowe  boats  are  fast  and 
others  slow  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  480;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  with  SAVE  THE  CONSTITUTION  on  recto.] 
22.2  X  13.7  cm. 

THE  MISSISSIPPI  CHASE,  see  THE  UNION  FLAG. 

1447.  MISTAKES.— Siraw^e  scenes  are  acted  every  day 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Matt  Gebler. 

T.  o.  border.   15.9  x  10.5  cm.  (cropped) 

1448.  MISTER  BARNEY  O'TOOLE.-iWzsier  Barney  one 
day  went  to  limerick  fair  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  719;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  oupid  border.   25.2  x  15.7  cm. 

MISTER  FWAGAN,  see  MR.  FINAGAN. 

1449.  MOLLY  ASTHORE.->ls  down  by  Banna's  banks  I 
stray 'd  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.8  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Molly  Bawn  Astore";  long  lines;  sheet  no. 
1158;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

1450.  MOLLY  GUZZLED  THE  ICE-CREAM. -Promenad- 
ing doivn  Grand-Street  (3  vs.) 

Parody  on:   Mother  kissed  me  in  my  dream;  By  the 
"Professor". 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen  in  title  and  first  line;]  quotation  marks 
around  Parody;  sheet  no.  1225;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23.8  x  15.2  cm. 

1451.  MONEY  AM  A  HARD  THING  TO  BORROW. -Tfee 
tim.es  are  so  tight,  for  the  cash  is  hard  to  get  (6  vs.  and 
2  chors.)  Air,  Jordan. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15. 1  cm. 


1452.  MONEY  IS  YOUR  ONLY  FRIEND. -Of  friendship  I 
have  heard  m.uch  talk  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.  Green  grow 
the  Rushes,  O! 

a.  2nd  song:   "The  Child  of  The  Regiment";  [publ.]   De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  16.I  cm. 

b.  With  quotes  around  Air;  sheet  no.  1194;  publ.  Wrigley 
[without  address]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.4  cm. 

1453.  MONITOR  AND  ME RRIMAC. -/w '  ^om^  to  sing  a 
song,  I  won't  detain  you  long  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Yankee 
Doodle  Dandy. 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.   21  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  24.3  x  13.9  cm. 

c.  [Without  Air;]  but  with  "The"  in  title;  By  Chas.  A. 
Clark;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26  x  16.4  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border.   23  x  13.8  cm. 

e.  With  "The"  in  title;  advs:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor,  and  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of  Songs;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

Black  flag  with  skull  and  crossbones,  motto:   "J.  D. 
His  Marque."  23.1  x  15.3  cm. 

f.  [Title  as  above;]  Respectfully  Dedicated  to  Wheelock 
M.  Gardner,  Esq.,  of  Brooklyn,  N.Y.;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  new  and  popular  Songs. 

Ornament  as  above.   23.5  x  13.3  cm. 

g.  [Without  Air;]  but  with  "The"  in  title;  sold  by 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  13.1  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  sheet  no.  917. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.  21  x  14  cm. 

i.    [As  above;  without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no. 
921;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.7  x  14. 1  cm. 

1454.  THE  MONITOR  AND  MERRIMACK. -Way  down  at 
Fort  Monroe  (9  vs.)  Air:   Landlady  of  France. 

a.  Publ.  James  D.  Gay,  the  celebrated  Army  Song  Pub- 
lisher, formerly  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery  of  Reading,  Pa. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  border  with  Columbia  and  flag, 
battle  scenes,  soldier,  eagle,  etc.  in  red.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  dash  after  Air;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  122,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

1455.  THE  MONKEY'S  WEDDING.  — T/ze  monkey  married 
the  baboon's  sister  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1039;  sung  by  Lewis  Simmons  at  the  Amer- 
ican Hall,  444  Broadway  N.Y.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with 
THE  BROGUE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

1456.  THE  MONKS  OF  OhD.-Many  have  told  of  the  monks 
of  old  (4  vs.  and  3  chors.) 


98 


[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:    1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

A  MONODY  TO  ROBERT  BURNS,  see  A  HUNDRED 
YEARS  AGO. 

1457.  THE  MOON  BEHIND  THE  HILL.-/  watch'd  last 
night  the  rising  moon  (4  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Abbecco;  publ.  Boyd;  adv:   Boyd's  Circu- 
lating Library. 

T.  o.  border;  man  watching  moon  rising.   20.3  x 
11.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.6  x  16.1  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  786;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.8  cm. 

THE  MOON  IS  UP,  see  PRETTY  LITTLE  FLORA. 

1458.  THE  MORMON  KDMG.-O/z  hark  kind  friends  while  I 
do  sing  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— PCing  of  the  Cannibal  Islands. 

Words  by  G.  W.  Anderson,  Irish  Vocalist;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.6  cm. 

1459.  MORNING'S  RUDDY  BEAMS. -Mor«in^'s  ruddy 
beams,  tint  the  eastern  sky  (2  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

Adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ.  John- 
son (2);  Printed  and  sold  Wholesale  at  [blank]   Card  &  Job 
Printing  Office,  Philad. 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  14.6  cm. 

1460.  THE  MOTE  AND  THE  BEAM-Wfeera  truth  reflects 
upon  the  senses  (5  vs.) 

Written  by  Elder  Wm.  Laues;  adv:   You  will  save  25 
per  cent  .  .  .;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15. 2  cm. 

1461.  MOTHER,  COME,  YOUR  BOY  IS  DYING. -Mof/zer, 
come,  your  boy  is  dying  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Music  publ.  by  Wm.  R.  Smith. 
A-J  border.   20  x  13.2  cm. 

1462.  MOTHER  DEAR,  I'LL  COME  HOME.-0/j.'  Mother 
dear,  I  sigh  in  vain  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  comma  after  "Mother",  and  "Again"  added  to 
title;  2nd  song:   "By-Gone  Days". 

A-J  border.   20  x  13.3  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  T.  B.  Prendergast,  at  Bryant's  Minstrels,  472 
Broadway,  N.Y.;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3), 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.6  x  15.5  cm. 

0.   As  Sung  at  Bryant's  Minstrels,  472  Broadway,  N.Y.; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

d.    [Without  comma  and  period  in  title;]   sheet  no.  696; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

MOTHER  DEAR,  I'LL  COME  HOME  AGAIN,  see 
ERIN  IS  MY  HOME. 

1463.  MOTHER,  DEAR,  I'M  THINKING  OF  YOV.-"Mother, 
dear,  I'm  thinking  of  you"  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


Copied  by  permission  of  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1), 
Music  Publishers,  owners  of  the  copy-right. 

a.  Adv;   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

1464.  MOTHER,  DEAREST,  I  AM  COMING. -ZJearesi 
mother,  since  I  left  you  (3  vs.) 

Copied  by  permission  of  Henry  McCaffrey,  Music 
Publisher,  owner  of  the  copyright. 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  97,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  165.   20.4  x   12.8  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  99,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19  x  12.5  cm. 

1465.  MOTHER,  HE'S  GOING  AV/AY-Now  what  are  you 
crying  for,  Nelly  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  733;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

MOTHER  I  AM  GOING,  see  COURAGE,  MOTHER  I 
AM  GOING. 

1466.  MOTHER,  IS  THE  BATTLE  OVER?  -Mother,  is  the 
battle  over  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Without  comma  in  title;]   2  vs.  only;  music  published 
by  J.  Marsh  (1);  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border;  mounted  officer  and  two  soldiers.   21  x 
12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  22.7  x  13.5  cm. 

c.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  Air— The  Fairy  Boy;  publ. 
Auner  [address  cropped]. 

Eagle  with  flag.   18  x  10.5  cm. 

d.  [Without  comma  in  title;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  17  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]   De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   23.5  x 
15.3  cm. 

f.  Air.— The  Fairy  Boy;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   600  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  Songs. 

A-J  border;  mounted  officer  and  two  soldiers.  24.7  x 
15  cm. 

g.  With  2  vs.;  adv:   600  different  kinds  of  Songs. 

A-J  border;  mounted  officer  and  two  soldiers.   19.7  x 

12.2  cm.  (cropped) 

h.   With  quotation  marks  at  beginning  of  first  line. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  18,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.8  x  13  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  123,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

19.6  X  12  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  124,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  12  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  144,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.3  X  12.7  cm. 


99 


m.  With  quotation  marks  at  beginning  of  first  line;  sheet 
no.  570;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.9  x  16.1  cm. 

n.   First  line  as  above;  sheet  no.  766;  [without  imprint.] 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  23  x  14  cm. 

1467.  MOTHER,  I'VE  COME  HOME  TO  VIE. -Dear  mother, 
I  remember  well  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  E.  Bowers,  Music  by  Henry  Tucker. 

a.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  composer's  name  given  as 
"Hy.";  Firth,  Son  &  Co.  music  publishers  and  owners  of 
the  copyright;  with  3  chors;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   22.7  x  13.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  Firth,  Son  &  Co.  listed  as  owners 
of  the  copyright.]   20.4  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  With  "Dear"  in  title;  music  obtained  of  Firth,  Son  & 
Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

e.  Composer's  name  given  as  "Hy.";  Firth,  Son  &  Co. 
music  publishers  and  owners  of  the  copyright;  publ.  John- 
son (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.   24.2  x  14  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  without  adv.]  24.7  x  14.7  cm. 

g.  Music  had  at  Firth,  Son  &  Co.,  owners  of  the  copyright; 
advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  41a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

i.    [As  above,  but  without  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;] 
hdpc.  Magnus  52,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus.   19  x  12.3  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  54,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus. 
21  X  13  cm. 

k.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  55,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus. 
21  X  13  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  73,  bronze  ink;  publ.  Magnus. 
21  X   13.4  cm. 

m.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  75,  bronze  ink;  publ.  Magnus. 
18.6  X  12.6  cm. 

n.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  83,  bronze  ink.  21  x  13.2  cm. 

o.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  127,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  13  cm. 

p.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  147,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
18  X  13  cm. 

q.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  197,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.6  cm. 

r.   With  "Dear"  in  title;  "Mother"  in  first  line;  sheet  no. 
855;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15.7  cm. 

s.   Music  had  at  Firth,  Son  &  Co.,  owners  of  the  copyright; 
sheet  no.  1149;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15.2  cm. 

1468.  MOTHER  KISSED  ME  IN  MY  UKEAU.— Lying  on  my 
dying  bed  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

With  narrative  beginning:   "A  young  soldier,  who  was 
severely  wounded  at  the  Battle  of  Antietam  .  .  .". 


a.  With  bracket  at  beginning  of  narrative;  Words  by  Geo. 
Cooper;  Music  by  J.  R.  Thomas;  William  A.  Pond  &  Co., 
Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.   21.7  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  Music  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.5 
X  14.6  cm. 

f.  Music  obtained  at  Wm.  Pond  &  Co. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  156,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus 

(1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  193,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

h.   Music  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co;  sheet  no.  1201; 
publ.  Wrigley  [address  imperfectly  printed.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.7  x  15.2  cm. 

1469.  MOTHER,  O  SING  ME  TO  'REST.— Mother,  oh!  sing 
m.e  to  rest  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1098;  as  sung  by  S.  C.  Campbell,  of  Bryants 
Minstrels;  music  had  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1470.  MOTHER  ON  THE  BRAIN. -As  you  look  on  the  songs 
that  you  see  now-a-days  (4  vs.)  Air:   The  Bonnie  Blue  Flag. 

By  John  C.  Cross. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  With  dash  after  "Air".   20.3  x  10.5  cm. 

1471.  MOTHER  WHEN  THE  WAR  IS  OYEB..- Mother  when 
the  war  is  over  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

18  X  10  cm.  (cropped) 

1472.  MOTHER  WOULD  COMFORT  ME.-Wounded  and 
sorrowful,  far  from  m.y  hom.e  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson. 

a.  [Without  "music  obtained  .  .  ."] 

T.  o.  border.   18  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  3  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23  x  13.5  cm. 

c.  Words  and  Music  by  Charles  Carroll  Sawyer;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  23.5  x  15.2  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

6.    [Without  "Music  obtained  .  .  .";]  3  chors.;  Sawyer  & 
Thompson,  Music  Publishers. 

A-J  border.  20  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

f.   Adv:   600  different  kinds  of  songs. 
A-J  border.  20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 


100 


g.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [pub.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  94,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  194,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.8  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;  hdpc. 
Magnus  151,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   20  x  12.6  cm. 

j.    [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  1171;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  15  cm. 

k.    [As  above;  without  imprint;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids 
border.  23.5  x  15. 3  cm. 

1473.  MOTHER  WOULD  WALLOP  ME.  A  PARODY  ON 
MOTHER  WOULD  COMFORT  ME.  — Wounded  and  sorrow- 
ful, in  Jersey  I  roam  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  John  Casten  Cross,  Written  for  Pony  Smith,  the 
famous  personator  of  Burnt-Cork  eccentricities. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  With  quotes  around  "Mother  Would  Comfort  Me."  in 
title;  sheet  no.  1313;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1474.  A  MOTHER'S  ADDRESS  TO  HER  SON.-O,  my  dear 
son,  you  cannot  tell  (5  vs.) 

a.  By  Dr.  H.  Cann;  By  permission;  Air— Bonny  Doon; 
sold  by  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Title:  "A  Mother's  Address  To  Her  Son  At  War"; 
first  line  beginning:   "My  dear  Son";  composed  by  H. 
Cann;  Air— Days  of  Absence;  sold  at  No.  720  Twenty- 
third  Street  above  Coates. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  20.3  x  12  cm. 

THE  MOTHER'S  ASSENT,  see  THE  NATION'S  LAST 
CALL. 

1475.  A  MOTHER'S  HYMN  IN  TIME  OF  WAR.-Oh  Lord 
of  hosts !  his  country  called  (3  vs.) 

By  William  Ross  Wallace;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  210, 
col.  20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

1476.  A  MOTHER'S  PRAYER.-God  of  nations ,  God  of 
might  (10  vs.) 

By  Mrs.  Margaret  Piggot;  with  narrative  preceding 
song,  beginning:  "The  Lady  who  wrote  the  following"; 
Baltimore,  April  19th,  1861;  print.  John  D.  Toy.  19.7  x 
14  cm. 

THE  MOTHER'S  PRAYER,  see  also  THE  NATION'S 
LAST  CALL. 

1477.  THE  MOTHER'S  REPLY  TO  ROCK  ME  TO  SLEEP. 
—  My  child!  my  child!  thou  art  weary  to-night     (4  vs.) 

a.  With  quotation  marks  around  "Rock  Me  To  Sleep"  in 
title. 

A-J  border.   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1036;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 


1478.  MOTHER'S  WAITING  FOR  HER  SOLDIER  BOY-Bji 
the  blue  Potomac's  waters  (6  vs.)  Air.- Fairy  Boy,  or. 
Mother  is  the  Battle  Over. 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  the  lamented 
and  much  beloved  Dr.  John  F.  Kaufman,  Assistant  Surgeon 
of  the  74th  Regiment  N.Y.V.,  Excelsior  Brigade. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.  23  x  13. 5  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Air"  and  "Respectfully  dedicated  to.  .  .";] 
publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  22  x  11.2  cm. 

1479.  THE  MOUNTAIN  BVGhE. -Cheerily  thy  bugle 
sounds  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  publ.  by  Geo.  Willig,  Jr. 

A-J  border.   20.2  x  12. 7  cm.   (cropped) 

MOUNTAIN  WAVE,  see  A  BOLD  BRAVE  CREW. 
SONG  OF  THE  SEA. 

1480.  MOUNTAINEER'S  SONG.- Our  quarters  are  in 
Schuylkill,  our  men  are  brave  and  true  (10  vs.)  Air— Rocks 
of  Sicily. 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  15. 2  cm. 

1481.  MOURIR  POUR  LA  PATRIE  !-Par  la  voix  du  canon 
d'alarm.e  (2  vs.  and  chor.  with  the  English  version  next  to 
it.) 

Words  by  Alex.  Dumas;  Revolutionary  Song  of  '48,  as 
sung,  at  Paris,  during  the  struggle,  February  22,  23,  & 
24;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25  x  17.3  cm. 

1482.  MR.  &  MRS.  Si^iBBS.-Oh! Mister  Snibbs,  you 
cruel  man  (12  vs.  uneven  length) 

Sheet  no.  714;  adv:  Wanamaker  &  Brown,  Oak  Hall 
Clothing;  publ.  Auner  (5);  [with  YANKEE  MAN  OF  WAR 
on  verso.) 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  14  cm. 

1483.  MR.  FINAGAN.-7'm  a  dacent  laboring  youth  (8  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.6  x  16. 3  cm. 

0.  Title:  "Mister  McFinagin":  long  lines;  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  advs:  Johnson's  New  and  Popular  Songster,  Berry's 
popular  and  original  comic  songs,  and  The  Garland. 
Multi-line  border  with  ornamental  corners;  man 
watched  by  a  monkey  in  a  tree.  23.1  x  12.2  cm. 

d.  With  "Mister"  in  title;  sheet  no.  652. 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.1  x  15.6  cm. 

1484.  MR.  SIMKINS  LIVED  AT  LEEDS.-Mr.  Simkins 
lived  at  Leeds  (9  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  597;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border,  col.  24.7  x  17  cm. 


101 


1485.  MRS.  CUNNINGHAM  AND  THE  BABY. -A  child 
micst  be  bom,  an  heir  to  Burdell  (4  vs.)  Air— "Villikins 
and  his  Dinah." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  adv.  for  the  "Monthly  Singers' 
Journal,"  signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.]  24  x 
15.5  cm. 

c.  Headed:  "No.  1.";  [publ.  Johnson.] 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  11.7  cm.  (cropped) 

1486.  MRS.  CUNNINGHAM'S  DARLING  BABY. -There 
lived  in  New  York,  in  the  days  of  old  (6  vs.)  Air— "Fine 
Old  English  Gentleman,  or  the  Cork  Leg." 

By  Brickbat;  headed:  "No.  3.";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

1487.  MRS.  JOHNSON.— O/z.'/  /Mt)e  got  a  charming  bride 
(12  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  508;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.6  cm. 

1488.  MRS.  LOFTY  AND  l.-Mrs.  Lofty  keeps  a  carriage 
(4  vs.) 

Words  by  Mrs.  C.  H.  Gildersleeve;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4);  copyright  secured. 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25  x 
16.5  cm. 

1489.  MRS.  WADDLE. -Mrs.  Waddle  was  a  widow  and  she 
made  no  little  gain  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  466;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

1490.  MUIRNEEN  NA  GROUEGH  BAANEH.-ZJoiwz  fry  the 
river  side  there  dwells  a  comely  bride  (5  vs.) 

Headed:  "A  New  Song  called";  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

1491.  MUNSON'S  HILLI-OA  call  us  hard  names ,  call  us 
m.ere  tools  (4  vs.)  Air— "Call  me  Pet  Names." 

Headed:  "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  hunter  with  hound.  29.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1492.  THE  MURDERED  POLICEMAN,  EUGENE  ANDER- 
SON, WHO  WAS  SHOT  BY  THE  DESPERATE  ITALIAN 
BURGLAR,  MICHAEL  CANCEMI,  COR.  OF  CENTRE  AND 
GRANT  STREETS,  JULY  22,  1857.-0  sad  and  mournful 
tale,  yet  the  truth  I'll  relate  (10  vs.)  Air— Indian  Hunter. 

By  Saugerties  Bard;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.5  cm. 

1493.  MUTTON:  OR  MR.  &  MRS.  BONE— O  don't  be  jeer- 
ing, whilst  you're  hearing  (7  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  752;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

1494.  MY  BOY  WITH  THE  AUBURN  HAIR.- Tzoas  on  a 
Summer' s  morning,  all  in  the  month  of  May  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Sheet  no.  57;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15  cm. 


1495.  MY  BOYHOOD'S  HAPPY  HOME.-Mji  boyhood's 
happy,  happy  hom.e  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  and  Music  by  Our  Ned;  Music  obtained  at  J.  J. 
Daley's  (2);  [with  adv.  for  Singer's  Journal,  signed  Mrs. 
Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4);  (Copy- 
right Secured.) 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24.5  x 
16.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  but  without  adv.  on  verso.]  25  x  10.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  310;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  RAM- 
BLING BOY  OF  POVERTY  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above:  with  THE  FISHBALL  MUSKETEER  on 
recto.)  25.2  x  15.7  cm. 

MY  BOYHOOD'S  HOME,  see  HOME,  SWEET  HOME. 

1496.  MY  CLARA  DEAR.— T/ze  Southern  Sun  was  sinking 
low  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1497.  MY  COTTAGE  HOME.— Mj)  home,  my  home,  my 
cottage  hom.e  (2  vs.) 

a.  Advs:  By  sending  orders  through  Despatch;  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill  Heads;  and  You  will  save  25  per  cent; 
publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  870;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22  x  15.5  cm. 

MY  COUNTRY  'TIS  OF  THEE,  see  AMERICA. 

1498.  MY  DEAR  LUCINDA.-As  /  walked  out  last  Sunday 
night  (5  vs.) 

With  narrative  beginning:  "De  ole  musqueto  bone 
nigga.  .  .";  Adv:  Price  One  Cent. 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  13.7  cm. 

1499.  MY  EMMA  LOUISE.— FoM  may  talk  of  your  beauties 
with  eyes  so  bewitching  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Composed  by  Charles  Carroll  Sawyer;  arranged  for 
the  piano  by  Henry  Tucker;  music  obtained  by  Sawyer  & 
Thompson;  sheet  no.  1122;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  I'M 
AFLOAT  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

1500.  MY  FATHER  SOULD  CHARCOAL.-When  I  was  a 
servant  in  sweet  Tipperary,  oh!  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

As  sung  and  danced  by  Dick  Ralph  of  Cotton  And 
Sharpley's  Minstrels;  music  publ.  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co. 
(1)  and  may  be  obtained  of  C.  H.  Ditson  &  Co.;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.4  x  15.9  cm. 

1501.  MY  FIFTY-THIRD— 0«e  summer  day  the  first  of 
June  (10  vs.)  Air.— Maryland,  my  Maryland. 

Respectfully  Dedicated  to  the  53d  Regt.  P.  V.,  by  Levi 
J.  Fritz;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Eagle  with  motto:   "Pluribus  Unum".  24.3  x  16  cm. 

MY  FRIEND  AND  PITCHER,  see  THE  IRISH  TOAD. 


102 


1502.  MY  GIRL  WITH  THE  CALICO  DRESS.-A  fig  for 
your  upper-ten  girls  (4  vs.)  Air— Old  Rosin  The  Beau. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

1503.  MY  GOOD-LOOKING  MAN. -Come  all  you  pretty 
fair  maids,  of  courage  brave  and  true  (12  vs.)  Air:  Roving 
Journeyman. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.1  x  i6.6  cm. 

1504.  MY  GOOD  OLD  DARKEY  HOME. -T/iere  is  a  place 
in  childhood  where  oft  I  liked  to  roam  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  J.  Stratton  at  Bryants'  Minstrels,  472 
Broadway,  N.  Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.8  x  16.4  cm. 

1505.  MY  GOOD  OLD  IRISH  HOME.— Oc/z  my  heart  still 
yearns  for  my  good  ould  Irish  Home  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air.— My  Old  Kentucky  Home. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  28;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.8  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  With  "OULD"  in  title;  Words  written  by  John  L. 
Zieber,  expressly  for  Mr.  P.  J.  Gannon,  the  young  Irish 
Comedian  and  Vocalist,  and  sung  by  him  only;  adv:  You 
will  save  25  per  cent;  publ.  Zieber. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

1506.  MY  GRAND-MOTHER'S  ADVICE.-/  lived  with  my 
grandm.a  on  yonder  little  green  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.2  x  16.2  cm. 

1507.  MY  GUM  A  RUBBER  BOOTS.— Go  it  rubber  boots 
and  save  my  pantalets  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.)  Air  Jordan  is 
a  Hard  Road  to  Travel. 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  360;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1);  [with  LITTLE  ALICE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  but  without  song  on  recto,  and  with  period 
at  end  of  title.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

1508.  MY  HEART  IS  SAD  AND  LONELY.-Ofe,  my  heart 
is  sad  and  lonely  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (4);  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  borders,  col.  24.8  x 
16.3  cm. 

1509.  MY  HEART  IS  SAD  FOR  THEE,  ANNIE. -My  heart 
is  sad  for  thee,  Annie  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Gentle  Annie. 

Anecdote:  Specimens  of  Western  oratory;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16.1  cm. 

1510.  MY  HEART'S  IN  OLD  IRELAND.-Mji  bark  on  the 
billow  dash' d  gloriously  on  (5  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  215;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   23.3  x  15.2  cm. 


1511.  MY  HIGHLAND  HOME.-Mji  highland  home,  where 
tempests  blow  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  673;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.1  x  15.6  cm. 

1512.  MY  HOME  IN  KENTUCK.— /  long,  how  I  long  for  my 
home  in  Kentuck  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.3  x  16.8  cm. 

1513.  MY  JOHNNY  IS  A  SAILOR  BOLD.-Mj;  Johnny  is  a 
sailor  bold  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  My  love  he  is  a  Sailor 
Boy. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  26  x  15.6  cm. 

1514.  MY  JOHNNY  WAS  A  SHOEMAKER. -My  Johnny 
was  a  shoemaker  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.8  x  i6.3  cm. 

1515.  MY  LOVE  IS  A  ZOU-ZU.— My  love  is  a  Zou-zu,  so 
gallant  and  bold  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Air.— My  Love  is  a  Sailor  Boy;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Title:  "My  Love  He  Is  A  Zou-Zu,  Only  19  Years 
Old";  only  one  chor.;  [without  comma  in  first  line;]  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   21.3  x  15  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery 
with  stars  and  stripes,  col.  23  x  15.1  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no. 
803;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.4  cm. 

e.  Title:   "My  Love  He  Is  A  Zou-Zu.   Only  19  Years 
Old".;  only  one  chor.;  sheet  no.  768;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

1516.  MY  LOVE  IS  LIKE  A  NOSEGAY.- O,  my  love  is 
like  a  nosegay  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1172;  sold  by  Partridge  [&  Co.] 
T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  15.9  cm. 

MY  LOVE  IS  LIKE  A  RED,  RED  ROSE,  see  WE  WERE 
BOYS  AND  GIRLS  TOGETHER. 

1517.  MY  LOVE  IS  ON  THE  BATTLE  FIELD.-My  love 
is  on  the  battle  field  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Robt.  Morris,  Esq.;  Music  by  Alfred 
Delaney;  Music  publ.  by  Lee  &  Walker. 

a.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  Lee  &  Walker, 
Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Tune.— Soldier  Boy  to  the  War  is  Gone;  advs:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill- Heads,  and  Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  soldier  with  rifle.  23.7  x  I5.i  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  t.  o.  border;  soldier  with  rifle.   23.5  x 
15.5  cm. 


103 


d.  Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  101,  col.  20.3 
X  12.8  cm. 

1518.  MY  MARYLAND.— My  barefoot  hands  are  on  thy 
shore  (8  vs.) 

By  Stone-Wall  Jackson;  2nd  song:  "Our  Maryland"; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1519.  MY  MARY'S  DEAD.  — SAe  sleeps  where  early  spring 
flowers  bloom  (2  vs.) 

By  J.  Ward  Childs;  sheet  no.  1081;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.1  x  15.2  cm. 

1520.  MY  MOTHER  DEAR.— T/zere  was  a  place  in  child- 
hood (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.1x15.1 
cm. 

1521.  MY  MOTHER'S  CUSTOMS. -Come,  Mary,  bring  the 
scrubbing  brush,  and  chuck  away  the  slops  (4  vs.)   Air— 
"The  days  when  we  went  a  gipsying. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.  25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  quotation  marks 
at  end  of  Air;  sheet  no.  625;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

1522.  MY  MUSTACHE  IS  GROWING. -My  mustache  is 
growing  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air,— Annie  of  the  Vale. 

a.  [Without  comma  after  "Air";]  publ.  Auner  [without 
address.] 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  940. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1523.  MY  NATIVE  LAND.- My  Native  land!  my  native 
land  (4  vs.) 

"Headed:   "Auner,  the  Greatest  Song  Publisher  in 
the  city";  publ.  Auner  (5). 

Eagle  with  flag.  27.9  x  21.7  cm. 

1524.  MY  NICK-NAME  IS  BARNEY.-My  nick-name  is 
Barney:   Och,  I  am  a  devil  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Flaming 
O '  Flannagans . 

Composed  and  sung  by  G.  W.  Anderson,  the  Irish 
Vocalist;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  14.9  cm. 

1525.  MY  NORMANDY.— /?o^e  whispers  me,  when  summer 
com.es  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.1  x 
16.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  635;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.9  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  COURAGE,  MOTHER,  I  AM  GOING 
on  recto.]  24  x  15.6  cm. 

1526.  MY  NORTHERN  BOY  TO  THE  WAR  HAS  GONE  !- 
My  Northern  Boy  to  the  war  has  gone  (3  vs.)  Air:  The 
M[i]nstrel  Boy. 

By  John  Ross  Dix. 


a.  Cop:  1864,  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.   Magnus  204,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).   19.5  x  10.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  132,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

1527.  MY  OLD  KENTUCKY  HOME,  GOOD  NIGHT.- 7%e 
sun  shines  bright  in  the  old  Kentucky  hom.e  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1528.  MY  OWN  DEAR  NATIVE  HOME.-There  was  a 
place,  in  childhood  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.7  x  16.1 
cm. 

b.  Written  and  sung  by  Frank  Spear,  with  Budworth  and 
Campbell's  Wood's  Minstrels;  sheet  no.  925;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

1529.  MY  OWN,  MY  GENTLE  MOTHER.-My  own,  my 
gentle  m.other,  why  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  199,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

1530.  MY  OWN  NATIVE  LAND.— /'z;e  roamed  over  mom- 
tain,  I've  crossed  over  flood  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  Revised  and  published 
expressly  for  the  use  of  the  Public  Schools,  and  taught  by 
Mr.  T.  Myers,  the  Blind  Teacher;  adv:  Johnson's  New 
Catalogue  of  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  22  x  13.3  cm. 

c.  With  short  lines  and  some  differences  in  wording; 
printed  and  sold  at  No.  404  Vine  above  Fourth  street. 

T.  o.  border;  Indian  smoking  pipe.   19  x  n  cm. 

d.  "Roved"  instead  of  "roamed"  in  first  line;  short 
lines;  differences  in  wording  of  text;  sheet  no.  449;  publ. 
Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.8  cm. 

1531.  MY  POOR  DOG  TRAY.- Ore  the  green  banks  of 
Shannon,  when  Shelah  was  nigh  (6  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  adv:  All  the  New  Songs. 

T.  o.  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

1532.  MY  PRETTY  GAZELLE.— Come  hither,  my  pretty 
gazelle  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  683;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.1  x  15.5  cm. 

MY  SKIFF  IS  BY  THE  SHORE,  see  COME,  OH!  COME 
WITH  ME. 

1533.  MY  SWEET  WIFE,  MY  SALLIE.-Tte  night  is  dark- 
the  bitter  wind  (4  vs.)  Air:  The  Girl  I  left  behind  me. 

a.  By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:   1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  168a,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2).  20.1  x  12.5  cm. 


104 


1534.  MY  TRUE  LOVE  IS  A  BUTCHER  BOY.-My  true 
love  is  a  Butcher  Boy,  I  would  have  you  all  to  know  (6  vs.) 
Air:  The  Salieur  Boy. 

Composed  by  J.  J.  Allen;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border;  col;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.5  x  17.4  cm. 

1535.  MY  YOUNG  WIFE  AND  I.—/  merrily  sing  from 
mom  till  night  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  sung,  with  unbounded  applause,  by  Harry 
Richmond;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.9  x  16  cm. 

1536.  NANCY  BELL  OR  OLD  PINE  TREE.-O/z  darkies, 
now  I'm  going  to  sing  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  22.9  x  13.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.8  xi4.8  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1537.  NANCY  FAT.— O^,  Nancy  Fat,  she  was  a  gal  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1256;  Sung  by  Dave  Reed,  of  Bryant's 
Minstrels;  Music  obtained  at  Wm.  A.  Pond  &Co.;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.8  x  14  cm. 

1538.  NANCY  GRAY.— I  fell  in  love  with  Nancy  Gray 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.9  x  13.6  cm. 

1539.  NANCY  TEASE.-How  is  you  white  folks,  one  and  all 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.9  x  15  cm. 

1540.  NANCY  TILL. —Down  by  de  cane  brake  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Headed:    "Popular  Song";  Sung  Nightly  with  Tremen- 
dous Applause,  by  all  the  Minstrel  Bands. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.4  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  heading  or  singers'  names;]  with  "the"  in 
first  line  in  place  of  "de". 

A-J  border.  19.9  x  12.1  cm. 

0.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

1541.  NAPOLEON'S  FAREWELL  TO  VkWS,.-Farewell\ 
ye  splendid  citadel,  metropolis ,  called  Paris  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16. 8  cm. 

1542.  ^kVOWCAm'E.-Napolitaine,  I  am  dreaming  of  thee 
(2  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Carncross,  at  Sanford's  Opera  House;  2nd 
song:    "Happy  Moments";  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  474;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [with  2nd  imprint 
within  border;]  [COLUMBIA'S  GLORIOUS  RULLING 
LIBERTY  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  23  ^  15.6  cm. 


1543.  THE  NATION  IS  V^EEVIHG.- Lincoln  has  fallen  1 
the  good  and  great  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Under  the  willow 
she's  sleeping. 

By  Louise  S.  Upham. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower  cor- 
ners; flag,  cannon,  mourning  woman  leaning  on  tomb  under 
willow.  25.1  X  16.8  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  dash  after  "Air";  "Willow"  and 
"Sleeping"  in  Air;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Head  of  Lincoln.  20.4  x  10.8  cm. 

c.  With  "Willow"  in  Air;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  mourning  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  1. 

20.5  X  12.7  cm. 

d.  With  period  and  dash  after  "Air",  and  quotation  marks 
around  its  title;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border;  tomb  under  willow  with 
2  figures  looking  on.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

1544.  THE  NATION  MOURNS.-  From  all  churches  (5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Mourning  border;  letter  paper;  hdpc.    Magnus  7. 
20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  7.     19.1  x  12.8  cm. 

1545.  A  NATION  MOURNS  HER  MARTYR'D  SON.-^  Na- 
tion mourns  hermartyr'd  Son  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "In  Memory  Of  Abraham  Lincoln  Sixteenth 
President  of  the  United  States";  with  quotation:    "An 
Honest  Man's  the  Noblest  Work  of  God";  words  by  Alice 
Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner];  music  by  Sep.  Winner;  cop: 
1865,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (3); 
publ.  Auner  (5). 

Mourning  border.  23.4  x  14.4  cm. 

1546.  NATIONAL  ALPHABET. ->1  stands  for  Abraham, 
Chief  of  the  Land  (40  lines) 

As  W[r]itten,  Arranged  and  Printed  with  Consent  of  Dick 
Watkins,  Olympic  Music  Hall,  Race  Street,  Philadelphia, 
Pa.,  October  14th,  1862. 

T.  o.  border.  30.4  x  I6  cm. 

1547.  NATIONAL  ANTHEM  OF  THE  PORT  STEERAGE 
MESS,  U.S.  FLAG  SHIP  "PHILADELPHIA. "-^s  we  lay 
in  the  creek,  tired  to  death  and  half  sick  (14  vs.)  Air— 
"Robinson  Crusoe." 

Letter  paper.  26.1  x  19.9  cm. 

1548.  THE  NATIONAL  FAST. -Our  nation  is  bending 
(12  vs.) 

[Signed]  Miss  Rebecca  F.  Peers.    For  the  National 
Fast,  September  26th,  1861.    Camden,  N.J. 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  11.3  cm. 

1549.  NATIONAL  GUARD  MARCHING  SONG.->l  sound 
through  the  nation  is  rolling  amain  (4  vs.)  Air.— "Lutzow's 
Wild  Chase." 

Dedicated  to  Col.  P.  Lyle;  publ.  Du  Bree. 
T.  o.  border;  seated  woman  holding  flag.  23.7  x  13.5 
cm. 

1550.  NATIONAL  GUARDS  SONG-W'e  are  the  gallant  little 
band  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Lazy  Club." 

Dedicated  to  Company  I,  by  J.  Tittermaryi  [publ.l 
Johnson  (2);  adv:    Printing  of  all  description. 
A-J  border.  19.9  x  12.3  cm.  (cropped) 


105 


1551.  NATIONAL  HYMN. -In  the  name  of  Jehovah  our 
banner  we  raise  (4  vs.  and  chors.)  [Air:]  Moore's  Song, 
[with  slight  variations] 

With  explanation  beginning:    "The  following  hymn  is 
copied  from  the  new  book  of  'Poems'  "...,  by  T.  H.  Stockton, 
Chaplain  to  Congress;  for  sale  at  Shepherd's,  Ballantyne's 
and  Anderson's;  with  quotation  from  the  Book  of  Psalms. 
20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

1552.  A  NATIONAL  SONG,  FOR  FOREFATHERS'  DAY, 
1869.— ffaz7,  ye  sons  of  brave  sires!  whose  Forefathers , 
free  (7  vs.  and  4  chors.)  Air.— "The  Star  Spangled  Banner." 

By  C.  C.  Haven.  19.5  x  24.5  cm. 

1553.  NATIONAL  THANKSGIVING  OD^.-Ancient  of  Days', 
before  whose  throne  (9  vs.)  Air— Old  Hundred. 

By  C.  C.  Haven;  Trenton,  N.J.,  November,  1863. 

Single-line  border  with  ornamental  corners!  (Library 
Company  copy  has  insc.  reading:    "John  A.  McAlister  with 
the  respects  of  C.  C.  Haven  77.")  27.9  x  17.7  cm. 

1554.  THE  NATIONAL  U^IO^. ~0h!  who  would  strike  the 
recreant  blow  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air,  "Auld  Lang  Syne." 

Headed:    "Hymn  For  The  Union";  by  Chas.  Collins, 
Jr.;  print.  T.  Sinex;  with  explanation  of  song  beginning: 
"The  following  lines  were  written  and  dedicated  by  per- 
mission, to  the  Hon.  Henry  Clay,  February  1851..." 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  13.5  cm. 

1555.  THE  NATION'S  ¥'LAG.— Shall  that  proud  flag  now  be 
riven  (5  vs.)  [in  MS.:  Air.— "Gay  and  Happy".] 

16  X  11.7  cm.  (cropped:    apparently  a  proof.) 

1556.  THE  NATION'S  LAST  CAl.'L.-Now  men  of  the  North! 
will  you  join  in  the  strife  (6  vs.) 

Headed:    "Leaflets  for  Soldiers  and  their  Mothers"; 
[from  the]  Atlantic  Monthly;  2nd  song:    "The  Young  Patri- 
ot's Answer.    "Kiss  Me,  Mother,  And  Let  Me  Go";  3rd 
song:    "The  Mother's  Assent.    "I've  Kissed  Him,  And  Let 
Him  Go";  4th  song:    "The  Mother's  Prayer";  [in  MS:  "Got 
up  by  Mr.  J.  D.  Steel  of  Brooklyn  -  the  Steretype  plates  now 
in  possession  of  L.  I.  Hist.  Soc] 

T.  o.  border  in  red;  blue  ink;  seal  of  the  United  States 
and  flag,  col.  43.6  x  20.1  cm. 

1557.  THE  NATION'S  PRAYER.    (A  SONG  FOR  THANKS- 
GIVING DAY,  1863.)— God  of  our  fathers ,  hear  our  earnest 
cry  (5  vs.  with  music  for  1st  vs.) 

Words  by  Wm.  H.  Burleigh;  Music  by  Wm.  Henry  Burr; 
advs:    Waters'  Choral  Harp,  and  Also  Just  Issued:    "Shall 
we  know  each  other  there",  etc.;  publ.  Waters  (1);  for  sale 
by  N.  P.  Kemp  &  Graves  &  Young,  Buffalo,  N.Y.;  cop:  1863, 
E.A.  Daggett,  SDN.Y.;  Warren,  Music  Stereotyper. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  28.5  cm. 

1558.  THE  NATION'S  SCOURGE,  A  VOICE  FROM  OUR 
WHOLE  COUNTRY.    A  NATIONAL  ODE. -Wake!  Sons  of 
the  North!  Lo!  your  Country  is  calling{7  vs.)  Tune  — 
"Scotland,  or  Voice  of  Free  Grace." 

Written  by  Miss  Harriet  E.  Banks;  Composed  By  Her 
Father,  Respectfully  Dedicated  to  His  Excellency  Governor 
Curtin;  Copyright  Secured;  Publ.  and  sold  wholesale  and 
Retail  at  the  Poplar  Street  Picture  Frame  and  Stationery 
Store,  No.  907  Poplar  St.,  Philadelphia, 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  13.5  cm. 

THE  NATIVES  ARE  UP,  D'YE  SEE,  see  WE  ALL 
HAVE  HEARTS  TO  FIGHT  FOR  HOME. 

1559.  NATURE'S  WOODLAND  CAhh- Pleasure  roams 
wild  in  the  woodlands  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  Sheet  no.  612;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.9  x  15,7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  GIDEON'S  BAND  on  recto.]  24.8  x  15 
cm. 

1560.  NEAR  THE  BANKS  OF  THAT  LONE  RIVER. -Wear 
the  banks  of  that  lone  river  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  E.  H.  Winchell,  at  Bryants'  Minstrels,  472 
Broadway,  N.Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.4  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Magnus  (1);  adv:  Magnus'  Ornamental  and 
Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  201, 
col.  20.4  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  Advs:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2),  and 
Ten  Illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  233a, 
col.  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

1561.  NEARER  TO  THEE. -Wearer,  my  God  to  thee  (5  vs.) 
[Signed]  Sarah  F.  Adams;  no.  161.    American  Tract 

Society. 

T.  o.  border.  18.5  x  n.i  cm. 

1562.  NED  BRANAGHAN  AND  NELLY  MULLIGAN. -Ofe.' 
listen  to  a  doleful  tale,  'twill  almost  make  you  blubber 
(6  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.3  x  16. 1  cm. 

1563.  THE  NEGLECTED  PICTURE. -Wfeai  ails  you  Jeff? 
hast  had  a  "smash'!"  (7  vs.) 

From  the  Home  Journal;  with  explanation  of  song 
beginning:    "The  following  lines  were  suggested  on  seeing 
the  painting  styled  the  'Neglected  Picture',  by  W.  M.  Davis 
...";  adv:    Photographic  copies.  Carte  de  Visite  size;  [with 
account  of  painting  from  the  New  York  Herald  on  verso.] 
20  X  13  cm. 

1564.  THE  NEGRO  BOY  SOLD  FOR  A  VfATCH.-When 
thirst  of  gold  enslaves  the  mind  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  582. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  19  x  11.7  cm.  (cropped) 

1565.  THE  NEGRO'S  COM  PLAINT. -forced/rom  home 
and  all  its  pleasures  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border,  with  ornaments  in  corners.  20.3  x 
12  cm. 

1566.  NELL  FLAUGHERTY'S  DRAKE. -My  name  it  is 
Nell,  right  candid  I  tell  (7  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  23.9  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  653;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

1567.  NELLIE  OF  THE  NORTH.-T/ze  watch-fires  are 
gleam.ing  -  the  bright  stars  are  beaming  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 
Air:    Annie  of  the  Vale 

By  John  Ross  Dix. 

a.   Cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  174,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  12.6  cm. 


106 


b.  Advs:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.l  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  234a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  ^  12.6  cm. 

NELLIE,  WILT  THOU  BE  MY  BRIDE,  see  THE 
WATERY  GRAVE. 

1568.  NELLY  BUY. —Nelly  Bly!  Nelly  Bly!  bring  de  broom 
along  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  Nightly,  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  all  the 
Minstrel  Bands. 

a.  Title:    "Look!  Nelly  Bly";  [without  "Sung  Nightly..."] 
T.  o.  border;  woman  leaning  on  tree.  21.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Sold  by]  Astley. 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  23.6  x  15.7  cm. 

d.  [Without  "Sung  Nightly...";]  adv.    Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1569.  NELLY  VlARlMiG.— The  flowers  are  blooming, 
Nelly  Darling  (2  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  adv:    All  the  New  Songs. 
T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  13.7  cm. 

NELLY  GRAY,  see  DARLING  NELLY  GRAY. 

1570.  NELLY  WAS  A  LADY. -ZJotcw  on  de  Mississippi 
floating  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  adv:    All  the  New  Songs. 
T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

0.  3  vs.  and  chor;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  22.9  x  14.3  cm. 

1571.  NELLY  WOOD.  — 'Ttoas  on  a  clear  and  cloudless 
night  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Goodbye,  Allie  Dear! 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.3  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  "Good-bye"  in  Air;]  sheet  no.  1041;  by  J.  H. 
Wooley;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  FARMER'S  BOY  on 
recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15.7  cm. 

1572.  NERVE.  — 0/z.'  here  we  are  a  funny  pair,  our  like  was 
never  seen  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Hooley's  Minstrels;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Title:    "The  Nerves";  first  line  beginning:    "Well, 
here  we  are;"  short  lines  and  2  added  vs.;  Air:  The  Per- 
fect Cure;  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.8  cm. 

1573.  NETTIE  IS  NO  MORE.-Zw  a  little  lonely  cottage  by 
the  shady  mountain  side  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Nettie 
Moore. 

a.  Composed  by  John  Benjamin,  and  sung  by  H.Green- 
wood, at  the  Chatham  Theatre;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:    1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  865;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.8  x  15. 2  cm. 


1574.  NETTIE  MOORE.— In  a  little  white  cottage  where 
the  trees  are  ever  green  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.9  x  16. 7  cm. 

NEW  BILLY  BARLOW,  see  BILLY  BARLOW. 

THE  NEW  DIXIE,  see  DIXIE. 

NEW  HOIST  UP  THE  FLAG,  see  HOIST  UP  THE  FLAG 

NEW  HUNDRED  YEARS  HENCE,  see  HUNDRED 
YEARS  HENCE. 

1575.  NEW  JERS-A. -Cowe,  kind  friends,  all  draw  near 
(11  vs.) 

a.  Air.— "Root  HogorDie";  A  very  solemn  song  of  Inci- 
dents happening  in  New  Jersey;  Respectfully  dedicated  to 
a  Sweet  Potatoe;  By.  C.A.  Boggs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.2  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;)  Air:  K.Y.K.;  Sung  by 
Harry  Ball,  the  Yankee  Vocalist,  at  Hitchcock's  National 
Concert  Saloon,  172  New-Canal  str.  New-York;  publ. 

De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.2  x  15.9  cm. 

1576.  THE  NEW  JERSEY  THIRDl-Cowe  all  ye  true 
Americans ,  1  pray  you  lend  an  ear  (14  vs.)  Air. .."Caroline 
of  Edinborough  Town." 

By  H.E.  Loper,  Company  F. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  12.6  cm. 

NEW  JOHNNY  FILL  UP  THE  BOWL,  see  JOHNNY 
FILL  UP  THE  BOWL. 

1577.  THE  NEW  LIQUOR  LAW.— Ofc.'  what  a  wond'rous  age 
this  is  (5  vs.)  Air:  the  Quilting  Party. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   24  x  16  cm. 

1578.  NEW  NATIONAL  HYMN.-M3)  native  land  I  love 
(6  vs.)  Tune— America. 

Composed  by  an  American  Widow,  A.B.  Clark;  April, 
1864;  print.  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border.  22.5  x  15.6  cm. 

1579.  NEW  NURSERY  RHYMES. -Sin^  a  song  of  six-pence 
(2  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  blue  paper.  21.5  x  13.5  cm. 

1580.  THE  NEW  OTHER  SIDE  OF  JORDON.-77ze  Ladies 
little  Bonnets,  I  m.ust  mention  in  my  Sonnet  (8  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Sung  by  Mr.  S.  Sharpley,  at  Sanford's  Opera  House, 
With  raptures  of  applause;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  19.7  x  11.4  cm. 

NEW  PATRIOTIC  AND  COMIC  SONG  ON  THE  SINKING 
OF  THE  PIRATE  ALABAMA.    BY  THE  U.S.  GUNBOAT 
KEARSAGE,  CAPTAIN  WINSLOW.    JUNE  19TH,  1864,  see 
THE  SINKING  OF  THE  PIRATE  ALABAMA. 

NEW  RALLY  ROUND  THE  FLAG,  BOYS,  see  RALLY 
ROUND  THE  FLAG. 

NEW  RED,  WHITE,  AND  BLUE,  see  RED,  WHITE  AND 
BLUE. 

1581.  THE  NEW  SKEDADDLE  SONG.-I'U  sing  you  now  de 
last  new  song  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 


107 


(3). 


Music  obtained  of  Root  &  Cady  (2);  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16  cm. 


1582.  A  NEW  SONG  BY  NOBODY!-/'m  thinking  just  now 
of  nobody  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1383;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.9  x  15.2  cm. 

A  NEW  SONG  CALLED  REPEAL  OF  THE  UNION,  see 
REPEAL  OF  THE  UNION. 

THE  NEW  VERSION  OF  THE  COLORED  VOLUNTEER, 
see  THE  COLORED  VOLUNTEER. 

A  NEW  VERSION  OF  THE  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN, 
see  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN. 

NEW  WAR  SONG  OF  THE  69TH  REGIMENT,  see  WAR 
SONG  OF  THE  69TH  REGIMENT. 


1590.  NEW- YORK  FIRE  ZOUAVES.-Fe  Southron  rebels, 
clear  the  way  (6  vs.) 

a.  Title:    "The  New-York  Zouaves,  or  Fire-Brigade"; 
by  Archibald  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border;  cop:    1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  22.8  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  23.8  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  780;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.5  X  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  14.5 


1591.  THE  NEW  YORK  ICE-MAN. -My  name  it  is  Michal 
from  Dutchland  I  came  (5  vs.)  Air:  Villikins  and  his  Dinah. 

By  A.S.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.  25  x  16. 2  cm. 


NEW  WHACK  ROW  DE  DOW,  see  WHACK  ROW  DE 
DOW. 

1583.  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  BY  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE 
PUBLIC  LEDGER,  JANUARY  1,  1852.-Full  fifteen  times 
the  glorious  orb  of  day  (21  vs.  uneven  length) 

T.  o.  border;  engraving  of  Public  Ledger's  Hoe  Eight 
Cylinder  Printing  Press  by  lUman  &  Sons,  with  motto 
"Light!  More  Light  Still".  52.5  x  34  cm. 

1584.  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE 
EPISCOPAL'RECORDER,  JANUARY  1,  \?,(,5.-Again  we 
greet  you  with  our  New  Year's  call  (18  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  47  x  31  cm. 

1585.  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE 
PHILADELPHIA  EVENING  JOURNAL,  JANUARY  1,  1858. 
—The  Year  is  gone,  and  looking  back  (8  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  on  shield  within  frame  of  agricul- 
tural and  industrial  symbols.  42.8  x  27.8  cm. 

1586.  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  CARRIERS  OF  THE 
PRESBYTERIAN,  JANUARY  1,  1857. -7i  seems  but  a  little 
time,  m.y  friends  (28  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  32  x  23.7  cm. 

1587.  THE  NEW  YEAR'S  ADDRESS  OF  THE  NEWS  MEN 
OF  THE  NEW  YORK  HERALD.    TO  ITS  SUBSCRIBERS 
AND  READERS,  JANUARY  1,  1862.-Once  again,  in  her 
course  (29  vs.  uneven  length) 

Architectural  border  of  Civil  War  figures  with 
portraits.  54  x  39.7  cm. 

1588.  THE  NEW-YORK  APPRENTICE  BOY.-Come,  all 
you  wild  young  fellows  who  live  both  far  and  near  (7  vs.) 
Air:  The  Sheffield  apprentice. 

a.  Composed  and  sung  by  Harry  Greenwood,  the  Champion 
Balladist  at  the  Chatham  Theatre;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:    1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.6  x  16. 2  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  dash  after  Air;  sheet  no.  706;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1589.  THE  NEW-YORK  FIRE-ZOUAVES. -Come  all,  you 
loyal  citizens ,  I  pray  you  will  draw  near  (6  vs.)  Air:  River 
Roe. 

By  Mrs.  E.O.C.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25.5  x  16. 2  cm. 


1592.  NEW-YORK  IN  SLICES.— /'t;e  just  dropped  in  to  sing 
a  verse,  now  pray  don't  think  m.e  rude  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

With  last  three  verses  headed:    "Encore  Verses"; 
print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

1593.  NEW-YORK  7.TH  REGIMENT. -0/z,  the  first  from 
New-York  was  our  heroes  so  bold  (3  vs.)  Air     Star 
Spangled  Banner. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  With  period  and  dash  after  Air;  by  Albert  F.  Dawson 
[sicl;  sheet  no.  802;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stars  on  blue  ground  within  red 
stripes.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1594.  NEW-YORK  SIGHTS.-// yoa  want  to  go  down  Broad- 
way (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clovra  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen  and  period  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1000;  As 
sung  by  J.H.  Budworth;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1595.  NEW- YORK  12TH  REGIMENT:  NO  2.— When  Rebel- 
lion first  m.ade  its  appearance  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Red, 
White,  and  blue. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  "NO  2."  in  title;]  with  ampersand  in  place  of 
"and"  in  Air;  By  Albert  F.  Dauson;  sheet  no.  764;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.7  x  13  cm. 

1596.  THE  NEW- YORK  VOLUNTEER. -Twas  in  the  days 
of  '76  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  21.4  x  15  cm. 

c.  [Without  "The"  and  hyphen  in  title;]  Written  by  Frank 
Spear,  and  Sung  by  Sam  Long;  sheet  no.  859;  publ.  Wrigley 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15. 5  cm. 


108 


1597.  THE  NEWS  BOY.  — Oh!  'tis  early  every  morning, 
about  the  break  of  day  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air,  "Wait  for  the 
Waggon  [sic].". 

From  the  Broadway  Belle;  Affectionately  dedicated  to 
the  numerous  respectable  and  useful  body  of  New  York 
Newsboys;  print.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  25  x  15  cm. 

1598.  NICE  YOUNG  MA'N.  — There  was  a  nice  young  man 
(9  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

1599.  NICODEMUS  JOHNSON.— 7'i;e  just  arrived  in  town 
today  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  946;  As  sung  by  C.  Pettingill  with  great 
applause,  at  Morris  Bros.  Pell  &  Trowbridge's;  sold  by 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.2  x  14.5  cm. 

1600.  DE  NIGGER  ON  DE  FENCE. -ATow,  listen  to  me. 
white  folks,  de  truth  I'm  going  to  tell  you  (6  vs.)  Air:  All 
round  my  hat. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  16. 4  cm. 

d.  Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  218,  col.  20.5  x  12. 5  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  848;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

f.  With  "Hat"  in  Air,  and  hyphen  in  first  line;  sheet  no. 
1123;  As  sung  by  J.  Gaynor;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1601.  NIGGER,  PUT  DOWN  DAT  3\3G.-Nigger,  put  down 
dat  jug,  touch  not  a  single  drop  (2  vs.)  Air:  Woodman  spare 
that  Tree. 

Music  obtained  of  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1602.  NIGHT  FUNERAL  OF  A  SLAVE. -/«  the  bright  sunny 
South,  at  the  close  of  the  day  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  Edwin  J.  Gibson;  for  sale  at  F.  Rafferty's. 
T.  o.  border;  green  paper;  small  ornament  of  child  on 
a  swing.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

1603.  NINE  CHEERS  AND  A  TIGER  FOR  THE  GALLANT 
SEVENTH  NEW  YORK  REGT. -Come  listen  to  my  story, 
ye  soldiers,  one  and  all  (7  vs.)  Air— "Rose  of  Tennessee." 

A-J  border.  21.5  x  14.8  cm.  (cropped) 

1604.  (DEDICATED  TO  THE)  NINTH  MARYLAND  VOL- 
UNTEERS, AND  SUNG  ON  THEIR  RETURN  FROM  LIBBY 
PRISON.  — T/ze  Ninth  comes  m.arching  home  once  more 
(13  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Prints.  Rose  &  Co. 

T.  o.  border.  26.2  x  19  cm. 

1605.  9TH  NEW-JERSEY  VOLUNTEER  REGIMENT. -Ke, 
Sons  of  New-Jersey,  the  Free  and  the  Brave  (12  vs.) 

By  J.D.  Long,  Private  of  Company  D.;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 


De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  26  x  16  cm. 

1606.  THE  NINTH  WARD  SONG.->l  song  for  Fremont, 
Freedom's  son  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Williams. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  12  cm. 

1607.  NO  IRISH  NEED  APPLY. -I'm  a  dacint  boy,  just 
landed  from  the  town  of  Ballyfad  (6  vs.) 

a.  Written  by  John  F.  Poole,  and  sung,  with  immense 
success,  by  the  great  Comic-Vocalist  of  the  age,  Tony 
Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

c.  An  Original  Song,  By  John  F.  Poole;  Written  for  and 
sung  with  immense  success  by  the  great  Comic  Vocalist 
of  the  age,  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no.  1169;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.6  x  13.8  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  imprint;]  Wrigley  Ethiopian  border. 
23  X  15  cm. 

1608.  NO  IRISH  NEED  APPLY. -Ofe  'twas  yesterday  that  I 
was  led  on  such  a  wild  goose  chase  (6  vs.) 

Adv:    Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album  Drolleries 
[publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  woman  playing  harp,  col.  23  x  14  cm. 

1609.  NO  MOTHER  OR  NO  SISTER  NO  WIFE  -  NO  CHILD 
HAVE  I!— .A  Railroad  car  was  crowded  (5  vs.) 

Eagle  perched  on  clasped  hands,  with  motto  "In  Union 
There  is  Strength".  26.5  x  8.9  cm. 

1610.  NO  NEWS  FOR  ME.— Wo  News  for  me  -  No  news  for 
me  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  "Good  news  from  Home." 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.; 
adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 
Magnus  250,  col.  18.5  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  251,  bronze.  20.5  x  12. 7  cm. 

c.  [Without  cop.  and  adv.) 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  251,  bronze. 
18  X  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

1611.  NO  ONE  TO  LOVE.— ATo  one  to  love,  none  to  caress 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Lee  &  Walker's  Music  Store;  2nd  song:   "Some  One  to 
Love";  publ.  Auner  (5);  [with  SOUR  APPLE  TREE  on 
verso.) 

A-J  border,  23.6  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  2nd  song:    "Here  in  Solitude  and  Silence";  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  2  vs.  only;  with  "no  one"  in  place  of  "none"  in  first 
line;  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.)  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  245, 
col.  20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  bronze  ink;  hdpc,  bronze.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  First  line  and  vs.  as  above;  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs; 
publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  245, 
col.  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 


109 


f.  First  line  and  vs.  as  above;  publ.  Magnus  (1);  adv:  500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 
Magnus  248c,  col.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  Sheet  no.  923;  2nd  Song:    "Here  in  Solitude  and 
Silence"  [without  imprint]. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1612.  NO  PUPPIES  NEED  APPhY .-Gentlemen  who  seek  a 
wife,  pray  just  look  at  me  (4  vs.)  Air:  No  Irish  need  apply. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1613.  NOBLE  LADS  OF  BROOKLYN. -Come  all,  ye  Union 
Heroes ,  I  pray  you  lend  your  ears  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1037;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  22.3  x  13.6  cm. 

1614.  THE  NOBLEMAN'S  DAUGHTER. -Tts  of  a  Noble- 
man's daughter  (7  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  16.8  cm. 

1615.  "NOBODY  HURT"  (OLD  ABE. )-Mr.  Lincoln  a  great 
speech  was  making  (3  vs.)  Air:  Columbia  The  Gem  of  the 
Ocean. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  8,  col;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1616.  NOBODY'S  CHILD.  — WTzere  I  was  born  and  bred 
(5  vs.  and  ohor.) 

As  sung  by  the  popular  Charles  Vivian;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

1617.  NONSENSE  'iiO.— Nonsensical  songs  have  all  gone 
down  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  730;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

1618.  NORA  CREINA,  SEE  THE  FLOWERS. -i^ora  Creina, 
see  the  flowers  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  24.5  x  16.7  cm. 

NORAH,  DARLING,  DON'T  YOU  CRY,  see  DON'T  YOU 
CRY  SO,  NORAH  DARLING. 

1619.  NORAH  M'SHANE.-/'i;e  left  Ballymornach  a  long 
way  behind  me  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "You'll  Remember  Me";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  15  cm. 

1620.  NORAH'S  REMONSTRANCE. -ATom;,  Terence,  have 
done  wid  yer  tasing  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1089;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  ETTIE  MAY  on 
recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.5  x  14.8  cm. 

1621.  A  NORRIBLE  TALE  OF  THE  SUICIDAL  FAMILY.- 
Oh!  a  Horrible  tale  I  have  to  tell  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

With  7th  verse  headed:    "Moral". 


a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4) 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.7  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Stuart  Robson's  Great  Song,  And  sung  by  the  Great 
Comedian,  Stuart  Robson,  for  upwards  of  500  nights,  with 
rapturous  applause,  at  Mrs.  John  Drew's  Arch  Street 
Theatre.  19.6  x  13.1  cm.  (cropped) 

1622.  THE  NORTHERN  GIRL  TO  HER  LOVER.-Go, 
darling  -  join  the  loyal  strong  (3  vs.)  Air:  After  the  Battle. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  205,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  19.3  x  12.6  cm. 

1623.  THE  NORTHERN  GIRL'S  SONC-FoM  are  marching 
to  the  field  -  to  the  field  of  dreadful  fray  (3  vs.)  Air— 
Jeannette  and  Jeannot. 

Advs:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  35,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  11.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  38a,  col.,  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  13  cm. 

c.  [Without  advs.;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus 
213a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.4  cm. 

1624.  THE  NORTHMEN  ARE  COMING!-Tfee  Northmen  are 
coming.  Oho!  Oho!  (5  vs.)  Air:  The  Campbells  are  coming. 

By  George  Perry. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.8  x  17  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

1625.  NOT  FOR  GRANT.—/  met  a  man  the  other  day  (5  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air:  "Not  for  Joseph." 

Publ.  Johnson  (2).  18.5  x  12  cm. 

1626.  NOT  FOR  JOSEPH.-/'t;e  seen  a  bit  of  gaiety 
throughout  my  short  career  (5  vs.  and  chor.,  3  vs.  spoken) 

Sung  by  the  Celebrated  Charles  Vivian;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16. 5  cm. 

1627.  NOT  MARRIED  YET!— /'m  single  yet! I'm  single  yet! 
(3  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.8  x  14.6  cm. 

1628.  NOT  YET.— O^  Country,  marvel  of  the  earth  (7  vs. 
printed  on  both  sides  of  sheet) 

By  William  CuUen  Bryant.  28  x  19  cm. 

1629.  NOTHING  AT  ALL.-/ra  derry  dovm  dale,  when  I 
wanted  a  mate  (4  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  676;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1630.  A  NOVEL  IN  FOUR  VOLUMES:    TO  BE  READ  IN 
FIVE  MINUTES.— MooreZi^W  evening  -  shady  grove  (4  vs.) 

Pupils'  Press,  Glrard  College.  22.3  x  n  cm. 

1631.  NOW  HOLD  YOUR  HORSES,  WILL  YOU?-JVom;  hold 
your  horses,  will  you  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


110 


a.  Title;    "Hold  Your  Horses";  Music  obtained  of  Berry 
&  Gordon;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.6  x  15  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Auner  &  Johnson. 

T.  o.  border;  stagecoach  and  four  horses.  23  x  10  cm. 
(cropped) 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  stagecoach  and  four  horses.  23.3  x  14.5 
cm. 

e.  Sold  by  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border  with  fleuron  corners.  20.2  x  12  cm. 

1632.  NOW  OR  NEVER.— Lzsiew,  youTig  heroes !  your 
country  is  calling  (8  vs.) 

By  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes.  20.5  x  11.6  cm. 

1633.  O,  CARRY  ME  HOME.— 0,  carry  me  back  to  my 
Childhood's  home  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.  "Carry  me  back 
to  Old  Virginia." 

a.  With  "to  Die"  in  title;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Magnus  (1)  for  James  D.  Gay. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  192, 
col.  20.5  X  13  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  192,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12  cm. 

d.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  192, 
col.  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

O,  CARRY  ME  HOME  TO  DIE,  see  THE  BANNER  OF 
THE  FREE. 

1634.  O,  DEAREST  DINE.— v4  cutting  of  the  sugar-cane  is 
this  here  darkey's  fun  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:    "Pompey's  Grave";  print.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews' 
21  X  14  cm. 

1635.  O  ERIN,  MY  COUNTRYl-0  Erin,  my  Country! 
although  thy  heart  slumbers  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1013;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1636.  O  GENTLY  BREATHE. -O  gently  breathe  the  tender 
sigh  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  title:    "Oh!  Gently  Breathe";  2  chors.;  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.1  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  T.  B.  Prendergast;  2nd  song:    "Fairy-Belle" 
De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:    1860,  H. 

De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.3  x  16. 4  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  451;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  GALLANT 
SONS  OF  ERIN  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.4  x  13.5  cm. 

1637.  O  GOD!  PRESERVE  THE  MARINER. -O  God! pre- 
serve the  mariner  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col;  cop:    1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.7  x  16.3  cm. 


1638.  O  LET  ME  LIKE  A  SOLDIER  FALL.-O  let  me  like 
a  soldier  fall  (2  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  1151;  2nd  song:    "In  Happy  Moments". 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.3  x  1.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

O,  RIP  TARE  MY  JOHNNY'S  GONE  AWAY,  see  OH, 
RIP  TARE  MY  JOHNNY. 

O!  SILBER  SHINING  MOON,  see  OH!  SILBER  SHINING 
MOON. 

1639.  O!  SING  ME  TO  SLEEP,  DEAR  FATHER.-Ofc.'  sing 
me  to  sleep,  dear  father  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  J.  L.  Carncross;  adv:    All  the  Popular 
Songs  of  the  Day;  [imprint  cropped  off.] 
T.  o.  border.  17  x  14.9  cm. 

1640.  O!  WHAT'S  THE  UATTZ^.  — The  fall  campaign  is 
now  begun  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune:— "That's  what's  the 
Mamter  [sic]. 

Headed:    "No.  4.  Campaign  Song";  adv:    McClellan 
Campaign  Songster  [publ.]  Mason  &  Co.;  copyright  secured. 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.2  cm. 

1641.  O  WIE  MANCHE  SHONE  STUNDE.-O  wie  manche 
schone  Stunde  (8  vs.) 

Headed:  "Zwei  Lieder":  2nd  song:  "Ach,  ich  hab'  in 
meinen  Jahren"  [signed]  Charles  Michael,  Mauch  Chunk, 
Carbon  County,  Pa. 

T.  o.  border.  28.3  x  19.3  cm. 

1642.  THE  OATH,  OR,  YE  FREEMEN,  HOW  LONG  WILL 
YE  STIFLE.  — ye /reeme«  how  long  will  ye  stifle  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Words  by  Thomas  Buchanan  Read;  music  by  J.  C. 
Beckel;  cop:    1864,  J.  C.  Beckel,  EDPa.;  music  published 
by  J.  C.  Beckel,  Germantown,  Penna. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

A-J  border.  21.5  x  12.6  cm. 

1643.  THE  OBSTINATE  GlKh.-Of  the  obstinate  buffer  I've 
sung  and  I  have  said  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  760;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

1644.  THE  OCEAN  BURIAL.-O  buiy  me  not  in  the  deep 
deep  sea  (6  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3)- 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  First  line  in  quotation  marks,  with  "Oh",  and  two 
commas. 

Double  t.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1645.  OCH!  PADDY,  IS  IT  YERSELF?-Oc/i,  Pat.  is  U 
yerself  indade,  safe  agin  to  home  (3  vs.) 

a.   By  "Stone"  of  "Rocks.";  Air— Willie,  we  have  missed 
you;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 


Ill 


b.  A  Parody  on  "Willie  We  Have  Missed  You";  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  woodcut  of  two  men  conversing.  23.8  x 
14.9  cm. 

1646.  AN  ODE  FOR  THE  FOURTH  OF  MARCH,  1857.- 
While  the  vassals  of  tyranny  rivet  their  chains  (5  vs.) 

Adv:    You  will  save  25  per  cent;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 


Words  by  L. A.  Jones;  music  by  Frederick  Buckley; 
2nd  song:    "Choice  of  A  Wife";  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1656.  OH!  CAST  THAT  SHADOW  FROM  THY  BROW.-O/t.' 
cast  that  shadow  from  thy  brow  (10  vs.) 

Words  by  Mrs.  L.E.  Landon;  adv:    You  will  save  25 
per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing  done;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  15  cm. 


1647.  ODE  FOR  THE  FOURTH  OF  JULY,  1861. -To  the 
sages  who  spoke  -  to  the  heroes  who  bled  (4  vs.) 

Print.  A.H.  Senseman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  21  x  13  cm. 

1648.  ODE  ON  SHANGHAI  MARY  ENGINE  CO.  6.-7  hope 
you'll  pay  attention  (8  vs.) 

By  a  Runner;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

1649.  ODE  TO  JOHN  BULL,  ESQ.— John  Bull,  Esq.,  my  jo 
John  (11  vs.) 

By  William  McMenaman,  29th  Regt.  P.V. 
Multi-line  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

1650.  ODE  WRITTEN  FOR  THE  SHE-KOM-E-KAH 
LITERARY  ASSOCIATION,  JULY  4,  1858. -We  hail  once 
more  the  glorious  day  (4  vs.) 

[Signed]  Hal. 

T.  o.  border.  18  x  11.4  cm. 

1651.  ODE,  WRITTEN  FOR  THE  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  OF 
OUR  SAVIOR.  BETHEL,  JULY  4,  1858.-W%erz  to  this 
bright  and  happy  land  (6  vs.) 

[Signed]  Halcyon. 

T.  o.  border.  19.5  x  11.4  cm. 

OFFICER'S  FUNERAL,  see  SOLDIER'S  FUNERAL. 

OFT  IN  THE  STILLY  NIGHT,  see  'TIS  MIDNIGHT 
HOUR. 

1652.  OH!  AND  HE  LOVED  ME  DEARLY!-Tfeere  was  a 
young  man  came  a  courting  of  me  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:    1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25  X  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  exclamation  point  after  "Oh";]  sheet  no.  715; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

1653.  OH!  BLESS  ME,  MOTHER,  ERE  I  DIE.-O/!.'  bless 
me.  Mother,  ere  I  die  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.6  x  16  cm. 

1654.  OH!  BOYS,  CARRY  ME  'LONG.— O/z.'  carry  me  'long 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  the  Celebrated  New  Orleans  Opera  and 
Ballet  Troupe,  in  all  the  principal  cities  in  the  U.S.,  with 
great  applause;  Copy-right  secured;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.9  cm. 

1655.  OH,  BREATHE  NOT  HER  NAME.-O/z,  breathe  not 
her  name!  for  it  steals  to  my  heart  (2  vs.) 


1657.  OH,  CHERISH  ME.— 0/z,  cherish  me,  my  loved  one 
dear  (5  vs.) 

From  "Life  Illustrated,"  by  Topsy;  print.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  Astley's  imprint  added.]  24  x  15  cm. 

1658.  OH!  COME,  FAIR  MAID,  WITH  ME.-0;z.'  come 
where  the  soft  winds  blow  (2  vs.)  Air:  A  life  on  the  Ocean 
wave. 

By  Kate  J.  Boyd;    [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

OH!  FOR  WINGS  TO  SOAR,  see  OH,  LET  ME  DREAM 
OF  FORMER  YEARS! 

OH!  GENTLY  BREATHE,  see  O  GENTLY  BREATHE. 

1659.  OH,  GIVE  ME  FREEDOM  EVER.-0;z,  give  me 
freedom  ever  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.3  x 
17.2  cm. 

1660.  OH!. HAVE  YOU  HEARD  THE  NEWS  OF  LATE.-O/z.' 
have  you  heard  the  news  of  late  (6  vs.) 

Print.  Johnson  (3). 

a.  Adv:    You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your 
printing  done. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15. 7  cm. 

b.  By  W.  G— . 

T.  o.  border.  21.4  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped) 

1661.  OH,  HOW  GLAD  TO  GET  HOME.-0/z.'  how  glad  to 
get  home  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

OH!  HOW  IS  THAT  FOR  HIGH,  see  DARK  AND 
ROGUISH  EYE. 

1662.  OH!  I  SHOULD  LIKE  TO  MARRY. -O/z,  /  should  like 
to  marry,  if  that  I  could  find  (3  vs.  plus  2  lines) 

2nd  song:    "Daniel  Tucker's  Wedding". 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.2  x  16. 4  cm. 

1663.  OH!  I  VANTS  TO  GO  HOME.  OR  MAXIMILLIAN'S 
LAMFNT  [sic].— Oh! I  vants  to  go  hom.e...was  the  doleful 
cry  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  Endres  &  Compton;  obtained  of 
Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3) 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.  26  x  16.2  cm. 

1664.  OH!  I  WISH  THIS  WAR  WAS  OVER.-Mji  Johnny's  in 
the  army  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 


112 


By  Will  S.  Hays;  [publ.]  De  Marsan,(3). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

1665.  OH!  I'M  GOING  HOME. -Ok! I'm  going  home  to  the 
old  hearth  stone  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  is.g  cm. 

1667.  OH!  rSE  SO  WICKED!-0;z,  white  folks  I  was  never 
bom  (3  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Mrs.  G.  C.  Howard,  in  her  Celebrated  and 
Original  Character  of  Topsy,  in  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  at  the 
National  Theatre. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

1668.  OH  JEFF!  OH  JEFF!  HOW  ARE  YOU  ^OWf-Jeff 
Davis  is,  we  must  admit  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Comic  Song  and  Chorus.    By  Henry  Schroeder;  music 
published  by  Firth,  Son  &  Co.;  adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs; 
publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  174a, 
col.  20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

1669.  OH,  KISS,  BUT  NEVER  TELL.-W/zew  love  grows 
warm,  there  is  a  charm  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  379;  with  2  chors.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.9  x  15.3  cm. 

1670.  OH,  LET  ME  DREAM  OF  FORMER  YEARS\-Oh! 
let  m.e  dream,  of  former  years  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  2nd  song:    "Oh!  For  Wings  to  Soar";  publ.  De  Marsan 

(1). 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  682;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1671.  OH,  LET  ME  GO  TO  MY  HOME  AGAIN. -0/z,  let  me 
go  to  m.y  home  again  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  677;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

OH,  LET  ME  SHED  ONE  SILENT  TEAR,  see  I  WILL 
BE  TRUE  TO  THEE. 

1672.  OH!  LUCY  BEE. -By  old  James'  river  I  was  born 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  with  Tremendous  Applause  by  Buckley's  cele- 
brated Band  of  Minstrels,  539  Broadway,  N.Y.;  print. 
Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

1673.  OH,  MY  LOVE'S  GONE. -As  /  was  a  walking  down 
by  the  sea  shore  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Bryants'  Minstrels,  472  Broadway. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.1  x  16.6  cm. 

1674.  OH!  NICODEMUS.-A/j)  lover  he's  going  to  sea.  Oh! 
Nicodetnus  (4  vs.  and  spoken  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (1).  19.4  x  11.4  cm. 

1675.  OH!  NO,  WE  NEVER  MENTION  HER. -O/;.' no,  we 
never  mention  her  (3  vs.) 


a.  [Publ.l  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  14.5  cm. 

1676.  OH,  RIP  TARE,  MY  JOHNNY'S  GONE  AWAY.-0/z, 
listen,  fair  ladies  of  this  here  town  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:  "Oh,  Rip  Tare,  My  Johnny!";  with  3  chors.; 
publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.3  ^  16.2  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Oh,  Rip  Tare,  My  Johnny";  as  sung  by  the 
Grotto  Minstrels  at  the  New  Grotto  Concert  Hall.  N.W. 
Cor.  6th  &  Chestnut  Sts.;  publ.  Walter  Warren  (2). 

T.  o.  border,  with  balloons.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

d.  With  "O"  in  title,  without  comma  after  "Tare";  as 
sung  by  Add  Weaver;  sheet  no.  852;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

OH,  SAY  NOT  WOMAN'S  HEART  IS  BOUGHT,  see 
ADVICE  TO  YOUNG  LADIES. 

1677.  OH!  SAY  NOT  WOMAN'S  LOVE  IS  BOUGHT-O/z.' say 
not  wom.an's  love  is  bought  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  603;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1678.  OH,  SCORN  NOT  THY  BROTHER. -0/z.'  scorn  not 
thy  brother  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.5  X  16. 2  cm. 

1679.  OH,  SHARE  MY  COTTAGE,  GENTLE  MAYD-Oh 
share  my  cottage,  gentle  maid  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15.1  cm. 

1680.  OH!  SILBER  SHINING  MOON.-Lasf  night  when  de 
m,oon  was  beaming  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Title:    "O!  Silber  Shining  Moon";  with  "war"  as  verb 
in  first  line;  Composed  and  arranged  by  L.V.H.  Crosby; 
adv:    You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  printing 
done;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

1681.  OH,  TAKE  ME  TO  THY  HEART  AGAIN. -Oft  take  me 
to  thy  heart  again  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  C.  Campbell,  of  Carncross  and  Di.xey's 
Minstrels. 

a.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231.  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).    20.3  x  12. 5  cm. 

b.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border  around  te.xt;  hdpc. 

Magnus  235a,  col.  20.5  x  12. 7  cm. 

1682.  OH!  WASN'T  SHE  FOND  OF  HER  GREENS.-/  once 
went  couyiingalady  (7  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  14.6  cm. 


113 


b.  Sheet  no.  1337;  with  6  vs.  and  1  chor.;  publ.  Wrigley 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

1683.  OH,  WHERE  ARE  MY  SCHOOLMATES  GONE 7-0/1.' 
where  are  my  schoolmates  gone  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  547;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  16.3  cm. 

OH  WHISPER  THAT  THOU  FEELEST,  see 
SLEEPING  I  DREAM  LOVE. 

1684.  OH!  WILT  THOU  BE  MY  BRIDE,  KATHLEEN?-©^.' 
wilt  thou  be  ?ny  bride,  Kathleen  (2  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  23.5  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  877;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  ROSA  LEE  on 
verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

OH!  WOULD  I  WERE  A  BIRD,  see  OH!  WOULD  I  WERE 
A  FLY. 

1685.  OH!  WOULD  I  WERE  A  FLY.-O/z.'  would  I  were  a  fly 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  2nd  song;  "Oh! 
Would  I  were  a  Bird";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

1686.  OH!  WRITE  ME  A  SONG  OF  MY  FATHER.— O/z.' 
write  me  a  song  of  my  Father  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Song  and  Chorus  written  and  composed  by  C.  Henry; 
music  obtained  of  Wm.  Hall  &  Son  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

1687.  OH,  YES,  WE  OFTEN  MENTION  HER.-O/z,  yes,  we 
often  m.ention  her  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.4  x  16.2  cm. 

1688.  THE  OIL-MERCHANT. -O/z.'  white  folks,  if  you 
listen,  I'll  sing  to  you  a  song  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Happy 
Land  of  Canaan. 

By  John  C.  Crossr  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.5  x  le  cm. 

1689.  OIL  ON  THE  V,BMii  .—A  fellow  came  from  the  city 
of  York  (16  vs.)  Air:  The  Cork  Leg. 

By  B.  C.  L. 

a.  Title:    "Petroleum";  Respectfully  Dedicated  to  one 
who  has  Oil  on  the  Brain;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.;  adv:    new 
Catalogue,  Just  Out.  22  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.3  x  16  cm. 

1690.  OIL  ON  THE  BRAIN. -T/ze  Yankees  boast  that  they 
make  clocks  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  in  New-York,  Philadelphia,  and  all  the  prin- 
cipal cities  of  the  Union,  where  ile  fever  abounds;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.6  x  16. 5  cm. 

1691.  THE  OLD  ARM-CHAIR.-/  love  it,  I  love  it!  and  who 
shall  dare  (4  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.8  cm. 


1692.  OLD  BLACK  JOE.— Gone  are  the  days  when  my 
heart  was  young  and  gay  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  W.  R.  Smith,  Agt.;  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  adv:    Prof.  C.  Brook's  Ball  Room  Monitor,  3d  Edition. 
20  X  12  cm. 

1693.  OLD  BDB  RIDLEY,  O.—Now  white  folks  I'll  sing  you 
a  ditty  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  nightly  with  shouts  of  applause  by  Mr.  C.  White 
at  his  New  and  Beautiful  Opera  House,  No.  49  Bowery, 
directly  oposite  [sic]  the  Bowery-Theatre;  [publ.] 

De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  16. 5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "O"  in  title;]  adv:    You  will  save  25  per  cent, 
by  getting  your  Printing  done;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border;  four  minstrels.  22.9  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  "Oh!"  in  title;  publ.  J.  Peckham  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15  cm. 

1694.  THE  OLD  BOG-HOLE. -Tfee  pig  is  in  the  mire,  and 
the  cow  is  on  the  grass  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air:  Old  Zip 
Coon. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:    1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.3  X  16. 2  cm. 

1695.  THE  OLD  BROWN  COI.-Among  the  scenes  to 
m.em.ory  dear  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  16. 9  cm. 

1696.  THE  OLD  BUMMER.— Come  into  my  lodging,  old 
Bumm.er  (3  vs.)  Air:  Red  Robin. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1155;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

1697.  OLD  BUMMER.  A  PARODY  ON  "RED  ROBIN". - 
Walk  into  m.y  tavern.  Old  Bummer  (4  vs.) 

By  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  John  L.  Zieber;  adv:    Whole- 
sale Agents.  G.  Boshart,  etc. 
T.  o.  border.  19.8  x  12.5  cm. 

1698.  THE  OLD  CHURCHYAB  \s\c\.— Tread  Softly  round, 
here  lie  the  dead  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

1699.  THE  OLD  CONTRABAND. -/'s  a  contraband  from  de 
old  plantation  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  John  L.  Zieber;  music  by  Rudolph  Wittig; 
cop:    1865,  W.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;  W.  R.  Smith,  Agt.  Music  & 
Musical  Instruments;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

1700.  THE  OLD  COUNTRY  PARTY.-Saji,  did  ye  iver  go 
till  an  ould  country  party  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Irishman's 
Shanty. 

a.  By  Harry  M.  Palmer;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.7  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  843;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

1701.  OLD  DOG  TRAY.-Tfee  morn  of  life  is  past,  and 
evening  com.es  at  last  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 


114 


Sung  nightly  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  E.  P. 
Christy's  celebrated  Band  of  Minstrels,  472  Broadway, 
N.Y. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  [Without  "Sung  nightly,  etc";]  only  1  chor.;  adv:  You 
will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing  done;  publ. 
Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border;  dog.  19.8  x  11.2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  60;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1702.  OLD  DOG  TRAY  NO.  2.— The  morning  meal  is  past,  - 
the  next  is  com.ing  fast  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

A  Parody — from  the  "New  York  Clipper;"  with  ex- 
planation beginning:  "Our  readers  have  all,  doubtless, 
read;"  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15.2  cm. 

1703.  OLD  FARM  AT  HOME.— OA,  where  is  the  place  that 
I've  roamed  through  the  valley  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  with  Tremendous  Applause,  by  J.H.  Budworth, 
of  White's  Minstrels,  No.  53  Bowery,  N.Y.;  print.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.7  x  14.7 
cm. 

1704.  THE  OLD  FARM  GATE.— Wtere  where  is  the  gate 
that  once  used  to  divde  [sic]  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  159;  Presented  for  publication  by  E.J.  Amore; 
publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.9  x  15.4  cm. 

1705.  THE  OLD  FARM-HOUSE. -O,  the  old  farm-house, 
down  beside  the  valley  stream.  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.6  x  16.3  cm. 

1706.  THE  OLD  FOLKS  ARE  GONE. -Far,  far  in  many 
lands,  I've  wander'd  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  W.  Hall  &  Son  (3). 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  137;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23.3  x  16. 5  cm. 

1707.  OLD  FOLKS  AT  HOME. -Way  down  upon  the  Suianee 
ribber  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Music  published  by  Messrs.  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.;  adv. 
500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  224,  col.  20.5  x  12. 5  cm. 

1708.  THE  OLD  FOLKS  WE  LOVED  LONG  AGO.— BaUling 
with  life  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.4  cm. 

1709.  OLD  FRIEND  OF  YOUTH. -Gii^e  me  your  hand,  old 
friend  of  youth  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

I*ubl.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.8  x  16. 3  cm. 


1710.  OLD  FRIENDS  ARE  GONE.-A/3)  boyhood's  happy 
hours  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  684;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.7  ^  15.7  cm. 

1711.  THE  OLD  GRAY  MARE.— /Is  /  was  a  going  to 
Nottingham  fair  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  originally  by  W.  B.  Cavanagh,  Comedian,  at 
Barnum's  Museum. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  ^  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

1712.  OLD  HATS  &  RAGS.-Old  hats !  old  rags!  my  trouble 
is  great  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  the  Great  Lingard;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16  cm. 

1713.  OLD  HICKORY'S  DAYS.-^  song  I'll  now  sing  of  the 
happy  days  gone  by  (4  vs.)  Air:  |Our  Grand-fathers'  days. 

By  Eug.  T.  Johnston;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

1714.  THE  OLD  HOUSE  AT  HOME.-O/!,  the  old  house  at 
hom,e,  where  my  forefather  dwelt  (4  vs.) 

a.  With  2  vs.  only;  print.  Andrews  [no  address]. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  524;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  2nd  song:    "Strike  the 
Harp  Gently;"  [with  WHEN  THE  MOON  WITH  GLORY 
BRIGHTENS  on  recto]. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1715.  OLD  K.  Y.  KY.— I>e  snow  am  in  de  rloud  (6  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  [Publ.l  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  878;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1716.  THE  OLD  KIRK- YARD. -O/z,  come  with  me  to  the 
old  kirk-yard  (2  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

1718.  THE  OLD  LEATHER  BREECHES.-^f  the  sign  of  the 
Bell,  on  the  road  to  Clonm.ell  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  651. 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

1719.  THE  OLD  LOVE  SONGS.-Be/ore  my  true-love's 
threshold  (4  vs.) 

[By]  Ambrosius  Metzger;  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1720.  OLD  MOSE  SONG.-/'m  down  on  running  with  der  old 
machine  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air- "Oh  Susannah." 

Sung  by  Wm.  A.  Wray,  the  Celebrated  Banjoist;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.2  cm. 

1721.  THE  OLD  MOUNTAIN  TREE. -Oh!  the  home  we 
loved  by  the  bounding  deep  (3  vs.) 


115 


Words  and  music  by  James  D.  Clark;  music  published 
by  Oliver  Ditson  (2);  obtained  of  Berry  &  Gordon;  print. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1722.  THE  OLD  MOUSQUETAIRE.  — 'iVeai/z  a  vine-covered 
porch  sat  an  Old  Mousequetaire  (3  vs.) 

Music  and  words  by  Henry  Ease. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  IWarsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  IWarsan  (4). 

De  IWarsan  lyre  border,  col.  24.8  x  16.5  cm. 

1723.  THE  OLD  OAK  CHEST,  OR  THE  MISSLETOE 
BOUGH.  — T/ze  missletoe  hung  in  the  castle  hall  (4  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  with  spelling  "Mistletoe"; 
advs:    Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.,  and  25  per  cent, 
less  than  any  other  Printer  in  the  City;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

1724.  THE  OLD  OAKEN  BUCKET  WHICH  HUNG  IN  THE 
WElAj. —How  dear  to  this  heart  are  the  scenes  of  my 
childhood  (3  vs.) 

a.  T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  22.9  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15  cm. 

1725.  OLD  PARSON  BROWN.— iVoi  long  ago,  in  our  town 
(6  vs.  uneven  length,  with  prose  dialogue)  Air:  The  Rakes 
of  Mallow. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  25  x  16. 5  cm. 

1726.  THE  OLD  PINE  TREE. -Cowe  Darkies,  list! I'll 
sing  to  you  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Advs:    See  Johnson's  New  and  Popular  Songster,  600 
different  kinds  of  Songs,  and  a  Song  Book,  "The  Garland"; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Three-line  border  with  ornamental  corners;  fence  on 
two  trees.  23.8  x  10.8  cm. 

1727.  THE  OLD  PLAY  GROUND. -/'m  sitting  to-day  in  the 
old  play  ground  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25.7  x  16. 6  cm. 

1728.  OLD  ROSIN  THE  BEAU.—/  have  travelled  this  wide 
world  over  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.8  x  14.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

1729.  OLD  SHADY.— Ofe.'jia,  ya!  darkies,  laugh  with  me 
(5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Away  Down  South. 

a.  Title:    "Ole  Shady.    The  Song  of  the  Contraband"; 
sheet  no.  586;    [without  Air;]  (publ.)  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Headed:    "A  Contraband  Song";  with  explanation  read- 
li;g:    "The  following  rare  lyric  is  the  favorite  freedom  song 
of  the  Mississippi  Contrabands...";  publ.  by  the  Supervis- 


ory Committee  for  Recruiting  Colored  Regiments.  24.3  x 
14  cm. 

1730.  THE  OLD  SHADY  TREE.— Ho  you  remember  that 
dear  old  tree  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Bryants'  Minstrels;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  15.7  cm. 

1731.  OLD  SIDELING  HILL.— 7  have  wandered  through 
many  a  valley  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:    1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.2  x  16.5  cm. 

1732.  OLD  SIR  TODDY.— Cowze  all  ye  who  are  fond  of 
singing,  let  us  set  a  song  a  ringing  (9  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Air:    Old  Dan  Tucker. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border;  old  man  with  ducks.    22.8  x  12.3  cm. 

1733.  THE  OLD  SIXTH  CORPS— God  bless  our  noble  army 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:    Soldiers  can  receive  14  Songs  for  50  cents  [sold 
by]  G.P.  Hardwick,  Washington,  D.C. 

T.  o.  border  in  red;  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  wreath  of 
ivy  with  eagle  on  top,  surrounded  by  flags,  bayonets,  drum 
and  cannon,  with  a  drummer  boy  on  either  side,  col.  19.2  x 
12.8  cm. 

1734.  OLD  STATE  HOUSE  BELL.-Tfee  old  state  house 
bell,  time  honored  bell  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Published  by  permission  of  Stayman  &  Brothers; 
printed  and  sold  wholesale  at  George  S.  Harris'. 

Single  wavy-line  border  with  ornamental  corners. 
17.3  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  With  "The"  in  title;  words  by  G.  F.  Meeser;  music  by 
F.  Weiland;  music  obtained  at  Stayman  &  Bro.;  Copyright 
Secured;  publ.  Johnson  (3);  advs:    Card  and  Job  Printing, 
and  Persons  sending  Orders  for  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  11.2  cm. 

1735.  OLD  UNCLE  Y.ViVJk'RD.  — There  formerly  might  have 
been  seen  an  aged  colored  individual  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
24.1  X  15.1  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

Yellow  paper;  A-J  border.  22.3  x  14  cm. 

1736.  THE  OLD  UNION  WAGON. -The  eagle  of  Columbia, 
in  majesty  and  pride  (5  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  With  4th  vs.  beginning:    "Old  Abe  is  in  the  wagon,  and 
Scott  is  by  his  side..." 

T.  o.  border,  eagle  with  flag.  24.2  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title  and  without  period  at  end;]  but 
with  Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon;  with  4th  vs.  beginning:    "Old 
Abe  is  in  the  wagon,  and  McClellan  by  his  side...";  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  [Air  and  4th  vs.  as  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  22.8  x  14.5  cm. 


116 


d.  [Air  as  above;]  with  7  vs.  and  chor.;  variant  in  wording 
of  vs.;  by  James  D.  Gay,  the  Celebrated  Army  Song  Pub- 
lisher and  Vocalist;  cop:  1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  and  shield  with  motto:    "E  Pluribus 
Unum".  24  x  15  cm. 

e.  With  2  chors.;  sung  by  J.  D.  Gay  and  E.  V.  Andress, 
Song  dealers  for  the  army  of  the  Potomac;  with  4th  verse 
beginning:    "Old  'Abe'. ..and  'Mac'  is  by  his  side";  publ. 
Gay. 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  209,  col.  18.5  x  11.1  cm. 

f.  Title:   "Abe  Lincoln's  Union  Wagon";  with  7  vs.  and 
chor.;  variant  in  wording  of  vs.;  Air  "Wait  for  the  Wagon," 
or:    "Old  Virginia  low  lands";  by  James  D.  Gay,  Army 
Song  Dealer  and  Publisher;  adv:    All  of  Gay's  Army  Songs; 
cop:   1864,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  8,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2);  with  4th  verse  beginning:    "Old  'Abe'... 
and  'Mac'  is  by  his  side." 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  209,  col.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

h.  [Without  "Old"  in  title]  but  with  Air-"Wait  for  the 

Wagon";  Composed  by  Annie  Irene  Warren,  and  dedicated 

to  Miss  Clara  Weilman;  as  sung  by  Little  Ada  Payne,  at 

the  "Canterbury  Hall,"  N.W.  Cor.  5th  and  Chestnut;  publ. 

Warren  (6)  (2);  [sold  by]  Search;  with  4th  verse  beginning: 

"Old  Abe. ..and  Scott  is  by  his  side." 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 
1. 

i.    [Air  as  above;]  sheet  no.  1019;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  4th 

vs.  beginning:    "Old  Abe...  and  McClellan  by  his  side". 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  14.5  cm. 

1737.  OLD  VIRGINIA  LOW  LANDS,  LOW.-Fe  tars  of 
Columbia  it's  listen  to  my  song  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Pompey  Snow. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  17.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  With  "its"  in  1st  line;  by  George  H.  Engles,  Phila- 
delphia; sheet  no.  1091;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1738.  THE  OLD  WHISKEY  JUG. -We're  anchored  by  the 
roadside,  Jim  (4  vs.)  Air,   Auld  Lang  Syne. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15  cm. 

1739.  THE  OLD  WOMAN'S  DONKEY.-  Was  there  ever  a 
woman  so  treated  as  me  (8  vs.)  Air:   Derry  Down. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  I6.6  cm. 

OLE  SHADY,  see  OLD  SHADY. 

1740.  OMNIBUS  DRIVER.  ON  THE  LOMBARD  STREET 
LINE.— Afow  Ladies  and  Gents  I  am  going  to  sing  a  song 
(3  vs.)  Air— Gay  Conductor. 

Composed  by,  Walter  W.  Warren,  &  dedicated  to  Michael 
Lawn  Esq.;  sung  &  danced  at  the  Kossuth  Exchange,  7th, 
abv.  Chestnut.    By  Miss  Melinda  Nagle;  adv:    For  Sale  at 
Mrs.  Williams'  Variety  Store;  print.  Walter  Warren  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  20.8  x  12.4  cm. 

1741.  ON  BOARD  THE  CUMBERLAND. -"Siand  to  your 
guns,  men!"  Morris  cried  (38  vs.) 


[Signed)  George  H.  Boker;  headed:  "For  the  North 
American  and  United  States  Gazette";  March  7th,  1862. 
24  X  19.5  cm. 

1742.  ON  DE  ODER  SIDE  OF  JORDAN. -O/z.' de  Prohibitory 
Law  dey  say  am  goin  for  to  pass  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Thomas  M.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1743.  ON  FREEDOM'S  ALTAR  GLOWS  A  FIRE!  AN 
APPEAL  TO  ABMS\— On  freedom' s  Altar  glows  afire 
(4  vs.) 

a.  Title:    "Freedom's  Altar";  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  eagle.  23.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Inscribed  to  the  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  by  a  Lady  of 
Philadelphia. 

Eagle.  24  x  15  cm. 

1744.  ON!  ON!  ERIN!  ON!-Ofe.'  land  of  Erin  -  child  of  tears 
(4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Let  the  strain  be  bold  and  free. 

By  J.J.  Cummins;  2nd  song:    "Where  is  Home?"; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.3  cm. 

1745.  ON!  ON!  ON!  A  SEQUEL  TO  TRAMP,  TRAMP, 
TRAMP!— 0/z.'  the  day  it  came,  at  last  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  Root  &  Cady  (1). 

a.  Music  obtained  of  Fred.  Blume  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  I6  cm. 

c.  Title:    "On!  On!  On!  The  Boys  Came  Marching";  [publ.] 
Doyle;  [without  address  of  music  publ.] 

T.  o.  border.  21.8  x  13.6  cm. 

d.  Title:    "On!  On!  On!  The  Boys  Came  Marching";  Air— 
"Prisoner's  Hope",  music  publ.  by  Root  and  Co. 

A-J  border;  20.3  x  12. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  Title:    "On!  On!  On!  The  Boys  Came  Marching!  Or,  the 
Prisoner  Free!";  Sequel  to  "Tramp,  Tramp,  Tramp"; 
[without  "music  published  by...";]  words  and  music  by 
Geo.  F.  Root;  [publ.]  Johnson  &  Cartlitch;  print.  Johnson 
(2).  20  X  10.5  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  with  "Sequel  to",  etc.  in  bold  face  as  part 
of  title;  but  without  imprints.]  16.2  x  10  cm.  (cropped) 

g.  Title:    "On,  On,  On,  The  Boys  Come  Marching!  Or  the 
Prisoner  Free";  Sequel  to  "Tramp,  Tramp,  Tramp"; 
words  and  music  by  Geo.  F.  Root;  adv:    Ten  illustrated 
Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  20a,  col;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

h.  Title  and  Sequel  as  above;  [without  music  publisher;] 
sheet  no.  989;  [publ.]  Partridge  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  20.6  x  14.4  cm. 

i.    Sheet  no.  1354;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1746.  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  COL.  ELLSWORTH-T/ie 
muffled  drum  beats  lew  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  scene  of  Ellsworth's  death  in 
red  and  blue.  20  x  13.5  cm. 

1747.  ON  THE  FALL  OF  ATLANTA. -/liianta  is  fallen,  Uie 
country  is  thinking  (18  lines) 


117 


Lines  composed  by  T.  Loyd,  Jr.;  with  "Joseph  Hoag's 
Vision"  printed  on  verso,  narrating  Hoag's  visions  of 
heaven  in  1803.  21.6  x  12  cm. 

1748.  ON  THE  FALL  OF  LIEUT.  GREBLE!-^<  the  battle 
of  Great  Bethel  (6  vs.)  Tune— Napoleon's  Grave. 

By  A.  Anderson,  late  of  the  45th  Regt.,  P.V.M.; 
Respectfully  dedicated  to  his  friends;  September,  1863. 
T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.5  cm. 

ON  THE  SHORES  OF  TENNESSEE,  see  MASSA,  MASSA, 
HALLELUJAH!  THE  FLAG'S  COME  BACK  TO  TENNESSEE! 

1749.  ON  YONDER  ROCK  RECLINING. -On  yonder  rock 
reclining  (3  vs.) 

a.  From  the  Opera  of  Fra  Diavolo;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  Music  obtained  at  G.  Andre  &  Go's;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

1750.  ONE  FOOT  IN  THE  STIRRUP. -"One /oof  in  the 
stirrup,  one  hand  in  the  \rein"  (7  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.4  cm. 

1751.  ONE  GOOD  TURN  DESERVES  ANOTHER. -Tfee  light 
of  wisdom  dimly  bums  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  839;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  13.7  cm. 

1752.  THE  195TH  PENNSYLVANLf^  VOLUNTEERS. 
BALLAD  NO.  2. —At  Berryville,  fifteen  days  we  stayed 
(6  vs.) 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  136,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

ONE  KINDLY  WORD  BEFORE  WE  PART,  see 
GOODBYE  ALLIE  DEAR. 

1753.  ONE  OF  THE  B'HOYS.-/'m  a  B'hoy,  I'm  a  B'hoy 
(5  vs.)  Air.— Bold  Rooster  Boy, 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23.3  x  13.6  cm. 

1754.  ONE  POUND  TWO.— Ma^^y  dear,  I  come  to  hear  that 
you've  been  on  a  spree  (9  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1755.  ONE  THING  AND  THE  OTHER. -Last  year  I  was  one 
and  twenty  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

1756.  THE  ORGAN  GRINDER.-O/z,  what  a  dreadful  thing 
it  is  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.— Matilda. 

Written  by  J.W.  Mark. 

A-J  border;  musical  instruments.  20  x  12.8  cm. 
(cropped) 

1757.  THE  ORGAN-GRINDER.  — Fo«  see,  before  you,  a 
young  man  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.  with  spoken  lines) 

a.  As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  24.5  x  16  cm. 


b.  [Without  hyphen  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1343;  As  sung  with 
rapturous  applause  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  23.9  x  14.9  cm. 

THE  ORIGINAL  BEN  BOLT,  see  BEN  BOLT. 

ORIGINAL  DDCEY'S  LAND,  see  DKEY'S  LAND. 

1758.  AN  ORIGINAL  POEM-Good  people  all,  I  pray  draw 
near  (9  vs.) 

a.  Composed  by  A.  W.  Harmon;  concerning  his  Sickness, 
caused  by  lifting,  which  injured  his  Spine,  etc.;  2nd  poem: 
"Christ  Blessing  the  Children." 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  14. 3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  title:  "Pity  the  Sorrowful";  and 
with  11  vs. 

T.  o.  border.  25.9  x  16.9  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  2nd  poem:    "The  Soldier's  Re- 
turn." 

T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  14.8  cm. 

1759.  ORIGINAL  UNION  SONG\— The  Southern  rooster 
loudly  crows  (16  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air:  Yankee  Doodle. 

Dedicated  to  the  New  England  Volunteers;  had  at  F.  A. 
Searle's  Print  Works. 

T.  o.  border;  train  with  boot  as  engine,  motto:    "Young 
America!  Through  Baltimore."  26.5  x  13.5  cm. 

1760.  THE  ORIGINAL  WATER-TAhh.-Strange  fashions, 
now,  are  all  the  go  (5  vs.) 

a.  Written  and  sung  by  Fred.  Rouse;  dedicated  to  the 
Falls  of  Niagara,  or  any  other  Feminine;  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  22.5  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Title:    "The  Waterfall." 

A-J  border.  21.7  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped?) 

ORIGINAL  YANKEE  DOODLE,  see  YANKEE  DOODLE. 

1761.  THE  ORPHAN  BOY.-A  tale  can  be  told  of  a  child, 
who  was  born  (7  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.4  x  16. 3  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1762.  THE  OTHER  SIDE  OF  JORDAN.-i)az;jd  had  a  banjo, 
and  well  he  kept  it  strung  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.1  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  24.3  X  16  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  690;  5  vs.  and  chor.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  14.5  cm. 

1763.  THE  OTHER  SIDE  OF  JORDAN.-O/z,  /  went  to  the 
ferry  an'  tried  to  get  across  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

1764.  O'TOOLE  &  McFINNIGAN  ON  THE  'WKR.-Two 
Irishmen  out  of  employ  {6  vs.) 


118 


a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

b.  Adv.    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12. 5  cm. 

0.  [As  above;  with  line  between  text  and  adv.]  20.5  x  12.5 
cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  853;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15. 5  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  1121. 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

1765.  OULD  HIGGINS'S  BAL1,.-Arrah!  haven't  ye  heard  of 
ould  Higgins'  ball  (5  vs.) 

a.  With  "Higgins'  "  in  title;  Air:   The  Wedding  of  Bally- 
poreen  No.  2.  or  the  Priest  of  the  Parish;  as  sung  by  Tony 
Pastor  and  Fred  May;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.4  x  16. 5  cm. 

b.  Air.— "The  Priest  of  the  Parish.";  sung  by  the  great 
Comic  Vocalist  of  the  age,  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no.  1162; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  imprint  blank. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23  x  15  cm. 

1766.  OULD  IRISH  STEW.— /'2;e  travel'd  across  the  wide 
ocean  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Red,  White  and  Blue. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1002;  written  for  W.  O'Neil,  by  Tony  Pastor; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  LARRY  O'GAFF  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1767.  OUR  BANNER,  AN  ACROSTIC.    HAREWOOD 
HOSPITAL.— /?oW  to  the  breeze  our  Banner  high  (2  vs.) 

Written  by  J.  Byron  Brown,  Co.  B,  154th  Reg't, 
N.Y.S.V.;  [publ.]  J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  flags 
and  motto  in  red  and  blue.  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1768.  OUR  BATTLE-FLAG.— 0,  never  mind,  boys!  raise 
me  up  one  again  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Written  by  Edward  Willett. 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Johnson's  New  Catalogue. 
A-J  border.  24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  143,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

1769.  OUR  BEAUTIFUL  BANNERI-Owr  Beautiful  Banner 
forever  shall  wave  (3  vs.)  Tune— "Star  Spangled  Banner." 

Written  by  Mrs.  Louis  F.  Neagle;  dedicated  to  Mrs. 
Abraham  Lincoln;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.  22.5  x  15  cm. 

1770.  OUR  BEAUTIFUL  FLAG. -Come  rally,  brothers, 
rally,  around  the  strips  [sic]  and  stars  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.   Music  published  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1). 
A-J  border.  20.2  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 


b.  With  "Or,  The  Bonnie  Red,  White  and  Blue"  after 
title;  "strips"  spelled  "stripes"  in  1st  line;  music  publ. 
Oliver,  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Auner  (5). 
T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  13.5  cm. 

OUR  BOY  IS  A  WARRIOR  NOW,  see  ARAB  STEED. 

1771.  OUR  BRAVE  VOLUNTEERS.— O/j,  say  dost  thou  see, 
midst  the  glories  of  day    (4  vs.  with  music  to  first  vs.) 

Words  by  T.  P.  Coulston;  publ.  Wm.  H.  Coulston;  cop: 
EDPa.;  E.F.  Stewart,  music  typographer.  19.5  x  11.7  cm. 

1772.  OUR  COUNTRY.— Oar  Country!  'Tis  of  thee  we  sing 
(7  vs.)  Air:  Old  Hundred. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  712;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1773.  OUR  COUNTRY  AND  FLAG. -Owr  Flag  and  our 
Country  -  our  Union  forever  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  M.  L.  Hofford;  cop:  1862,  Lee  &  Walker,  EDPa.; 
Lee  &  Walker,  Music  and  Musical  Instruments;  publ. 
Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.3  x  15.2  cm. 

1774.  OUR  COUNTRY  REDEEMED!-Z)ay  is  breaking  o'er 
the  strand  (5  vs.) 

Composed  by  O.  Wheelock,  Proprietor  of  the  Great 
Dinners  in  the  Palace  Markets  Corner  of  Twelfth  and 
Market  Street,  where  the  Reader  is  Respectfully  Invited 
to  Participate;  Ledger  Job  Print.  64  x  32  cm. 

1775.  OUR  COUNTRY  RIGHT  OR  WRONG.— /'ZZ  sing  a  song 
about  the  tim.es  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— Few  Days. 

By  Tho's  a'Becket;  Sung  nightly  at  Sanford's  Opera 
House;  Copyright  Secured. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  15.6  cm. 

1776.  OUR  COUNTRY'S  Y'LAG.-Beneath  the  Stars  and 
Stripes  there  stand  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  By  G.  Gumpert;  with  "To  Our  Noble  Volunteers"  after 
title;  cop:  1861,  G.  Gumpert,  EDPa.;  music  publ.  G.  Andre 
&  Co.  19.5  X  12.2  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  2  chors.;  song  printed  by  permission  of  the  pub- 
lishers, G.  Andre  &  Co.;  print.  Johnson  (5);  advs:  Cards, 
Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.;  and  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

Eagle  on  shield,  and  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and 
motto  "Our  Country".  20  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  With  2  chors.;  song  printed  by  permission  of  the  pub- 
lishers, G.  Andre  &  Co.;  2nd  song:    "God  Save  the  Union"; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Floating  hemisphere  with  motto  "Our  Country",  and 
flag  between  two  eagles.  21  x  12  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  imprint  cropped.] 

Floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto  "Our  Country" 
19.5  X  12.7  cm. 

1777.  OUR  COUNTRY'S  FLAG. -"Gorf  bless  our  Stars 
forever  (1  vs.) 

Blue  ink;  figure  of  Liberty  with  flag,  col.  11.2  x  8  cm. 

OUR  COUNTRY'S  FLAG,  see  also  STAR  SPANGLED 
BANNER,  and  WE  ARE  FOR  THE  UNION. 

1778.  OUR  FIFER-BOY.-HTiiJe  the  battle  hot  was  raging 
(8  vs.)  Air:  James  Bird;  or  Dying  Callfomian. 


119 


Composed  by  C.  G.  Wright,  on  board  the  U.  S. 
Steam-Ship  Mississippi,  (New-Orleans.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  23.5  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.2  x  16.8  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1018;  varying:    "Air:   Dying  Californian"; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.7  x  13.2  cm. 

1779.  OUR  FhAG.— Flag  of  the  Free!  heart's  only  home 
(1  vs.) 

Drake's  Address  to  the  American  Flag. 
Glazed  card  paper;  blue  ink;  figure  of  Liberty  with 
flag,  col.  11.2  X  8  cm. 

1780.  OUR  FLAG.— See,  friends,  see,  our  glorioles  flag  of 
freedom  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Cheer,  Boys,  Cheer." 

Written  by  request,  expressly  for  the  Lewis  Opera 
Troupe,  by  John  L.  Zieber;  with  narrative  below  title 
starting:    "Lines  suggested  on  witnessing  Abraham 
Lincoln... raising  the  new  Flag. ..on  the  22d  of  February, 
1861";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1781.  OUR  FLAG  IS  TWER^. -Our  flag  is  there !  our  flag 
is  there  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Printed  as  two  vs.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  26  x  16. 4 
cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15  cm. 

d.  Printed  as  two  vs.;  Revised  and  published  expressly 
for  the  Public  Schools;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

e.  With  exclamation  mark  after  title;  sheet  no.  692;  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15. 2  cm. 

f.  Sheet  no.  738;  2nd  song:    "Star  of  Columbia";  pub. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.  22.3 
X  14  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.2  x  14 
cm. 

OUR  FLAG  IS  THERE,  see  also  THE  DEAR  OLD 
FLAG. 

1782.  OUR  FLAG  TRIUMPHANT !-OMr  Flag  is  proudly 
floating  (3  vs.)  Air— "The  Watcher." 

By  R.  M.  Caldwell;  respectfully  submitted  to  A. 
Anderson;  sold  by  A.  Anderson. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

OUR  FLAG  WITH  THIRTY-FOUR  STARS,  see  THE 
FLAG  WITH  THE  THIRTY  FOUR  STARS. 

OUR  FLAG'S  COME  BACK  TO  TENNESSEE,  see 
MASSA,  MASSA,  HALLELUJAH!  THE  FLAG'S  COME 
BACK  TO  TENNESSEE. 

1783.  OUR  FREEDOM-LIT  BANNER.-AZZ  Hail!  we  now 
see  in  a  full  blaze  of  light  (4  vs.)  Tune— Star-Spangled 
Banner. 


Dedicated  to  Master  "Tad,"  The  Beloved  Son  of  our 
late  Noble  and  Lamented  President,  Abraham  Lincoln; 
Philadelphia,  June  7,  1865;  [signed]  K.  M.;  cop:    1865, 
K.  Moncrieff,  EDPa;  sold  at  230  S.  Tenth  St.  &  346  S. 
Third  St. 

Double-line  border.  19.5  x  12.5  cm. 

1784.  OUR  GALLANT  COLONEL.— Come  all  ye  jolly  lads 
and  mem.bers  of  Company  1  (5  vs.) 

a.  [With  words  for  Col.  EUmaker  and  Company  I;]  Com- 
posed and  sung  by  John  Doherty,  Comp.  I.,  119th  Reg't 

P. v..  May  12,  1863;  Tune— Caroline  of  Edinburgh  Town; 
print.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  19  x  10. 5  cm. 

b.  [With  words  for  Col.  Moore  and  Company  D;]  Com- 
posed and  sung  by  Charles  E.  Archer,  Company  D.,  73d 
Reg't  P. v.,  August  20,  1863;  Tune— Bummers  Drinking  on 
the  Sly;  adv:    New  Songs  since  Aug.  1st,  1863. 

Bust  of  Colonel  Moore  (?).  22  x  16  cm.  (cropped) 

1785.  OUR  GALLANT  PENNSYLVANIA  VOLUNTEERS.- 
Com,e,  friends,  I'll  sing  you  now  a  song  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Tune— "Our  Yankee  Boys;"  publ.  John  W.  Du  Bree. 
Double-line  border  with  fleuron  corners.  20.2  x  11.5 

cm. 

b.  [Without  "Pennsylvania"  in  title;]  composed  and  sung 
by  David  A.  Warden,  with  immense  success;  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

A-J  border.  23  x  13  cm. 

1786.  OUR  GALLANT  YANKEE  BOYS!-Fro?M  the  banks  of 
the  Potomac,  our  army  so  grand  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— 
Gum  Tree  Canoe. 

Written  by  Charles  Gantz,  Co.  C.  11th  P.V.  Cavalry; 
publ.  Johnson  (2).  24.7  x  15. 3  cm. 

1787.  OUR  GERMAN  VOLUNTEERS.-T/zere  is  a  General 
in  the  West  whose  deeds  have  com.e  to  fame  (5  vs.)  Air: 
New-York  Volunteer. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  24  x  16. 5  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen  joining  New  York;]  dedicated  to  them 
by  John  C.  Cross;  sheet  no.  830;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.  24.5 
X  15.5  cm. 

1788.  OUR  GLORIOUS  FLAG  RED,  WHITE,  AND  BLUE.- 
Come  to  the  field  of  fame,  boys,  come  (6  vs.)  Air:  The 
Rich  Girl. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  By  F.  Collins;  sheet  no.  828;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1789.  OUR  GLORIOUS  UNION.-Freemew,  arouse!  the 
southern  men  are  raving  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "Cheer 
Boys,  Cheer." 

Composed  by  William  H.  Murphy. 

T.  o.  border  (cropped).  12.7  x  10.2  cm. 

1790.  OUR  GOOD  SHIP  SAILS  TO-NIGHT  I- 0«r  ^g'ood  ship 
sails  to-night,  Mary  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  Music 
Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  14.8  cm. 


120 


b.  New  Song  dedicated  to  the  Gallant  Patriots  now  vol- 
unteering in  the  service  of  their  Country— composed  by 
Stephen  C.  Massett,  and  sung  with  the  most  enthusiastic 
applause  by;    Madame  Anna  Bishop,  et  al.;  music  published 
by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23.3  x  14  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  but  with  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no. 
809;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1791.  OUR  GRAND-FATHERS'  DAYS.— ^  song  for  to 
please  all  my  kind  friends  before  me  (5  vs.) 

Written  by  John  F.  Poole;  originally  sung  by  Tony 
Pastor. 

a.  [Without  author's  or  singer's  name;]  publ.  Boyd;  adv: 
Boyd's  Novel  Exchange. 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  11.9  cm. 

b.  Varying:    "Sung  by  Tony  Pastor";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4).  25.1  x  17.1  cm. 

d.  [Without  author's  or  singer's  name;  and  hyphen  in 
"Grandfather";]  sung  by  C.  Monroe,  Clown,  of  Stone, 
Rosston  &  Co.'s  N.Y.  Circus;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Catalogue  of  over  600  songs. 

Double-line  border.  20  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  [Title  as  above;]  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  68,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12. 5  cm. 

f.  [Title  as  above;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus 
214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  but  in  black  ink.]  20.2  x  12.2  cm. 

h.  [Title  as  above;]  sheet  no.  1143. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22.7  x  15.3  cm. 

1792.  OUR  HEROES.— C;zeers.'  Cheers,  for  our  heroes 
(6  vs.) 

By  Francis  De  Haes  Janvier. 

a.  Blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners 
in  red  ink.  20.5  x  12  cm. 

b.  17  X  11  cm.  (cropped) 

1793.  OUR  HERO'S  REIGN. -O/z.'  sound  the  trumpet  cheer- 
fully (4  vs.)  Air— "The  Dearest  Place  on  Earth  to  me  is 
Home." 

By  Anna  W.  Spencer,  of  Rhode  Island;  Respectfully 
dedicated  to  Gen.  McClellan. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  hovering  over  fire.  21  x  ix.4  cm. 

OUR  JIMMY  GRAFTED  IN  THE  ARMY,  see  GRAFTED 
INTO  THE  ARMY. 

1794.  OUR  JOURNEY  TO  DIXIE. -H'e  joined  the  army 
t'other  day  (9  vs.) 

Composed  by  T.  F.  St.  John,  while  on  the  Road, 
Thanksgiving  Day;  print.  King  &  Baird  (1). 

Wavy  line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  17.8  x 
13.5  cm. 

OUR  MARYLAND,  see  MY  MARYLAND. 


1795.  OUR  NATIVE  LAND.  — Oar  native  land!  Our  native 
land  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  exclamation  mark  after  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  lyre  border.  25.5  x  I6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  774;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.  24.5 
X  15.5  cm. 

OUR  NATIVE  LAND,  see  also  AMERICA. 
OUR  OWN  DEAR  AMERICA,  see  PRIZE  SONG. 

1796.  OUR  OWN  FLAG  OF  GREEN. -Soon,  soon  shall  our 
Green  Flag  wave  o'er  us  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Red,  White, 
and  Blue. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  26  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.7  x  14.9 
cm. 

c.  With  Air  in  quotation  marks;  sheet  no.  914;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.7  x  15.7  cm. 

1796A.  OUR  POETICAL  ALPHABET.-^  stands  for 
"Abraham" ,  our  President  tall  (52  lines) 

Adv:    The  Only  Place  to  obtain  a  faithful  and  beautiful 
picture  of  yourself  is  at  the  Great  Emporium  of  Art, 
Sherman's  Vignette  Gallery. 

Double-line  border,  with  ornaments  in  comers.  20  x 
12.6  cm. 

1797.  OUR  POTTSVILLE  VOLUNTEERS.-Come, /reemen 
lend  an  ear,  I'll  sing  to  you  a  lay  (13  vs.) 

Composed  and  Sung  by  L.  C.  Crosland;  print.  Johnson 
(2).  23  X  14.5  cm. 

1798.  OUR  SHIP  OF  STATE.— Two  years  ago  or  nearly  so 
(6  vs.) 

Print.  Johnson  (2). 
Eagle.  22.8  x  12.5  cm. 

1799.  OUR  SO'LDIE'RS..— Our  soldiers'r  the  lads  we  adore 
(6  vs.) 

Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  soldier  at  top,  two  horses  and  groom  with 
horse  at  bottom.  23.6  x  14.4  cm. 

1800.  OUR  SWEETHEARTS  AT  HOME.-TAe  rover  goes 
forth  from,  his  home  far  away  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  Sep.  Winner;  music  publ.  by  Sep. 
Winner  (3);  cop:  1864,  Sep.  Winner,  EDPa.;  adv:  Prof 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.7  x  15  cm. 

1801.  OUR  TORN  FLAG.— See  our  to rn  flag  still  tvaving 
(4  vs.) 

Written  in  honor  of  those  Americans  who  fell  in 
Kensington  on  the  6th,  7th  and  8th  of  May,  1844;  print. 
Harris. 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  21.2  x  14.5  cm. 

1802.  OUR  ULYSSES. ->1  new  Song  this  is  of  the  great 
Ulysses  (3  vs.)  Air— The  Groves  of  Blarney. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 


121 


a.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  14a,  col.  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  text  and  hdpc.  in  bronze  ink.  20.4 
X  12.6  cm. 

c.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

1803.  OUR  UNION.— Owr  Union  the  gift  of  our  fathers  1  (3 
vs.  and  chor.  with  music)  Air— Red,  White  and  Blue. 

Headed:    "National  Songs  Issued  By  The  Loyal  National 
League";  written  for  the  great  Sumter  Mass  Meeting,  at 
Union  Square,  April  11th,  1863;  by  Alfred  B.  Street;  issued 
from  the  Offices  of  the  Rebellion  Record,  441  and  448 
Broadway,  New-York.  25  x  17  cm. 

1804.  OUR  UNION  Y'LAG. —There's  a  starry  banner  float- 
ing o'er  the  home  of  liberty  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air:  Nellie 
Grey. 

Words  composed  by  Walter  Washington  Warren,  and 
respectfully  inscribed  to  little  Ada  Payne,  the  highly  gifted 
Vocalist  now  performing  at  the  "Canterbury,"  N.W.  Cor. 
Fifth  &  Chestnut;  print.  Warren  (2);  adv:    You  will  save  30 
per  cent. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  21.5  x  12.2  cm. 

1805.  OUR  UNION,  RIGHT  OR  WRONG. -/n  Freedom's 
name,  our  blades  we  draw  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

A  Song  for  the  Volunteers;  by  Gen.  G.  P.  Morris; 
music  by  Signer  Muzio. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  22.5  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border.  25.8  x  16.2  cm. 

1806.  OUR  UNION,  RIGHT  OR  WRONG. -flowse,  hearts  of 
Freedom.' s  only  home  (4  vs.) 

a.  T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  in- 
scription "America".  23.6  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23.6  x  14  cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  A.  H. 
Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.9  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  743;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.2  cm. 

1806.  OUR  VOLUNTEER  SONG!-We  are  marching  on  with 
shield  and  banner  bright  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  in  the  public  schools.  14.5  x  10.2  cm.  (cropped) 

1807.  OUR  WORK. -Ore  the  wide  battle-field  (5  vs.) 
With  two  leaves,  title  on  recto  of  first  leaf;  title  re- 
peated and  3  vs.  on  verso;  2  vs.  on  recto  of  2nd  leaf;  red 
and  blue  double -line  border  on  recto  of  first  leaf;  red 
double -line  border  on  verso  and  on  recto  of  2nd  leaf;  text 
in  blue  ink.  22  x  14.1  cm. 

1808.  OUR  YANKEE  GENERALS.-lVe  are  all  for  the 
Constitution  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  With  "Air:  Dixie's  Land";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 

corners.  23.1  x  13.9  cm. 


c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  24.6  X  16  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  13.2  cm. 

1809.  OUR  YANKEE  MONITOR.— T/te  time,  my  boys,  is 
very  nigh,  when  Johnny  Bull  will  see  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  24.6  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1073;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  22.3  x  13.2  cm. 

1810.  OUT  FOR  ONCE.— CoTwe  listen  to  my  story,  young 
m.en  and  ladies  fair  (6  vs.)  Air:  Root  Hog  or  Die. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Air  in  quotation  marks;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border;  little  man  riding  mouse,  and  little  woman 
in  chariot  pulled  by  butterflies.  23.1  x  14.3  cm. 

c.  With  dash  after  Air;  sheet  no.  972;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1811.  THE  OUTLAW.— 0/z,  /  am  the  child  of  the  forest  wild 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.1  x  15.6  cm. 

1812.  "PA  HAS  STRUCK  ILE,"— /  once  was  unknown  by 
the  happy  and  gay  (3  vs.) 

Written  and  composed  by  C.  Archer;  music  publ.  by 
Lee  and  Walker;  publ.  by  permission  of  the  owner  of  the 
copyright;  cop:  1865,  C.  Everest,  EDPa.;  publ.  Johnson 
&  Co.  22.1  X  13.9  cm. 

1813.  PADDY  BURKE.— Here  /  am  Paddy  Burke,  a  true 
Irish  turk  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Jeff  Davis. 

By  Eugene  Johnston. 

a.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).  19.7  x  12.4  cm. 

b.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  With  semi-colon  after  "Air";  sheet  no.  1071;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.3  x  13.9  cm. 

1814.  PADDY  GOSHLOW.— Mji  darlings  don't  smile  while 
to  you  I  do  tell  (7  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air— Billy  Barlow. 

By  G.W.  Anderson,  Irish  Vocalist;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  14.7  cm. 

1815.  PADDY  IS  THE  BOY.— It's  some  years  ago,  I  very 
well  know  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1816.  PADDY  MC  FADDEN.— Paddy  McFadden  was  lazy 
and  fat  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Harry  Fox,  The  Popular  Comic  Vocalist,  at 
Hitchcock's  National  Concert  Hall. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 


122 


b.  Sheet  no.  901;  publ,  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.9  x  15.2  cm. 

1817.  PADDY  MILES.— From  the  big  town  of  Limerick 
lately  I  came  (6  vs.  and  6  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.1  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  903;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

1818.  PADDY  O'FLANAGAN. -'TM;as  Paddy  O'Flanagan 
set  out,  one  morning  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  26  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no. .1193;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1819.  PADDY  O'LYNN— 0«e  Paddy  O'Lynn  courted  Widdy 
M'Kay  (9  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  688;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1820.  PADDY  ON  THE  CANAL. -W^ere  I  landed  in  sweet 
Philadelphia,  the  weather  was  pleasant  and  clear  (6  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.7  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.1  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  414;  printed  and  Sold  wholesale  only  at 
Philip  Price's. 

T.  o.  border.  18  x  11.9  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  698;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

1821.  PADDY  ON  THE  RAILWAY.-A  Paddy  once  in 
Greenock  town,  for  Glasgow  city  he  was  bound  (5  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.9  x  15.8  cm. 

1822.  PADDY  WHACK.-OA,  here  I  am  and  that  is  flat 
(5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupld  border,  col.  24.2  x  16  cm. 

1823.  PADDY'S  DREAM. -/w  London  one  night,  about  three 
in  the  morning  (3  vs.;  3  vs.  spoken  and  3  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.9  x  16.3  cm. 

1824.  PADDY'S  FIGHT  WITH  THE  KNOW-NOTHINGS. - 
Paddy,  mavourneen,  ye  have  but  one  eye  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Rory  O'More"  Or  "The  Campbells  Are  Coming." 

a.  By  Tom  Robinson;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  With  title:    "Patrick  M'Finigan's  Fight  with  the  Know- 
Nothings";  Air— "Rory  O'Moore";  publ.  Johnson  (3);  adv: 
Card  and  Job  Printing. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  14.9  cm. 

1825.  PADDY'S  GRAVE. -'Twas  at  the  Pig  and  Cat  (3  vs. 
and  chors.) 

a.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.9  x  15.6  cm. 


b.  With  only  one  chor.;  sheet  no.  634;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  23.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1826.  PADDY'S  KIPPEEN.-/  bruk  a  skull  the  other  day, 
there  upon  the  green  (4  vs.  and  chors.  and  3  mottoes)  Air: 
The  Sewing  Machine. 

Sheet  no.  1443;  As  Sung  by  Wm.  Carleton;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.1  cm. 

1827.  PADDY'S  LAMENT. -Ocfe  home!  alas!  for  the  sons 
of  ould  Erin  (9  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  Adv:    You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Print- 
ing done;  [print.]  Johnson  (3). 

Wavy-line  sides,  with  floral  comerpieces;  four  men 
smoking.  22.5  x  14.1  cm. 

1828.  PADDY'S  LAMENT.— "/ot  sitthin  on  de  sthile, 
Molly,  wid  a  grape  shot  in  m.y  leg  (5  vs.)  Air:  I'm  sitting 
on  the  stile  &  c." 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.; 
adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  190,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

1829.  PADDY'S  WEDDING.— Swre  won't  you  hear  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.8  x  I6.I  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  647;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  25  x  15.8  cm. 

1830.  PAR  EXCELLENCE:    OR  THE  IDOL  OF  THE  DAY.- 
I'm.  "on  the  Cards  for  Gaiety"  (4  vs.  and  chor.;  4  vs. 
spoken) 

Sung  by  Vance;  with  a  suggestion  reading:    "N.B.— The 
places  mentioned  in  this  Song  can  be  readily  localized  by 
the  vocalist..";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

1831.  PARODY  NO.  2.  ON  "VILIKINS  AND  HIS  DINAH. "- 
There  is  a  young  damsel  in  Woodbridge  doth  dwell  (7  vs.) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

1832.  PARODY  ON  THE  COTTAGE  BY  THE  SEA. -"Child- 
hood's days  have  passed  before  me"  (5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  83.  bronze.  19.5 x 
13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.7  cm. 

d.  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1175;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

1833.  PARODY  ON  DEAR  MOTHER,  I'VE  COME  HOME  TO 
DIE.— Dear  Mother,  I  remember  well  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.6  x  16.9  cm. 


123 


c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25  x  15.4  cm. 

d.  [Without  "Dear"  in  title;]  An  Original  Conglomeration 
of  Titles;  by  the  popular  Author  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet 
no.  1176;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.7  x  13.1  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1834.  PARODY  ON  I'M  LONELY  TO-NIGHT.-/  am  lonely, 
to-night,  in  a  narrow  little  chamber  (2  vs.) 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  2nd  song:  "The  Milkmaid"; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1835.  PARODY  ON  JUST  BEFORE  THE  BATTLE. -J«si 
before  the  battle.  Mother  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Just  before 
the  battle. 

By  Eug.  T.  Johnston. 

a.  Title:    "Skedaddling  Song.    A  Parody  on 'Just  Before 
the  Battle'  ";  with  author's  name  spelled  "Johnson";  publ. 
Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  [Title  as  above;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  24  x  n  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  16. 1  cm. 

1836.  PARODY  ON  NORAH  O'NEAL.  OR  TRYING  TO 
RAISE  A  SQUARE  MEAL.-Z'w  thirsty,  to-night,  Jim, 
without  you  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Norah  O'Neal. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  Title:    "Trying  to  Raise  a  Square  Meal;  or,  Norah 
O'Neal.  No.  2";  sheet  no.  1057;  [publ.]  Partridge  (2). 

Double-line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  23.3  x 
14.8  cm. 

1837.  PARODY  ON:    PUT  ME  IN  MY  LITTLE  BED.-O/z.' 
once  I  was  a  little  dreary  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Morris  Stransky;  2nd  song:    "Jackey,  De  Butcher 
Boy";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

1838.  PARODY  ON  TENTING  ON  THE  OLD  CAMP- 
GROUND.—H'e 're  drinking,  to-night,  in  the  old  bar-room. 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  Wm.  H.  Hanford;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1839.  PARODY  ON  TO  THE  WEST. -To  the  west!  to  the 
west,  I  once  went,  do  you  see  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.6  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  blank  left  for  publisher's  name  at 
bottom. 

T.  o.  border;  horses  pulling  canal  boat.  19  x  11.6  cm. 

1840.  A  PARODY  ON  "UNCLE  SAM'S  FARM."-0/a/Z  the 
reformations,  in  the  east  or  in  the  west  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Written  by  Professor  Field;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 
23.8  X  15.5  cm. 


1841.  PARODY  ON  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER.- 
Och,  Biddy  dear,  do  you  rem.em.ber  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Tune.— When  this  Cruel  War  is  Over;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border.  21  x  12. 5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.7  x  16. 5  cm. 

c.  Tune.— When  this  Cruel  War  is  Over;  publ.  Johnson (2), 
with  "7  N.  St.  10th,"  in  imprint;  adv:    Johnson's  New 
Catalogue  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  13.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  with  "No.  7  N.  10th"  in  imprint.] 
T.  o.  border.  21  x  12  cm. 

e.  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs, 
publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

f .  By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  12.2  cm. 

g.  Title:    "When  this  Cruel  War  is  Over  No.  2.";  sheet 
no.  822;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  14  cm. 

h.   By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1107. 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

1842.  PARODY  ON  YOU'LL  REMEMBER  ME. -When  other 
lips  and  other  hearts  (5  vs.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.6  x  17.1  cm. 

b.  With  "at  444  Broadway,  N.Y."  inserted  after  name  of 
singer;  sheet  no.  1163;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

1843.  PARTING  WHISPERS:-/  must  go,  I  must  go,  yet  I 
linger  and  stay  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus  Winner];  cop:    1863, 
Winner  &  Co.,  EDPa.;  Winner  &  Co.'s  Music  Store  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  18.4  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

1844.  THE  PASS  OF  DEATH.— /f  was  a  narrow  pass  (6  vs.) 
Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  14.4  cm. 

1845.  PASSING  THE  BRIDGE.— Cojjze  close  to  my  bed, 
m.other  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  824;  with  explanation  at  beginning  of  song 
reading:    "A  New  England  soldier  boy,  dying  in  a  southern 
city,  opened  his  eyes...";  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  21.7  x  13  cm. 

1846.  PAT  AND  THE  PRIEST.— Pai/eZZ  sick  on  a  time,  and 
he  sent  for  the  Priest  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Vilikens  and 
his  Dinah." 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  897;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

1847.  PAT  MC  CARTY.— Oc/i,  my  name  is  Pat  Mc  Carty 
(3  vs.  uneven  length  and  2  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.2  x  15.8  cm. 


124 


1848.  PAT  MAhhOY.— At  sixteen  years  of  age,  I  was  my 
mother's  fair  hair'd  boy  (3  vs.) 

Cop:  1865,  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  SDN.Y.;  Wm.  A.  Pond 
&  Co.,  Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

1849.  PAT  MURPHY  OF  MEAGHER'S  BRIGADE. -'Tioas 
the  night  before  battle;  and,  gathered  in  groups  (6  vs.) 
Air:  Think  of  your  head  in  the  morning. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  quotation  marks  around  Air;  sheet  no.  1124;  sung 
with  great  success  by  the  Comic  Vocalist  of  the  day,  Tony 
Pastor;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [printed  upside-down). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3).  21.5  x  13.4  cm.  (cropped) 

1850.  PATRICK  CAZEY.  — Sweet  Kathleen  dear,  I'm  now 
come  here  (10  vs.) 

A  Popular  Comic  Duet,  as  Sung  by  the  Misses  Shaw; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.4  x  I6.2  cm. 

PATRICK  M'FINIGAN'S  FIGHT  WITH  THE  KNOW- 
NOTHINGS,  see  PADDY'S  FIGHT  WITH  THE  KNOW- 
NOTHINGS. 

1851.  THE  PATRIOT  FIAG. -Fling  to  the  breeze  the 
patriot  flag.  (5  vs.) 

For  sale  at  11  Pennsylvania  Avenue. 
T.  o.  border.  18.9  x  11.6  cm.  (cropped) 

1852.  THE  PATRIOTIC  CONTRABAND !-0  darkles,  I'se 
gwine  in  de  Armey  [sic]  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Kingdom's 
Coming. 

By  A.  Anderson. 

T.  o.  border  21.6  x  13.2  cm. 

1853.  THE  PATRIOT'S  CALL  TO  DUTY.-ffarfe,  brothers, 
hark,  the  trumpet's  calling  (5  vs.)  Air— "Row,  Boys,  Row." 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  13.3  cm. 

1854.  THE  PATRIOT'S  PLUME. -For^ef  we  the  hopes  that 
our  fore -fathers  cherish'd  (4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Miss  Jennie  Wilkinson,  at  the  Kossuth 
Concert  Saloon,  Seventh  street,  above  Chestnut;  publ. 
Warren  (1)  (2)  (5). 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  20.9  x  11.7  cm. 

1855.  PAT'S  ADVENTURES  IN  THE  CRIMEA.-Two  years 
ago,  I  was  working  on  me  farm  (11  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
"Paddy's  Ramble." 

a.  Words  by  G.  W.  Anderson,  Irish  Vocalist;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14.1  cm. 

b.  Title:    "Pat's  Adventures";  sheet  no.  11;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  23.3  x  15.1  cm. 

1856.  PAT'S  CURIOSITY  SHOP.-Dirf  you  hear  tell  of 
Paddy's  Museum  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1).  23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.3  x  16. 2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  589;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14.9  cm. 


d.  Sheet  no.  650;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24.4  x  15.7  cm. 

1857.  PAT'S  FAREWELL  TO  HIS  SWEETHEART. -Fare- 
well,  farewell,  dear  maid  (4  vs.)  Air.— The  harp  that  once 
thro'  Tara's  Halls. 

By  P.J.  Walsh;  publ.  Andrews. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.6  x  15.6 
cm. 

1858.  PAUL  VANE.  ANSWER  TO  LORENA.-T/ze  years 
are  creeping  slowly  by,  dear  Paul  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  is  cm. 

1859.  THE  PAUPERS.— 0/j  don't  you  remember  the 
Paupers,  Tom  Brown  (4  vs.)  Air.— "Ben  Bolt." 

By  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

1860.  THE  PEANUT  GKL.—Now  gather  round  me,  colored 
folks  and  listen  to  my  ditty  (3  vs.) 

a.  Without  "The"  in  title;  2nd  song:    "Charcoal  Man"; 
publ.  C.  Boyd  (1);  adv:    Boyd's  Circulating  Library. 

T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  Comic  banjo  song  by  Unsworth;  sheet  no.  211;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  DRUMMER  BOY  OF  WATERLOO 
on  recto.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1861.  THE  PEANUT-GAL'S  GHOST. -07z.'tofc'fe /oZfes, /'se 
come  for  to  sing  you  a  song  {4  vs.)  Air:  Robinson  Crusoe. 

A  sorrowful  song  sung  by  Sam  Sharpley;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3) 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1862.  THE  PEANUT  STAND. -Cowe,  listen  to  me,  white 
folks,  while  I  rehearse  a  ditty  (5  vs.)  Air:  Joe  Bowers. 

As  sung  by  L.  Simmons,  Ethiopian  Comedian. 

a.  [Without  "As  sung  by...";]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col,;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).  20  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Adv:    Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 

(1).  20.5  X  13.3  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1101;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

1863.  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  MOUNTED  RANGERS'  WAR 
SONG.— MoM«i.'  mount!  and  away  o'er  our  borders  so  wide 
(3  vs.)  Air— I'm  Afloat. 

a.  By  James  V.  Murray;  respectfully  dedicated  to  Colonel 
E.  G.  Chormann. 

T.  o.  border.  21.3  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  (As  above;]  yellow  paper.  18.2  x  10.6  cm. 

1864.  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  TWENTY  EIGHTH. -On  «ie 
old  Potomac  Border,  through  Winter's  stonu  and  snow 
(9  vs.)  Air.— Louisiana  Lowlands. 

Written  for  George  Henry  &  Singers  of  company  P.  at 
Camp  Tourison,  Manassas  Junction.  May  17th.  1862.  by 
E.H.C.;  cop:   1862;  Harbach  &  Brother,  EDPa.;  print. 
Harbach  &  Bro. 


125 


Letter  paper;  printed  on  double-sheet  with  title  on  first 
page  in  red  and  blue  ink,  and  text  on  pp.  2  and  3;  t.  o. 
borders  in  green;  with  scene  of  "Camp  Tourison".  21.2  x 
13.7  cm. 

1865.  THE  PENNSYLVANU  VOLVtiTEERS-Oh!  where, 
tell  us  where,  are  our  gallant  soldiers  gone  (5  vs.)  Air:  — 
"The  Blue  Bells  of  Scotland." 

a.  Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2);  adv:    Handbills,  Programmes, 
Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  small  figures  of  guard  and  soldier  with 
horse.  19.5  x  11  cm.  (cropped) 

1866.  THE  PENNSYLVANIAN  BATTLE  CRY. -Hark!  the 
trumpet  calls  to  duty  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Gay  and 
Happy. ' ' 

By  T.  A'  Becket;  author  of  "Columbia,  the  Gem  of  the 
Ocean";  cop:   1861,   T.  A'Becket,  EDPa. 

a.  Sold  at  Johnson's  (2). 

Yellow  paper;  niulti-line  border.  23.7  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  headed  "Fifth  Edition".  24.3  x  13  cm. 

c.  Headed:    "Second  Edition";  print.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

d.  [Without  "By  T.  A'Becket"  and  copyright;]  title:    "The 
Maryland  Battle  Cry";  with  words  changed  to  apply  to 
Maryland. 

T.  o.  border;  figure  of  Liberty  with  scales  and  sword. 
25.7  X  8.7  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  Title:    "We  Are  For  The  Union";  "As  Sung  by  Our 
Volunteers";  with  comma  after  "Tune";  8  vs.  and  chor.; 
[without  author's  name  and  copyright.] 

Double -line  border.  20.2  x  12  cm. 

1867.  THE  PEOPLE  TO  THE  PRESIDENT.-0;j,  let  the 
Constitution  stand  (5  vs.)  Air— Maryland,  My  Maryland; 
German  Melody:    O  Tannenbaum,  O  Tannenbaum,  wie  grlin 
sind  deine  Blatter. 

By  A  Lady  of  Washington  City. 

a.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  6,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).  21  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  period  at  end  of  title;]  hdpc.  Magnus 
121,  col.  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12. 5  cm. 

c.  Adv:    Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  6,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).  19.7  x  11.5  cm. 

1868.  PEOPLE'S  CAMPAIGN  SONG,  NO.  1.  LINCOLN  & 
YiAWLW.—Oh}  Lincoln  the  hope  of  the  nation  (3  vs.  and 
chor.)  Tune— "Columbia's  the  gem  of  the  ocean." 

Multi-line  border.  21  x  14.6  cm. 

1869.  THE  PEOPLE'S  CHOICE. -Bring-  the  good  oU  bugle, 
boys  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— "Marching  through  Georgia." 

Sheet  no.  1096;  written  for  the  Fifth  Ward  Glee  Club; 
publ.  Partridge  (2);  [signed]  W.  P.  C. 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  12.5  cm. 

THE  PERFECT  CURE,  see  THE  REAL,  PERFECT 
CURE. 

1870.  PETER  GRAY.— My  song  is  of  a  nice  young  man 
(7  vs.) 

An  Affecting  Song  on  the  Sorrowful  Death  of  Peter  Gray 
and  Lizzy  Anna  Querl;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  16.5  cm. 


PETROLEUM;  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED  TO  ONE 
WHO  HAS  OIL  ON  THE  BRAIN,  see  OIL  ON  THE  BRAIN. 

1871.  PETTICOAT  LANE.-H^en  to  Dublin  I  came  from 
the  sweet  County  Down  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

1872.  PHELIM  MAVOURNEEN.-O/z,  Phelim-dear  Phelim! 
tho'  lonely  you  wait  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  781;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

1873.  THE  PHILADELPHIA  FIREMEN. -Some  ten  or 
fifteen  years  ago,  when  1  was  twenty-one  (10  vs.)  Air— 

"The  Raging  Canal." 

By  John  L.  Zieber;  print.  Boyle. 
T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

1874.  THE  PHILADELPHIA  GIRL'S  LAMENT!-^  Maiden's 
tears  were  streaming  (4  vs.)  Tune— "The  Gascon  Vespers." 

By  "Ned  Buntline"  [Edward  Zane  Carroll  Judson;] 
dedicated  to  the  Belles  of  Chestnut  Street;  adv:    You  will 
save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing  done  at  Johnson's; 
publ.  Johnson  (3);  adv:    Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  13.7  cm. 

1875.  PHILADELPHIA  RIOTS.-Oh  in  Philadelphia  folks 
say  how  (19  vs.  and  3  chors.)  Tune— It  'ill  neber  do  to  gib 
it  up. 

Copy-right  secured;  publ.  J.  Torr  (2);  sold  by  Colon  & 
Adriance  and  at  Peirson's;  [with  CLAY  AND  FRELING- 
HUYSEN  and  THE  WHIG  CHIEF  on  verso.] 

Double-line  border.  22.5  x  12  cm. 

1876.  PHOEBE  DEAREST.— P^zoeSe,  dearest,  tell,  oh!  tell 
m.e  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  kissing  cupid  border.  26  x  16.4 
cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  961;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

1877.  THE  PHOENIX  SOCIETY.— /'ZZ  sing  you  a  nice  little 
song  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:    One  night  to  a  concert  I  went. 

By  J.J.  Cummins;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.8  cm. 

1878.  PHYSIC  FOR  TRAITORS !- WTzaf  means  all  this 
frightful  commotion  (8  vs.)  Tune— 'Red,  White  and  Blue.' 

Headed:    "The  Great  Union  War  Song";  cop:  1847, 
Quipps  and  Co.,  EDPa.;  Quipps  &  Co.'s  Comic  Miscellany- 
No.  XX.;  adv:    Dealers  supplied  at  1021  Market  St.  second 
floor. 

T.  o.  border;  "Illustration  -  Jeff  Davis  in  the  right 
place".  41  X  13. 5  cm. 

1879.  THE  PICKET  GUARD.— Comrade,  how  goes  the  night 
without  (6  vs.) 

Printed,  June  1863;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.  18.8  x  12.5  cm. 

THE  PICKET  GUARD,  see  also  THE  PICKET'S  LAST 
WATCH. 

1880.  PICKET'S  LAST  WATCH. -Aii  quiet  along  the 
Potomac  "they  say"  (6  vs.  uneven  length) 

[By  Mrs.  Ethel  Lynn  Beers.]' 


126 


a.  Music  composed  by  David  A.  Warden;  adv:    the  Music 
of  this  and  the  following  Copyright  Songs  obtained  for 
Fifteen  Cents  Each  [of]  D.A.  Warden  (1);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.6  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  on  yellow  paper.  23.7  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  Music  composed  by  David  A.  Warden;  publ.  Auner. 
A-J  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

d.  A-J  border.  20.2  x  13  cm. 

e.  [Without  "Last"  in  title;]  music  composed  and  sung  by 
D.A.  Warden;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.8  x  13.5  cm. 

f.  Title:    "Picket  Guard";  adv:    Johnson  will  send  you  the 
Music;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Kromer's  (Upham's)  Hair 
Dye. 

A-J  border.  21.6  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  [Title  as  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2).  20.7  x  12  cm. 

h.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
I,etter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  96,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  19.5  x  12  cm. 

i.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  99,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
18.5  X  12.6  cm. 

j.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  106,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.5  cm. 

k.  (As  above;]  black  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus 
170,  col.  20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

1881.  PIC-NIC  VkKTY.— Last  summer  I  shall  ne'er  forget 
(6  vs.)  Air.— "Sleighing  Party" 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.4  cm. 

1882.  THE  PIG  IS  GREASED  BEHIND.-Cojne,  listen  all, 
ye  jolly  boys  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.  25.5  X  16. 5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.5  x  15  cm. 

c.  By  Fred  Ford;  sheet  no.  907;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1883.  THE  PIG  PALLOON  SCHIP.-Vaf  ^j^ewess  dem 
fellers  vay  up  on  the  ski  (7  vs.)  Air:    Vilikinsand  his  Dinah 

[Signed]  Hans  Lubeck,  43rd  Street,  New  York. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4).  26  x  15. 9  cm. 

1884.  PILFERING  SCAMP.    A  PARODY  ON  "DISMAL 
SWAMP."— //e's  placed  in  a  cell  too  cold  and  damp  (4  vs.) 

Written  for  the  "Lewis  Opera  Troupe,"  by  John  L. 
Zieber;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  22.9  x  14.3  cm. 

1885.  THE  VllXiT:. -Oh  1  pilot,  'tis  a  fearful  night  (Z  vs. 
with  three  2-line  proverbs  below  text) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1886.  THE  PILOT.— H^en  lightnings  pierce  the  pitchy  sky 
(4  vs.) 


2nd  song:    "Ever  of  Thee";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

1887.  PIRATE'S  CHORUS.   FROM  THE  "ENCHANTRESS." 
—Ever  be  happy,  and  bright  as  thou  art  (1  vs.) 

2nd  song:    "Drinking  Chorus.    From  the  'Enchantress'  "; 
3rd  song:    "Beautiful  Venice";  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

PIRATE'S  CHORUS,  see  also  BEAUTIFUL  VENICE. 

1888.  THE  PIRATE'S  SERENADE. -Come  love,  come, 
com.e  away  ivith  me  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— I  am  off  for 
Baltimore. 

By  Geo.  A.  W.  Langford  Fahie;  print.  Andrews. 

a.  Andrews  ivy  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

PITY  THE  SORROWFUL,  see  AN  ORIGINAL  POEM. 

1889.  PITY  THE  SORROWS  OF  A  POOR  OLD  MAl^.-Pity 
the  sorrows  of  a  poor  old  man  (10  vs.) 

a.  By  the  Rev.  Thomas  Ross;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Boyd's  stamp  added.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

1890.  A  PLACE  IN  THY  MEMORY  DEAREST.-^ />toce  in 
thy  memory,  Dearest  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1619. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.8  x  15.4  cm. 

1891.  PLAYED  OVT.—New  bye-words  com.e  up  every  year 
(7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— King  and  Countryman. 

a.  Adv:    Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album  Drolleries; 
[publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  man  on  donkey  chased  by  eagle,  col.  23  x 
14.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  935;  as  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  with  different 
words  to  verses  3-6  and  two  added;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  21.5  x  13  cm. 

1892.  PLAYED  OUT,  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED  TO 
"OLD  FOGIES."— OZd  Fogies  oft  sigh  for  the  good  old 
times  floivn  (10  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— What  I  Don't  Like  to 
see. 

By  John  L.  Zieber.  22  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

1893.  PLUG  UGLIES.— H'e  are  a  gallant  band  of  spirits, 
fair  or  foul  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Root  Hog  or  Die." 

Headed:    "The  Celebrated  Baltimore  Song";  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  19.6  x  10.8  cm.  (cropped) 

1894.  POCAHONTAS. -!7/)on  the  barren  sand  (3  vs.) 
Narrative  following  title .  beginning:    "The  daughter 

of  the  Indian  Chief  Powhattan  who  was  mov'd,  by  her 
eloquent  importunities,  to  save  the  life  of  Captain  Smith...". 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  is. 2  cm. 

b.  By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  667;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1895.  POLLY  PERKINS,  OF  WASHINGTON  SQUARE. -/'w 
a  broken-heart  butcher-boy  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 


127 


a.  Print.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  21.8  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  "broken-hearted"  in  first  line;  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.7  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [First  line  as  above;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  16  cm. 

1896.  POLLY  VON  LUTHER  AND  JAMIE  RAKDAhh.-Ho! 
all  ye  gay  sportsmen,  who  follow  the  gun  (7  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

1897.  POMPEY  MOORE.— O^z.' my  name  is  Pompey  Moore 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  J.  T.  Boyce  of  Hooley's  Minstrels;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.5  x  15.6  cm. 

POMPEY'S  GRAVE,  see  O,  DEAREST  DINE. 

1898.  POOR  BILLY  VAIL.    A  PARODY  ON  "LILLY  DALE.' 
—  'Twos  a  cold  raw  night  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1899.  POOR  BLACK  B'ESS.—Wlien  fortune,  blind  goddess, 
she  fled  m.y  abode  (9  vs.)  Air:    Poor  Dog  Tray. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  437;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  STAR  OF 
THE  WEST  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  LULA  IS  GONE  on  recto.] 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

1900.  THE  POOR  LITTLE  FISHERMAN'S  GIRL.-«  was 
down  in  the  country  a  poor  girl  was  weeping  (7  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

1901.  THE  POOR  LITTLE  SOLDIER'S  BOY.-T/te  snow 
was  fast  a  falling  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  23.4  x  14  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.5  x  16.9  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1462;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  harper  border.  24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

1902.  POOR  OLD  HORSE  LET  HIM  DIE. -My  clothingonce, 
alas  my  friends ,  was  linsey  wools ey  fine  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

POOR  OLD  JOE,  see  HAM-FAT. 

1903.  POOR  OLD  MAmS.— Fourscore  and  four  of  us,  poor 
old  maids  (5  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  14.6  cm. 


1904.  POOR  OLD  MIKE.—/  was  reared  in  Doncaster,  some 
forty  years  ago  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.9  x  16.6  cm. 

1905.  POOR  OLD  SLAVE.— 'Tjs  just  one  year  ago  to-day 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  First  line  beginning:    "It  was";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.,  and  25  per  cent,  less 
than  any  other  Printer  in  the  City. 

A-J  border.  21  x  12. 7  cm. 

1906.  THE  POOR  SOLDIER  BOY.— Gather  a  round  me,  one 
and  all,  short  and  tall,  great  and  sm.all  (6  vs.)  Air— Bold 
Soldier  Boy. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  24.5  x  I6  cm. 

1907.  POOR  UNCLE  TOM.-^  look  of  gloomy,  bitter  sad- 
ness (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  This  Song  was  suggested  by  the  incidents  to  be  found  in 
Mrs.  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe's  celebrated  work,  entitled  "Uncle 
Tom's  Cabin,"  and  sung  nightly,  with  tremendous  applause,  by 
Wood's  Celebrated  Minstrels,  at  444  Broadway,  N.Y.; 

print.  Andrews;  adv:    All  the  New  Songs  constantly  on  hand. 
Price  One  Cent,  each. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  13.8  cm. 

b.  Suggested  by  incidents  in  Mrs.  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe's 
great  work,  entitled  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,"  and  sung 
nightly  with  great  applause,  by  Wood's  Minstrels;  [publ.] 
Auner  (6);  adv:    Printing  of  All  Descriptions  neatly  exe- 
cuted. 

T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  14  cm. 

1908.  POP  GOES  THE  COACHMAN.-Mr.  Boker's  very 
blue,  cause  his  daughter-poached,  m.an  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air- Pop  goes  the  Weasel. 

A  duet  between  John  and  Mary  Ann;  [signed]  W.  T. 

a.  Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  19.5  x  n  cm.  (cropped) 

1909.  POP  GOES  THE  QUESTIONI-MafrmoKj  is  a  nut 
(10  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  976;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  three-line  imprint. 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.3  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  two-line  imprint.  24.7  x  15.1  cm. 

1910.  POP  GOES  DE  WEASEL.-W%e«  de  night  walks  in, 
as  black  as  a  sheep  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

1911.  POP  GOES  THE  WEAZLE!— O/z  darkies,  what  a  time 
I  had  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  nightly  by  Charley  White,  with  shouts  of  applause, 
at  his  Opera  House,  49  Bowery,  N.Y.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1912.  POP  GOES  THE  WEAZLE!  NO.  Z.-Queen  Victoria 
is  very  sick  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 


128 


[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.2  x  16  cm. 

PRAIRIE  FLOWER,  see  ROSALIE  THE  PRAIRIE 
FLOWER. 

1913.  PRAYER  DURING  BATTLE. -Father,  I  call  on  thee 
(6  vs.) 

Sept.  1863;  print.  Johnson  (2). 
Double-line  border.  14.7  x  10.5  cm. 

PRAYER  DURING  BATTLE,  see  also  SWORD  SONG. 

PRAYER  FOR  OUR  COUNTRY,  see  AMERICA. 

1914.  THE  'PRENTICE  BOY.-As  doum  in  cupid's  garden 
for  pleasure  I  did  walk  (8  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;}  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

1915.  PRESIDENT  LINCOLN'S  FAVORITE  POEM.-O^i.' 
why  should  the  spirit  of  mortal  be  proud  (12  vs.) 

a.  With  comma  at  end  of  title;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
Mourning  border;  eagle  with  shield,  flags  and  motto 

"E  Pluribus  Unum".  22  x  12  cm. 

b.  Copied  by  F.  B.  Carpenter,  while  our  Lamented  Chief 
was  reciting  it;  April  21,  1865;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Mourning  border.  18  x  9.2  cm. 

THE  PRESIDENT  WHO  WORE  HIS  WIFE'S  PETTICOAT, 
see  THE  LAST  DITCH. 

1916.  PRESIDENT'S  BALL.— Come  all  ye  kind  friends  who 
now  are  downhearted  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  A.  Anderson;  cop;  A.  Anderson,  EDPa.,  1863;  sold 
at  420  South  Tenth  Street  Phila.,  also  by  Harry  May. 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

1917.  THE  PRESIDENT'S  BALL.-/^o  doubt  you've  all 
heard  of  the  hop  of  Tim  Lannegan  (5  vs.)  Air:    Lannegan's 
Ball. 

Sung  by  Joe  English;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  25.5  x  16.4  cm. 

1918.  THE  PRESIDENT'S  CHAIR.-O/;,  say  do  you  hear 
from  the  East  to  the  West  (3  vs.)  Tune.— "The  Star 
Spangled  Banner." 

Sheet  no.  1091;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

THE  PRESS,  see  CARRIER'S  ADDRESS  TO  THE 
PATRONS  OF  "THE  PRESS." 

1919.  THE  PRESS  GANG . -Freedom 's  sons  awake  to  glory 
(7  vs.)  Air.-"Tom  Haliard." 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H. 
De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  666;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

1920.  PRETTY  DILLY  BURN.-/  loved  a  little  color'd  girl, 
she  lived  in  Tennessee  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  23.5  x  15.2 
cm. 


PRETTY  GIRL  IJNDER  THE  ROSE,  see  CORCORAN 
TO  HIS  REGIMENT. 

1921.  PRETTY  JANE.— My  pretty  Jane,  my  pretty  Jane 
(2  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.7  cm. 

1922.  PRETTY  JEMIMA. -Mji  love  she  lives  in  a  two-pair 
back  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  the  celebrated  Charles  Vivian,  at  Butler's 
American  Theatre,  472  Broadway,  New-York;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

1923.  PRETTY  LITTLE  ThORA.-I  sing  of  Pretty  Flora, 
a  gem  behind  the  bar  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  by  G.  Leyboume;  2nd  song:    "Wait  for  the  Turn 
of  the  Tide";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1621;  2nd  song:    "The  Moon  Is  Up." 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

1924.  PRETTY  LITTLE  MARY,  OR  CHUCK,  CHUCK, 
CHUCK.— To  Farmer  Jones'  I  went  down,  one  lovely 
February  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

1925.  PRETTY  LITTLE  SARAH,  OR  $7  A  WEEK.-Mji 
heart  is  like  a  pumpkin,  swollen  big  with  love  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  737;  CM.  Tremaine,  Music  Publisher;  publ. 
Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor,  at  his  Opera-House,  201  Bowery; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

1926.  PRETTY  MAID  MILKING  HER  COW.-/i  being  on  a 
fine  summer's  morning  (7  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  841;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

1927.  PRETTY  SALLY.- 'Tis  o'er  the  mountains  far  away 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  Winner  &  Co.  (3). 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Johnson's  New  Catalogue  of 
Songs . 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  "Music  published  by";]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 
20  X  11  cm. 

c.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  234,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  Adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.l  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  236.  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

1928.  THE  PRroE  OF  THE  VILL-VGE.-/  ivas  bom  in  the 
town  of  KiWiooley  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Pat's  Curiosity 
Shop. 

By  Eug.  T.  Johnston;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.7  x  16.3  cm. 


129 


1929.  PRINCE  OF  WALES. -Fe,  sons  of  freedom,  hail  the 
day  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  A.  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24.5  x 

16.2  cm. 

1930.  THE  PRINCE  OF  WHALES,  [sic]  NO.  2. -The  Prince 
of  Whales  will  soon  be  here  (5  vs.)  Air:  Burns'  Farewell. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24  x  16.2  cm. 

1931.  THE  PRINCE  OF  WALES.  NO.  S.-Ye  Flora 
McFlinsey's  and  Frederick  Fitz  Foodies  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— Villikens  and  his  Dinah. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  16  cm. 

1932.  PRISON  SONG.- Twas  on  the  thirty-first  of  May 
(79  vs.) 

With  narrative  preceding  text,  beginning:    "Lines 
written  by  Dr.  Sutherland,  a  Live  Yankee,  of  the  92d  N.Y. 
Regiment,  who  was  captured  by  the  Rebels...";  printed  at 
the  Office  of  the  Daily  Chronicle;  Charles  Bender's  adv. 
added. 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  51.2  x  36.4  cm. 

1933.  THE  PRISONER  FOR  hlFE.-Adieu,  ye  green  trees, 
ye  sweet  meadows,  adieu  (8  vs.)  Air:    Hunt  the  Buffalo. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  PRISONER'S  HOPE,  see  TRAMP!  TRAMP! 
TRAMP!  THE  PRISONER'S  HOPE. 

1934.  THE  PRISONER'S  PLEA.-WTzen  our  country  called 
for  m.en,  we  came  from,  forge  and  store  and  mill  (4  vs.) 

[Signed]  Sergt.  T.J.  Hyatt,  Co.  K.  118th  Penn.  Vols, 
written  while  a  prisoner  at  Andersonville,  Ga.,  October 
25th,  1864;  original  in  possession  of  J.  L.  Smith;  with  im^ 
print  of  J.  L.  Smith,  map  publisher,  added.  20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

1935.  THE  PRISONER'S  RELEASE  OR  THE  DEAR  OLD 
FLAG  HAS  COME.— ATow  the  bugle's  thrilling  blast  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Headed:    "Sequel  to  Prisoner's  Hope";  cop:  1865, 
Wm.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Get  the  two 
New  Songs  -  "Somebody  is  Waiting  for  Me,"  and  "There's 
Somebody  Waiting  for  Me". 

Flag.  20  X  10.7  cm. 

1936.  A  PRIVATE  STILL.— ^re  Exciseman,  once,  in  Dublin, 
at  the  tim.e  I  was  there  (10  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1566;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  Border.  24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

1937.  PRIZE  SONG.-/^eei  with  a  full  heart  the  land  of 
the  West  (2  vs.) 

By  Bayard  Taylor,  Esq.,  and  sung  by  Mad'Ue  Jenny 
Lind,  at  her  first  Concert  in  America;  2nd  song:    "Our  Own 
Dear  America";  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  12.6  cm. 

1938.  PROUD  COLUMBIA. -HfZiiZ,  Mil,  proud  Columbia,  the 
land  of  the  free  (6  vs.)  Tune— "The  Lyon  of  Freedom." 

a.  A  Patriotic  Song,  by  J.E.,  Germantown. 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  20  x  12.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  "Lyon"  spelled  "Lion".  22.5  x 

15.3  cm. 


1939.  THE  PULLING  DOWN  OF  GARTLETRA  CHAPEL.- 
You,  Catholics ,  both  young  and  old,  I  hou  [sic]  will  attend 
(9  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  23.9  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  With  "Chapels"  in  title;  with  first  line  reading:    "You 

Catholics I  hope  you  will  attend";  sheet  no.  1027;  publ. 

Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24.6  x  15.5  om. 

1940.  PUT  BY  FOR  A  RAINY  DAY.— Oft  times  the  world 
m.ay  laugh  and  jeer  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  16. 1  cm. 

1941.  "PUT  ME  DOWN  GENTLY,  BOYS."-PMi  me  down 
gently,  boys  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  857;  with  explanation  beginning;  "  'Put  me 
down  gently,  boys',  said  a  Captain  of  the  16th  Ohio;"  sold 
by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14. 3  cm. 

1942.  PUT  MY  LITTLE  SHOES  A^ AY. -Mother,  dear, 
com.e  bathe  m.y  forehead  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  2069;  Words  by  Samuel  N.  Mitchell;  Music 
by  Charles  E.  Pratt;  music  obtained  of  C.H.  Ditson  &  Co.; 
publ.  Partridge  &  Co. 

T.  o.  border.  22.2  x  15.2  cm. 

1943.  QUEEN  OF  THE  CONCERT  SALOON.-/'ZZ  sing  you 
a  song,  of  a  pretty  little  gal  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  867;  written  by  Frank  Spear,  and  Sung  by 
W.  Ross;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

1944.  QUEEN  OF  THE  OCEAN. -As  late  upon  the  deep 
blue  sea  (6  vs.)  Air— "When  Stars  are  in  the  Quiet  Skies." 

By  Anna  W.  Spencer,  of  Rhode  Island;  respectfully 
dedicated  to  President  Lincoln;  Copyright  Secured. 
T.  o.  border;  sailing  ship.  19.5  x  10  cm.  (cropped) 

1945.  QUEER  SIGHTS.— /'m  an  Irishman  bint  on  my 
rambles  (5  vs.)  Air:    Queer  Things. 

Written  and  sung  by  Wm.  Carleton;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.3  x  17  cm. 

1946.  QUIET  LODGINGS.— AZZ  you  who  love  retirement 
free  (6  vs.) 

a.  Air:— Teddy  the  Tiler;  7  vs.;  long  lines. 
A-J  border.  20  x  13.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Air.— King  of  the  Cannibal  Islands;  sheet  no.  642;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

1947.  THE  QUILL  OF  THE  CONCERT  SALOON.-7'Zi  sing 
to  you  of  a  poor  little  quill,  and  I  guess  you've  all  seen  him. 
about  (8  vs.)  Air.— Sally  of  the  Sewing  Machine. 

Sheet  no.  762;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  25.5  x  15.6  cm. 

1948.  THE  QUILTING  PARTY. -/i  was  down  at  Major 
Parson's  house  (5  vs.)  Air:  Betsy  Baker. 

a.  As  sung  by  R.  H.  Racey;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  22.1  x  13.1  cm. 


130 


b.  [Without  "The"  in  title,  and  without  Air;)  song  beginning 
"  'Twas";  10  vs.  and  chor. 

A-J  border;  yellow  paper.  20.4  x  13.6  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  Sheet  no.  356;  [without  Air;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.4  x  16.5  cm. 

1949.  RAFFERTY'S  PARTY. -Ti/w  Rafferty  lived  in 
Mulbei-ry  street  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Air;  Tim  Finegan's  Wake;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.9  x  I6.6  cm. 

b.  Air.— Finegan's  Wake;  "Rafferty"  not  capitalized  in 
first  line;  by  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1095;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

1950.  THE  RAGGED  COAT.— Ok!  what  a  world  of  flummery , 
there's  nothing  but  deceit  in  it  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  24.8  x  15.2  cm. 

b.  As  Sung  by  Ned  Riley,  with  Unbounded  Applause;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.8  x  16.I  cm. 

1951.  RAGGED  PAT.— Now  all  you  young  gents  to  my  song 
lend  your  ear  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Lather  and  Shave. 

Sheet  no.  311;  by  John  Cross;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.3  x  17  cm. 

1952.  RAGING  CANAL.— Come  listen  to  my  story,  ye 
landsmen,  one  and  all  (15  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.6  x  15.2  cm. 

1953.  RAIL  ROAD  SONG.— Sw^n^  through  the  forest, 
rattling  over  ridges  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Sold  by]  S.H.  Ettla. 

T.  o.  border.  18.5  x  10. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

1954.  THE  RAISING.— Come,  muster,  my  lads,  your 
mechanical  tools  (9  vs.) 

A  Patriotic  Song  for  the  Mechanic;  print.  A.H. 
Sense  man  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  10.3  cm.  (cropped) 

RALLY  AROUND  THE  FLAG  BOYS,  see  RALLY 
ROUND  THE  FLAG  BOYS. 

1955.  RALLY  AROUND  THE  GOOD  OLD  FLAG. -Come 
rally  around  the  good  old  flag,  ye  freemen  of  the  North 
(5. vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Boy  with  Auburn  Hair. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  Written  by  Sergeant  John  Dyer,  Company  F,  Ringgold 
Regiment,  104th  Petma.  Volunteers,  Col.  W.  W.  H.  Davis; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:    Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  20.1  x  12  cm. 

1956.  THE  RALLY  CRY  OF  FREEDOM.-Come  true  loyal 
hearts  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Tune— "Battle  Cry  of  Freedom." 

Publ.  Magee;  cop:   1864,  J.  Magee,  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  red  and  blue  ink;  round  arch  supported 
by  two  columns  with  a  soldier  on  either  side,  battle  scene 
at  top  with  flags.  20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

1957.  RALLY  FOR  BRECKENRIDGE  AND  LANE.-T/je 
battle  field  is  now  in  view  (5  vs.)  Air:  The  Low  Back'd 
Car. 


Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  22.3  x 
14.2  cm. 

1958.  RALLY  ROUND  THE  CAUSE  BOYS.-Now,  we'll 
rally  round  the  cause  boys,  we'll  rally  in  our  might  (5  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air:  — Battle  Cry  of  Freedom. 

Headed:    "Campaign  Song";  by  "Our  Ned". 

a.  Adv:    Dealers  and  Clubs  can  be  supplied  with  all  the 
Campaign  Songs;  [sold  by]  Mason  &  Co.;  Copyright  Secured. 

Double-line  border;  flag.  24.2  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  adv:   Clubs  and  Dealers  can  have 
their  orders  filled. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  Lincoln.  23.4  x  x5.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  adv:    Now  ready,  Lincoln  Campaign 
Songster. 

T.  o.  border;  bust  of  Lincoln.  20.8  x  12.2  cm. 

1959.  RALLY  ROUND  THE  FLAG  BOYS  -Rally  round  the 
flag.  Boys  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  "Rally"  in  title  in  modified  scroll  caps;  with 
period  at  end  of  title. 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  "Rally"  in  title  in  white  outline  caps;  publ. 
Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

c.  With  "New"  in  title  and  comma  after  "Flag";  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:    Johnson's  New  Catalogue. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

d.  Title:    "Rally  Round  Your  Flag  Boys  No.  2";  publ. 
Johnson  &  Co. 

Flag.  21.4  X  10.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  adv:    See  his  new  Catalogue,  Just  Out. 
19.8  X  9.7  cm. 

f.  With  "Around"  in  title  and  period  at  end;  long  lines; 
arranged  as  4  vs. 

Letter  paper;  bronze  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 
Magnus  213c.  19  x  12. 1  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  black  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  21.3  x  13.2  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  with  adv:    500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  123,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

i.  Title:    "Rally  Round  The  Flag  Or  the  Stars  And 
Stripes";  arranged  as  2  vs.  and  2  chors.;  sheet  no.  702 
printed  at  right  hand  comer;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  13.9  cm. 

j.  [As  above;  sheet  no.  centered;]  t.  o.  border,  with 
ornamental  corners.  20.8  x  14.6  cm. 

k.   Title:    "The  Stars  And  Stripes";  2  vs.  and  2  chors. 
with  five  lines  of  music;  by  permission  of  Russell  &  Patee, 
proprietors  of  the  copyright;  words  by  J.  T.  F.;  music  by 
O.  B.  Brown;  publ.  and  for  sale  by  Wm.  Spencer  and 
Russell  &  Patee. 

Double-line  border  with  rounded  comers;  blue  ink; 
flag,  in  red  and  blue.  20.6  x  12.9  cm. 

1.   Title:    "The  Stars  &  Stripes";  printed  as  2  vs.  in  three 
parts  and  2  chors. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

1960.  RALLY  ROUND  THE  FIAG.-Rally  round  the  flag, 
boys,  rally  round  the  flag  (2  vs.  and  2  chors.) 


131 


By  permission  of  Wm.  B.  Bradley,  Esq.,  owner  of  the 
copyright;  Words  and  Music  publ.  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25.5  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  22.4  x  13.8  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1099;  only  one  chor.;  varying:    published  by 
Firth,  Pond  &  Co.,  N.Y.;  publ.  Wrigley. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.4  x  15.2  cm. 

RALLYING  SONG  FOR  THE  MASS  MEETING  AT 
OYSTER  BAY,  SEPTEMBER  20,  1856,  see  FREMONT  AND 
VICTORY.  A  RALLYING  SONG. 

1961.  THE  RAMBLER  FROM  ClAB-E.-Tke  first  of  my 
courtship  that  ever  was  known  (10  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15. 1  cm. 

1962.  THE  RAMBLING  BOY  OF  VOVEWTY-Iamagay  and 
rambling  boy,  from  Tipton-Town  I  came  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1055;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  MY  BOYHOOD'S 
HAPPY  HOME  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

1963.  RAMBLDSfG  BOYS  OF  PLEASURE.-Zom  rambling 
boys  of  pleasure  (6  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.2  cm. 

1964.  RAMS'  SONG. -Come  all  you  jolly  rams  (11  vs.) 
Tune— "Rocks  of  Sicilly  [sic]". 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  28.6  x  13. 2  cm. 

1965.  RATAPLAN.— Wtei  a  charm,  has  the  drum,  with  its 
tanarantan  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  C.  Jeffreys;  music  by  C.  W.  Glover;  adv: 
Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  imprint:    "No.  7  N.  10th  St.,  Phila." 
A-J  border.  24  x  15. 2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  imprint:    "7  N.  10th  St.,  Philadelphia." 
A-J  border.  21.2  x  12.6  cm. 

o.  [Without  word  "Chorus".) 

A-J  border.  20  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

1966.  THE  RAT-CATCHERS  DAUGHTER. -^oi  long  ago 
in  Vestminster  there  lived  a  rat-catcher's  aaugnter(&  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  John  Winans  of  the  Bowery  Theatre,  With 
Tremendous  Applause;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  im- 
print added. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  "Rat-Catcher's"  in  title  and  without  "The"; 
publ.  Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.  23.6  x  15.1  cm. 

1967.  RAW  RECRUIT.—/  am  a  raw  recruit  from  the  State 
of  Maine  (4  vs.) 

By  George  Bones  Hartford. 

T.  o.  border;  seal  of  Maine,  with  soldier  on  either 
side.  29.7  X  14.5  cm. 


1968.  READY  FOR  THE  FIGHT. -/'m  the  boy  that's  for 
the  Union  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Free  and  Easy. 

Dedicated  to  the  2d  Regt.  N.Y.S.M. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.4  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  By  Jerry  Holmes;  [without  period  at  end  of  title;] 
sheet  no.  929;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.3  x  12.8  cm. 

1969.  THE  REAL,  PERFECT  C\JB.Y..-Young  love  he 
plays  some  funny  tricks  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  The  Cure. 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  print.  Auner  [address 
cropped  off] . 

Multi-line  border.  19.9  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.1  x  16. 3  cm. 

c.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.9  x  15.2  cm. 

d.  [Without  "Real,"  in  title  and  without  Air;]  sheet  no. 
1189. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.8  x  15.2  cm. 

1970.  THE  REASON  WHY  SHE  LEFT  niM.-Why  did  she 
leave  him."?— Oh  dear!  what  a  bother  (3  vs.) 

a.  Sheet  no.  1113;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  THE  MERCHANT'S  DAUGHTER  on 
recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.9  x  I6.3  cm. 

1971.  THE  REBEL  FLAGS.  EXHIBITED  AT  THE  CAPI- 
TOL FEBRUARY  22,  1S&2. -Sadly  we  gazed  upon  the 
Flags  (4  vs.)  Air  "The  Sword  of  Bunker  Hill." 

a.  By  John  A.  Fowle. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  106,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  after  "Flags";]  by  John  A.  Fowle, 
Washington,  Feb.  22,  1862.  19  x  8.3  cm. 

1972.  THE  REBEL  RAID  IN  PENNSYLVANIA,  OR  THAT'S 
JUST  SO. —Boys  just  listen  while  I  sing  to  you  a  song  sir 
(12  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  4th  vs.  beginning:  "Oh!  there  is  Gen.  Lee,  that 
scoundrel  of  a  man  sir";  composed,  published  and  sung 
by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia,  the  celebrated  Army 
Song  publisher;  for  sale  at  No.  300  North  Twentieth...; 
Cop:  1863,  James  D.  Gay.  EDPa. 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  25.1  x  20.I  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  ink.  25  x  19.9  cm. 

c.  Title  "That's  just  so!";  7  vs.;  different  version 
after  3d  vs.;  4th  vs.  beginning:  "But  great  glory  to  our 
General  Pope  Sir";  composed  and  sung  by  E.  V.  Andress 
of  Owosso,  Mich.;  copyright  secured;  published  for  the 
Union  Soldiers  by  James  D.  Gay. 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  37a,  col.  20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

1973.  THE  REBEL  RAM.-O/z  Lord,  folks,  come  down  to 
de  bark  shed  (13  vs.) 

By  John  Henry;  print.  T.  Sinex. 
T.  o.  border.  30.7  x  15.6  cm. 

1974.  REBEL  SPARE  THAT  Fl.AG\-Rebel,  spare  that 
Flag  (4  vs.)  Air:  Woodman,  spare  that  Tree. 


132 


a.  [PublJ  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.6  x  16.  9  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "Rebel"  in  both  title  and  first 
line;]  with  period  at  end  of  title;  quotation  marks  around 
title  of  Air;  by  R.  A.  Tovey;  sheet  no. '  1042;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1).' 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

1975.  RECKON  I'M  IN  LUCK.-O^.'  don't  I  know  a  pretty 
girl  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Song  and  Dance;  as  sung  by  Dave  Reed;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.1  x  15.8  cm. 

1976.  RED  HOT.  — To  my  song  lend  your  ear,  I've  got 
something  to  say  (6  vs.)  Air:  A  hundred  years  hence. 

By  J.  Cross  Casten. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.6  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1273;  written  for  Chester  H.  Smith,  the 
celebrated  Banjoist;  publ.  Wrigley  [address  imperfectly 
printed] . 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

1977.  RED  PETTICOAT. -FoM  may  talk  about  the  fash- 
ions (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Winner  (6);  print.    Johnson 
(3);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 
T.  o.  border.  19.4  x  11.2  cm. 

1978.  RED  VETTICOAT .—  Yankee  Doodle  has  they  say 
(9  vs.)  Tune.— Yankee  Doodle,  or  Pop  Goes  the  Weasel. 

a.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  multi-line  border  with  ornamental 
comers;  hdpc.  Magnus  225,  col.  20.8  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  226,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.9  cm. 

1979.  RED  PETTICOATS.— I>oM)M  Broadway,  ere  the  sun 
was  low  (7  vs.) 

By  Willie  E.  Pabor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

1980.  THE  RED  ROBIN. -Come  into  my  cabin.  Red  Robin 
(4  vs .) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title.] 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.2  cm.  (cropped) 

1981.  RED,  WHITE  AND  BLUE.-0/z,  Columbia,  the  gem 
of  the  Ocean  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  22.3  x  11.9  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Columbia,  the  Gem  of  the  Ocean";  publ. 
Auner  (1). 

Flag.  20  X  11.3  cm. 

c.  With  "&"  in  place  of  "And";  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto: 
"Our  Country".  23.9  x  14.3  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Columbia,  The  Gem  Of  The  Ocean";  written 
and  composed  by  David  T.  Shaw;  arranged  by  T.A'Becket; 
publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 


e.  With  "&"  in  place  of  "And";  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.5  x  14.9  cm. 

f.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  25.1  x  16.3 
cm. 

g.  With"&"  in  place  of  "And";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  24.8  x  14.9  cm. 

h.  Title:  "Roth,  Weiss  Und  Blau",  and  first  line  begin- 
ning: "O  Columbia,  Perle  der  Lander";  [publ.]  De  Mar- 
san (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  26.2  x  x7  cm. 

i.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  floating. hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto: 
"Our  Country".  24.4  x  15. 1  cm. 

j.    With  "&"  in  place  of  "And",  and  exclamation  mark 
at  end  of  title;  with  3  chors.;  print,  and  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
20.1  X  11.2  cm. 

k.  [Without  chors.;]  with  title:  "Columbia  The  Gem  Of 
The  Ocean";  adv:  You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting 
your  printing  done;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  banner  on  which  is  printed 
Johnson's  address.  23.2  x  14.9  cm. 

1.  With  "&"  in  place  of  "And";  and  first  line  beginning: 
"O  Columbia,  Perle  der  Lander";  [publ.]  Magnus  (1);  adv: 
Magnus  '  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  211, 
col.  20.5  X  11.6  cm. 

m.   [Publ.]  Magnus  (2).. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  203, 
col.  20.5  X  12.7  cm. 

n.  Print.  Senseman(2). 

T.  o.  border;  sailor  nailing  flag  to  mast.  23.1  x  11.3 
cm. 

o.  As  sung  by  the  Star  Company,  at  the  Grotto  Concert 
Saloon,  Seventh  ab.  Chestnut  Street;  print.  S.  Loag;  publ. 
Warren  (6) . 

A-J  border;  flag.  25.2  x  14.9  cm. 

1982.  THE  RED,  WHITE  &  BLUE. -Come  all  ye  good  ivhigs 
of  old  '40  (9  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air,  "Rosin  the  bow." 

Adv:  You  will  save  25  per  cent  by  getting  your  print- 
ing done;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.1  cm. 

RED,  WHITE  &  BLUE!,  see  also  THE  BATTLE  CRY 
OF  FREEDOM. 

1983.  [NEW]  RED,  WHITE,  AND  BlAi'E.-For  Freedom, 
the  soul  of  our  nation  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  739;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  WHERE  ARE 
THE  FRIENDS  OF  MY  YOUTH  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.  5  x  15.5  cm. 

1984.  THE  RED,  WHITE  &  BLUE  OF  '61.-A/aj'  God  bless 
our  Union,  our  flag  and  our  land  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  G.  Gumpert;  music  by  A.  Bachmann;  dedi- 
cated to  Miss  Maggie  P.  Mayer;  publ.  Magee;  music  publ. 
Lee  &  Walker;  cop:  J.  Magee,   1861.  EDPa.  20.2  x  n.e  cm. 


133 


1985.  REFLECTIONS  IN  CAMP!  FIRST  SUNDAY  AFTER 
THE  BATTLE  OF  WILLIAMSBURG,  \A.-The  sunbeams 
they  are  shining  (4  vs.) 

By  A.  Anderson,  82d  Regt.  P.  V.;  May,  1863;  print. 
Harris. 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  11.9  cm. 

1986.  REILEY'S  COOLEEN  BAWN  PERSECUTED. -Zom, 
tender-hearted  lovers,  attend  unto  my  themei  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.7  x  le.l  cm. 

1987.  REILEY'S  COURTSHIP.— 'T'zt'as  on  a  pleasant  morn- 
ing all  in  the  bloom,  of  Spring  (13  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  16.1  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1009;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [printed  upside-down]. 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.2  x  15  cm. 

1988.  REILY'S  RELEASEMENT  AND  MARRIAGE  WITH 
COOLEEN  BA^'i^i.-Now,  having  left  Reily's  Fair  one  in 
sorrow  for  to  vail  (9  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1028;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

1989.  REILY'S  TRAIL. -Come,  rise  up!  William  Reily, 
and  come  along  with  me  (12  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1008;  publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [printed  upside- 
down]  . 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

1990.  RELIEF  FOR  IRELAND .-AroMse,  my  Irish  heroes! 
it's  painful  to  relatei(l  vs.)  Air:  Donnelly  and  Cooper. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border.    25.7  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  P.  Gearighty;  sheet  no.  871;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  military  cupid  border.    24.6  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  RELIGIOUS  CARD  PLAYER,  see  WELCOME 
BRAVE  BOYS.    RICHMOND  FALLS:    THE  WAR  IS  O'ER. 

1991.  REMEMBER  BALTIMORE. -Come  all  you  true 
Americans,  and  rally  to  the  stand  (10  vs.) 

Composed  by  Arthur  McCann. 

a.  Copyright  secured. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  22.4  x  10.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  flag.  23.6  x  16  cm. 

c.  Tune— "California  Brothers."  or  the  "Plains  of  Water- 
loo"; Copyright  Secured. 

Multi-line  border;  eagle  with  flag.  20.6  x  n.i  cm. 
(cropped) 

d.  [Without  composer's  name.] 

T.  o.  border.  19.5  x  12.2  cm.  (cropped) 

1992.  REMEMBER  LOVE  REMEMBER. -'Tz<;as  ten  o' 
clock  one  moonlight  night  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  "Ten  O'clock,  or"  in  title;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.2  x  15  cm. 


c.  Sheet  no.  500;  music  obtained  at  Firth,  Pond  &  Co. 
(1);  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.6  x  14.5  cm. 

1993.  REMEMBER  THE  POOR. -Co W  Winter  is  come 
with  his  keen  cutting  breath   (5  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  T.  Bryan,  with  unbounded  applause; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.1  x  16. 6  cm. 

REMEMBER  THEE,  see  MEETING  OF  THE  WATERS. 

1994.  REPEAL  OF  THE  UNION.  — Fe  true-born  musicians, 
I  pray  pay  attention  (4  vs.) 

Headed:  "A  New  Song  Called  The";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.9  cm. 

1995.  REPLY  TO  LILY  DALE.— M>i  Lily  dear  is  sleeping 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.1  x  14.2  cm. 

1996.  REPUBLICAN  CAMPAIGN  SONG. -Lincoln  and 
Johnson  will  guide  the  ship  of  State  (7  vs.)  Air.— "Ells- 
worth's body  lies  mouldering  in  the  dust." 

Dedicated  to  the  Lincoln  and  Johnson  clubs;  by  "Our 
Ned";  adv:  Dealers  and  Clubs  can  be  supplied;  [publ.] 
Mason  &  Co.;  Copyright  Secured. 

A-J  border;  bust  of  Lincoln.  23.5  x  15.6  cm. 

1997.  REPUBLICAN  CAMPAIGN  SONG  LINCOLN  & 
HAMLIN.  — r/zere's  an'  old  gray  horse  whose  nam.e  is 
Buck  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2)  [part  of  imprint  cropped] . 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  22.7  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4).  24.5  x  16.8  cm. 

1998.  REPUBLICAN  GLEE  FOR  LINCOLN  &  HAMLIN. 
—  The  war  drums  are  beating  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col. 
24  X  14.5  cm. 

1999.  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED  TO  THE  BUENA 
VISTA  GUARDS,  CAPT.  EDW.  W.  POWER,  ON  THEIR 
RETURN  FROM  Bk'LTlUO'R'E. -The  flag  of  battle  we 
unfold  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "The  girl  I  left  behind  me." 

a.  A-J  border.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Du  Bree. 

T.  o.  border.  20.6  x  12. 1  cm. 

2000.  THE  RETIRED  SOLDIER.- Tfee  retired  Soldier, 
bold  and  brave  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col   25.6  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  771;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.    24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

2001.  RETURN  OF  GEN.  CORCORAN  OF  THE  GLORIOUS 
69TH— Tfee  Southerners  in  fierce  array  against  the  North- 
men bold  (9  vs.)  Air:  The  Glorious  69th. 

Dedicated  to  its  Noble  Commander,  Michael  Corcoran, 
on  his  return  home. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16. 1  cm. 


134 


b.  Sheet  no.  748;  with  quotation  marks  around  Air;  by 
Wm.  P.  Ferris;  [sold  by]  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  15.1  cm. 

c.  (Air  and  author  as  above;]  sheet  no.  1043;  publ.  Wrig- 
ley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  22.2  x  13.3  cm. 

2002.  RETURN  OF  THE  69Tn-Tke  gallant  boys  of  the 
mth   (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.8  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  4  vs.;  composed  by  John  Flanagan;  sheet  no. 
814;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  LINDA  HAS  DEPARTED  on 
recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

RE-UNION,  see  UNION. 

THE  REVEILLE,  see  COMRADES,  JOIN  THE  RE- 
VEILLE. 

2003.  RHODE  ISLAND  VOLUNTEER.- /^arra^.'  for  our 
braves  of  Rhode  Island  (5  vs.  uneven  length)  Air— "Co- 
lumbia the  Gem  of  the  Ocean." 

Composed  by  James  D.  Gay  of  Philadelphia,  for  the 
9th  and  10th  Regiments  Rhode  Island  Volunteers. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  flags 
and  motto  in  red  and  blue;  bust  of  "General  Burns ide, 
commanding  the  Bumside  Expedition".    20.2  x  12. 5  cm. 

2004.  THE  RICH  COUNTRY  GAL  AND  THE  WICKED 
CITY  CHAP.  — /rs  all  of  a  Rich  Country  gal  that  I  know 
(5  vs.) 

a.  Air:  Vilikins  and  Dinah;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24  x 
16  cm. 

b.  Air:  Vilikins  and  Dinah;  sheet  no.  358;  publ.  Wrigley 

(D- 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.  23.4  x  15.2  cm. 

c.  Tune.— Villikins  and  Dinah. 

Triple-lined  border  with  corner  fleurons.  18.5  x 
11.5  cm.  (cropped) 

2005.  RICHMOND  3 AIL.  — This  Southern  rebellion  has 
raised  a  mighty  fuss  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  The  Union 
Cockade. 

a.  Dedicated  to  Michael  Corcoran  of  the  Irish  Brigade; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1007;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  COM  GANG 
AWA'  WI'  ME  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  22.4  x  14.6  cm. 

2006.  RICHMOND'S  EUROPEAN  VISION. -Ho.'  Freedom's 
Sons!  come,  list  the  cry  (7  vs.) 

18.5  X  9  cm. 

2007.  RICHMOND'S  SONG  FOR  THE  TIMES.- r/;e  oW 
Bay  State  sends  up  her  sons    (6  vs.) 

Sung  in  Howard  Hall,  Thursday  Evening,  June  12th, 
1856.    18.5  X  8.7  cm. 

2008.  RIDIN'  IN  A  RAILROAD  KEER.  — Sujfee  Sattinet  was 
a  comely  gal    (3  vs.) 

a.  Jacob  Endres,  Music  Publisher;  publ.  Boyd;  adv: 
10,000  Songs  For  Sale. 


T.  o.  border;  comic  scene  of  father  shooting  Slim 
Jim.    23,4  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  With  5  additional  lines  at  end;  music  published  by 
Jacob  Endres;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 


2009.  RIDING  OUTSIDE  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION!- 
Joker's  reign,  it  is  but  short    (4  vs.) 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 


-The 


2010.  THE  RIGHT  MAN  IN  THE  RIGHT  PLACE.-/*  was 
late  last  night  as  I  was  going  to  bed  (8  vs.  and  chor.,  1 
vs.  spoken) 

As  sung  by  Low  Gaylord,  at  the  Art  Union-Stull's 
Lyceum,  Sixth  Street,  below  Arch;  publ.  Walter  Warren 

(7). 

T.  o.  border.  20.7  x  11.7  cm. 

2011.  THE  RIGHTS  OF  THE  STATES.-Our  nation  is  all 
in  confusion  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Tune— "Where  There's  a 
Will  There's  a  Way." 

Sheet  no.  1093;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  12.5  cm. 

2012.  RING,  MERRY  BELLS!  OR  THE  UNION  VICTORY. - 
Ring,  merry  bells,  a  joyous  peal   (3  vs.) 

By  M.  L.  Hofford;  cop:  1862,  Marsh,  EDPa.;  printed 
by  permission;  Marsh's  Music  Store  (1);  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  21  x  12. 5  cm. 

2013.  THE  RING  MY  MOTHER  WORE.-Tfce  earth  has 
many  treasures  rare    (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  785;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5    x  15.7  cm. 

2014.  RIOT  IN  THE  CITY  HALL  PARK.    JUNE  18,  1857.- 
As  I  was  going  up  street  the  other  day    (12  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— Old  Dan  Tucker. 

Original  Copy;  By  Lue;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  15.2  cm. 

2015.  THE  RISING  GENERATION.-Go  where  you  will, 
you'll  get  your  fill    (5  vs.)    Air: -Yankee  Manufactures. 

Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  I6  cm. 

ROBERT  BRUCE'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  ARMY,  see 
BRUCE 'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  ARMY. 

2016.  ROBIN  ADAIR-What's  this  dull  town  to  me  (6  vs.) 
Music  obtained  at  Louis  Meyer's;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.    23.8  x  14.4  cm. 

2017.  ROBINSON  CRUSOE. -W^en  I  was  a  lad  (10  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border;  with  2  small  woodcuts 
below  title.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1102;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  717. 

T.  o.  border;  Crusoe  seated  with  animals  around  him. 
19.1  X  12.3  cm.  (cropped) 

2018.  THE  ROCK  BESIDE  THE  SEA.-07),  tell  me  not  the 
woods  are  fair   (2  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 


135 


2019.  ROCK  ME  TO  SLEEP  MOTHER.  -Backward,  turn 
backward,  oh!  time,  in  your  flight  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  5  vs.;  published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of 
Philadelphia;  [with  JOHNNY  IS  GONE  FOR  A  SOLDIER 
on  recto.] 

Letter  paper;  t.  o.  border.  22  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single -line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus 
169a,  col.  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  169b,  col.  20.4  x  12. 5  cm. 

d.  Words  by  Florence  Percy  [Elizabeth  Ann  Chase 
Taylor  Akers  Allen];  music  by  Ernest  Leslie;  sheet  no. 
849;  with  3  vs.,  and  comma  in  title;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.    24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

2020.  ROCK  OF  LIBERTY. -Ofe.'  the  firm  old  rock,  the 
wave-worn  rock  (3  vs.) 

a.  Music  published  by  Russell  &  Tolman;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  With  "The"  in  title;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  With  "The"  In  title;  sheet  no.  205;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

2021.  ROCKAWAY.  — Ok  old  Long  Island's  sea  girt  shore 
(3  vs.  and  chors.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  15.7  cm. 

2022.  ROCKED  IN  THE  CRADLE  OF  THE  D'E'EV. -Rock- 
ed in  the  cradle  of  the  deep    (2  vs.) 

a.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  words  by  Mrs. 
Willard;  music  by  J.  P.  Knight;  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1), 
Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  [address  blank]. 

A-J  border;  full-sailed  ship.  23.6  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Ma[r]san  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.    24.2  x  I6  cm. 

2023.  ROLL  ON  SILVER  MOON. -As  /  strayed  from  my 
cot  at  the  close  of  the  day    (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  crescent  moon.  23  x  ig  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  16. 3  cm. 

2024.  ROLLING  HOME  IN  THE  MORNING.-/ am  of  a 
school  of  boys  who're  always  gay  and  free  (5  vs.  and 
chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Crossing  on  the  Ferry";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

2025.  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE.-/'ZZ  tell  you  of  a  story  that 
happened  long  ago    (7  vs.) 

a.  Sung  with  shouts  of  applause  all  over  the  country 
in  Madigan&Co's  National  Travelling  Circus;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4).  24.5  x  I6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  J.  Peckham  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  Title  in  quotation  marks,  with  "or  the  Yankee  Boys"; 
publ.  Johnson  (3);  advs:  Save  25  per  cent,  by  getting 
your  Printing  done  at  Johnson's,  and  Cards,  Circulars, 


Bill  Heads,  etc.,  and  See  the  New  Songs  of  "Abraham's 
Daughter",  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  With  "or  the  Yankee  Boys"  in  title. 

A-J  border;  rooting  hog.  20.1  x  13.1  cm.  (cropped) 

2026.  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE!    NO.  2.  — The  greatest  old 
Nigger  that  ever  I  did  see    (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Composed  and  sung  with  Unbounded  Applause  by 
Richard  J.  McGowan,  the  World  Renowned  Champion 
Banjoist;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

c.  [Without  exclamation  point  in  title;]  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border;  rooting  hog.  23.7  x  15. j  cm. 

d.  With  two  exclamation  points  in  title;  publ.  Johnson 
(2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  20  x  11.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  second  adv:  Get  these  popular  songs 
"Come  Brothers  Sisters",  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  20  x  11.5  cm. 

2027.  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE!  NO.  3.—/  am  a  jolly  nigger 
as  ever  you  did  see   (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

2028.  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE.  NO.  i.—I  am  de  greatest 
little  darkey  on  de  top  ob  de  earth-  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  Wm.  H.  Core,  the  Young 
Banjoist. 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4) 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

2029.  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE.  NO.  5. -Come,  listen  to  my 
story,  and  a  good  one  I'll  relate   (6  vs.) 

By  a  Blue  Jacket;  written  on  board  U.  S.  Gunboat  Com. 
Barney,  after  the  Battle  at  Newbern,  N.  C. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.    26  x  16. 7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  945;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

2030.  RORY  0'M.OB.Y.. -Young  Rory  O'More  courted 
Kathleen  Bawn    (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  space  between  vs.] 

A-J  border.  20.1  x  13.1  cm.  (cropped) 

2031.  ROSA  'LEE.— When  I  lib'd  in  Tennessee,  U  li  a  li  o 
la  e   (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.5  x  16. 2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  457;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  SLEEP  DEAR 
ELLA  SLEEP  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  with  OH,  WILT  THOU  BE  MY  BRIDE, 
KATHLEEN  on  recto.]  25  x  15. 5  cm. 

d.  Short  lines;  Price  One  Cent;  adv:  All  the  New  Songs 
constantly  on  Hand. 

T.  o.  border.    22.5  x  13.8  cm. 


136 


2032.  ROSALIE  THE  PRAIRIE  FLOWER.-0«  the  distant 
prairie,  where  the  heather  wild  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25.4  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.2  x  16  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  ^  16  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Prairie  Flower:  or,  Rosalie";  as  sung  in  all 
the  Public  Schools;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circu- 
lars, Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  flower  girl.  22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

e.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  exclamation 
point  after  "Rosalie";  published  by  permission  of 
Russell  &  Richardson;  sheet  no.  391;  sold  by  Partridge 
(4). 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  14  cm. 

f.  With  comma  after  "Rosalie"  in  title. 
Double  t.  o.  border.  23  x  14. 4  cm. 

2033.  THE  ROSE  AND  THE  LILY.— /«  the  gay  month  of 
June,  a  fair  blushing  rose  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  675;  publ.  Wrlgley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  25.3  x  15.5  cm. 

2034.  ROSE  ATHERTON.— T^ze  summer  days  are  coming 
(3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

2035.  THE  ROSE  OF  kUiBAVlA.- Away  from  Mississip- 
pi's vale  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.3  x  15.7  cm. 

2036.  THE  ROSE  OF  ALLENDALE. -Tte  mom  was  fair, 
the  skies  were  clear  (Z  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  600 
different  kinds  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border;  girl  watering  flowers.  23.2  x  16.5  cm. 

2037.  THE  ROSE  OF  TRALEE.— T/ze  bright  moon  was 
rising  above  the  green  mountains  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "General  Lee";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

THE  ROSE  OF  TRALEE,  see  also  THE  WATCHMAN 
NO  2. 

ROTH,  WEISS  UND  BLAU,  see  RED,  WHITE  AND 
BLUE. 

2038.  "ROUGH  &  TUMBLE,"  OR  THE  AMOS  STREET 
FIGHT,  BETWEEN  POOLE  &  MORRISSEY. -Come  "Boys' 
draw  nigh  and  listen  to  this  m.y  little  ditty    (8  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air— I'll  Throw  Myself  Away. 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 


2039.  ROUSE!  BROTHERS,  RO\}S^\- Rouse!  brothers. 
Rouse,  the  way  is  long  before  us    (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1110;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1110;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  LILLEE  BAWN 
on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

THE  ROVER'S  GRAVE,  see  MEET  ME  TO-NIGHT. 

2040.  THE  ROVING  JOURNEYMAN.-/  am  a  roving 
ioumeym.an,  and  I  rove  from,  town  to  town    (7  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

2041.  ROW,  ROW.— iSoit).'  rowl  hom.eward  we  steer  (4  vs. 
and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De  Mar- 
san, SDN.Y.  24.6  X  16. 2  cm. 

2042.  ROW,  ROW,  BROTHERS,  HOVi\-Row,  row.  Broth- 
ers, row  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  the  Bohemian  Trio;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24  x  ig  cm. 

2043.  ROY  NEILL.-ffe  saiVdaway  in  a  gallant  bark 
(3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  725;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

2044.  ROY'S  WIFE  OF  ALDIVALLOCH.- flop's  wife  of 
Aldivalloch  (4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan.  SDN.Y.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

2045.  RULE  BRITAt^NlA.— When  Britain  first ,  at  Heaven's 
command   (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24  x  16 
cm. 

2046.  RUM!  RUM!  RUM!  THE  BUMMER'S  HOPE. 

A  PARODY  ON  THE  PRISONER'S  HOPE.-/n  the  marble 
halls  I  sit  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  John  C.  Cross,  and  sung  by  Chester  H.  Smith. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

2047.  RUN,  NIGGER,  RUN!  OR  THE  M.P.  'LL  CATCH 
YOU.— De  sun  am  set—dis  nigger  am  free   (4  vs.  and 
chor.  with  4  parts  spoken) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  23.6  x  14.5  cm. 

2048.  RUNNING  THE  STAGES  ON  SUNDAY,  IN  HOBOKEN. 
—Oh,  the  rich  man  may  ride  on  the  Sabbath  day    (6  vs.) 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  23  x  14.3  cm. 

2049.  SAD  NEWS  FROM  HOME. -Sad  news /rom  home 

for  me  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  George  P.  Reed. 
T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  22.3  x  14  cm. 


137 


2050.  SAD  TIMES.  THE  BURNING  OF  THE  STEAMBOAT 
NEW  JERSEY,  ON  THE  DELAWARE,  NIGHT  OF  MARCH 
15TH,  1856.  SIXTY-TWO  PERSONS  HURRIED  INTO  ETER- 
NITY BY  WATER  AND  BY  FIRE.-T/zere  was  a  sad  disas- 
ter, alas,  'twas  fraught  with  gloom   (7  vs.  and  chor.) 
Tune.— "Hard  Times  come  again  no  more." 

Written  by  Ned  Buntline  [Edward  Zane  Carroll  Jud- 
son];  copyright  secured;  cop:  1856,  J.  H.  Johnson,  EDPa.; 
adv:  You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing 
done  at  Johnson's;  print.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border;  woman  leaning  by  tomb.  23.2  x  15  cm. 

2051.  THE  SAILOR  BOY'S  BRIDE. -£ar/y  in  the  spring, 
when  I  was  young   (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  Imp  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  James  H.  WooUey;  sheet  no.  912;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2052.  THE  SAILOR'S  M)W,\J .- Farewell  to  Old  England, 
thy  white  cliffs  adieu   (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  24.7 
X  16  cm. 

2053.  THE  SAILOR'S  GRAVE. -Owr  bark  was  far,  far 
from  the  land    (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  23.4  x  16  cm. 

2054.  A  SAILOR'S  LIFE  FOR  ME.— ^  home  on  the  roll- 
ing deep    (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  389;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.1  cm. 

2055.  SAIRY  SYKES.— To  me  said  mother  t'other  day 
(6  vs.  uneven  length) 

Sheet  no.  755;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  25  x  15.7  cm. 

2056.  SALLY,  COME  \]V\-Massa's  gone  to  town  de  news 
to  hear    (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25  x  \Q  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma,]  but  with  period  in  title;  5  vs.  and 
chor. 

A-J  border.  20.5  x  12. 5  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  [Title  as  above;]  sheet  no.  721. 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2056A.SALLY  IN  OUR  ALLEY. -Of  all  the  girls  that  are 
so  smart    (3  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song'  "I'll  Be  No  Submissive  Wife";  print. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  advs:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc.,  and  25  per  cent,  less  than  any  other  Printer 
in  the  City . 

A-J  border.  25  x  I6  cm. 

2057.  SALLY  IS  DE  GAL  FOR  ME. -Last  year  I  was 
twenty  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 


2058.  SALLY  OF  THE  SEWING  MACHINE. -7'ZZ  sing  to 
you  of  a  beautiful  maid  (3  vs.  and  moral) 

A-J  border.  22.7  x  14.6  cm. 

2059.  SALLY  WEAVER.— ^s  /  went  out  one  summer's 
day  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.8  x 
15.5  cm. 

2060.  SAM.  HOUSTON  AND  THE  VEOVLE .-I  hearkened 
in  the  East  and  I  hearkened  in  the  West    (8  vs.  and 

2  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.  25  x  16. 7  cm. 

2061.  SAMBO,  I  HAVE  MISSED  YOU.-OA,  Sambo,  is  it 
you,  dear,  come  down  to  see  me  now    (3  vs.) 

By  John  Allen;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

2062.  SAMMY  SLAP,  THE  BILL-STICKER.-Z'm  Sammy 
Slap,  the  bill-sticker,  and  you  must  all  agree,  sirs 

(6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  25  x  16. 3  cm. 

2063.  THE  SAN  FRANCISCO  RAG-PICKER.-O  ladies 
and  gentlemen,  list  to  my  song  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Air, 
"Lather  and  Shave." 

As  sung  by  Fred.  WoodhuU;  publ.  Boyd;  adv:  Boyd's 
Circulating  Library. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

2064.  SANDY  AND  JENNY. -"Come,  come,  bonny  lassie,' 
cried  Sandy^"awa"  (6  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

2065.  SANSOM  STREET  CAIAMTTY. -Come  all  you 
feeling  Christians,  I  hope  you  will  draw  near  (5  vs.) 

June  7th,  1867. 

Double-line  border.  20.7  x  13.2  cm. 

2066.  SARAH'S  YOUNG  MAii.— My  first  love  was  Sarah: 
oh!  none  could  be  fairer   (7  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  In  lower 
corners.  25.7  x  16. 6  cm. 

2067.  THE  SATTERLEE  BOYS  TO  UNCLE  SAM.-Come, 
Uncle  Sam.,  hear  our  appeal    (17  vs.) 

By  Serg't  Don  Fitz  Squizzle,  author  of  "The  Wonder- 
ful Revolving  Squirt  Gun,"  &c.   23  x  15.8  cm. 

2068.  SAUCY  SAM.  — /  am  Saucy  Sam,  a  Southern  nig, 
as  you  can  plainly  see     (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  J.  T.  Boyce  at  Hooley's  Minstrels;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26  x  17  cm. 

2069.  SAVE  THE  CONSTITUTION.-Come  all,  you  gal- 
lant volunteers,  while  I  those  lines  am.  writing  (6  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air:  The  Sons  of  Molly  Maguire. 

Dedicated  to  the  9th  Connecticut  Volunteers. 

a.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 


138 


b.  By  Timothy  B.  O'Regan;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with 
MISSISSIPPI  BOAT  SONG  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.    22.2  x  13.7  cm. 

SAVE  THE  UNION,  see  SONS  OF  COLUMBIA  and 
STAR  SPANGLED  BANNER. 


Headed:  "The  Celebrated  Glee  Song";  advs:  You  will 
save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing  done,  and  See 
the  Songs  of  Row,  Brothers,  Row,  Will  you  come  to  my 
Mountain  Home,  etc.,  and  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  22.3  >;  13.5  cm. 


2070.  SAVOURNEEN  DEELISH  EILEEN  OGE.-Ak!  the 
moment  was  sad,  when  my  Love  and  I  parted   (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.3  cm. 

2071.  SAY  A  KIND  WORD  WHEN  YOU  CAN.-W/zai  were 
life  without  some  one  to  cheer  us    (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  N.W.  Gould,  at  Bryant's  Minstrels;  publ. 
De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.3 
X  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  521;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  LORD  LOVEL 
on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  15.6  cm. 

2072.  THE  SCARLET  FLOWER.— Size's  sportive  as  the 
zephyr   (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  621;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

SCENES  THAT  ARE  BRIGHTEST,  see  KINDLING 
WOOD  MAN. 

2073.  SCROUGERS'  SO^G.— Come  all  you  jolly  rowdies 
(10  vs.) 

By  A  Saucy  Scrouger;  publ.  Thomas  M.  Scroggy  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  12  cm. 

2074.  SECESSIA  \AND.— Where  now  is  blustering  Mason 
(10  vs.)  Air— Promised  Land. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  JOHNNY  SCHMOKER  on  recto.] 
23.5  X  14.9  cm. 

SECESSION  WAGON,  see  SOUTHERN  WAGON. 

2075.  THE  SECOND  LOUISIANA.  MAY  27TH,  1863. -Darfe 
as  the  clouds  of  even    (8  vs.) 

a.  By  George  H.  Boker.  21.3  x  13.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  title:  "The  Black  Regiment"; 
publ.  by  the  Supervisory  Committee  for  Recruiting 
Colored  Regiments.  24.3  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  On  two  leaves;  [signed]  George  H.  Boker. 
Single-line  border  with  ornamental  comers  in  red 

ink  on  first  leaf.  20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  Title:  "Das  Zweite  Louisiana  Regiment";  am  27. 
Mai  1863;  aus  dem  Englischen  des  George  H.  Boker. 
19.7  X  12.7  cm. 

2076.  THE  2D  N.Y.  FIRE-ZOUAVES. -Co»te  all,  ye 
brave  fellows ,  and  listen  to  my  song    (6  vs.)  Air:  Joe 
Bowe  rs . 

Dedicated  to  Col.  Fairman  by  One  of  the  Zouaves; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.6  x  16. 5  cm. 

2077.  SEE  OUR  OARS.— See  our  oars  with  feathered 
Spray    (4  vs.) 


2078.  SEHNSUCHT.  — 0  dass  mir  Allhier  im  Dunkeln 
(7  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  blue  paper.  24.8  x  19.7  cm. 

2079.  SEVEN  DAYS  FIGHT.  FROM  JUNE  26TH,  TO 
JULY  4TH,  \%&2.—Away  down  in  old  Virginia  not  many 
months  ago   (10  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Louisiana  Lowlands. 

a.  Varying  with  "Tune";  seventh  vs.  beginning:  "The 
twenty-third,  the  eighty-second";  publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  24  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  with  title:  "Virginia  Lowlands. 
From  June  26th  to  July  4th,  1862";  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  Title:  "Seven  Days  Fight  Before  Richmond"; 
[without  "Air";]  seventh  vs.  beginning:  "The  38th  and 
4th  Maine";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.6  x  16  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  26.5  x  17.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  but  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3).  26  x  16. 2  cm. 

f.  By  James  Smith,  Co.  H.;  seventh  vs.  beginning: 
"The  twenty-third,  the  eighty-second";  with  title  in 
two  lines;  publ.  Johnson  (2).  21  x  n  cm.  (cropped) 

g.  [As  above;  title  printed  on  one  line.]  24  x  14.8  cm. 

h.   [Without  date  in  title;]  first  line  beginning:  "Way"; 
sheet  no.  1196;  9  vs.  only,  sixth  vs.  starting:  "The 
ninety-third  —  the  twenty-third";  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  22  x  14  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.6  x 
13.7  cm. 

79TH  REGIMENT,  see  WAR  SONG  FOR  THE  79TH 
REGIMENT. 

2080.  SEYMOUR  TO  "BLKiB..— I've  just  been  down  the 
news  to  hear  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— [filled  in  in  pencil: 
Capt.  Jinks  of  the  Horse  Marines]  16.5  x  n.i  cm. 

2081.  SHALL  WE  KNOW  EACH  OTHER  THERE  7-lWiera 
we  hear  the  music  ringing  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12. 5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  214.  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).  20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).  20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

2082.  SHALL  WE  MEET  AGAIN ?-£:fer  since /rom  me 
you  parted   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Lee  &  Walker 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.3  x  17.5  cm. 

b.  Written  and  composed  by  C.  Everest;  [without 
question  mark  in  title;]  cop:  1863.  C.  Everest.  EDPa.; 
publ.  Johnson  (2).  23.7  x  15.2  cm. 


139 


2083.  SHAMROCK  GREEN.— A  pretty  girl  was  seen  to 
cry    (7  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Joe.  Mabbott  at  the  Belle  Union;  publ. 
Boyd  (1);  adv:  10,000  Songs  For  Sale. 

T.  o.  border;  woodcut  with  watchman  and  prisoner. 
23.7  X  12.4  cm. 

2084.  THE  SHANGHAI  ENGINE.— A^ow  Firemen  come  and 
listen  and  a  story  I  will  tell  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— Irish 
Molly  O. 

By  "One  of  the  Suspended.";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

2085.  A  SHANTYMAN'S  LIFE.-O/z,  a  Shantyman's  Life  is 
a  weary  one   (4  vs.) 

Composed  and  Written  by  Geo.  W.  Stage,  La  Crosse 
Valley,  Wis.;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

2086.  SHARON  lAWN.—  Twas  on  a  bright  and  sunny  morn 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  700;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

2087.  SHE  MEETS  ME  AT  THE  GATE.-S^ze  meets  me  at 
the  gate,  and  never  is  too  late   (2  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  722;  music  publ.  by  Chas.  W.  A.  Trumpler; 
adv:  Wanamaker  &  Brown,  Oak  Hall  Clothing;  publ.  Auner 
(5). 

T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  14  cm. 

2088.  SHE  NEVER  BLAM'D  HIM,  NEVER.— S^e  never 
blam.'d  him.,  never   (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.  25.7  x 
16.5  cm. 

SHE  SLEEPS  IN  THE  GRAVE,  see  DARLING  ROSABEL. 

SHE  SLEEPS  IN  THE  VALLEY,  see  JANE  O'MALLEY. 

2089.  SHE  WAS  ALL  THE  WORLD  TO  ME.-In  the  sad 
and  mournful  autumn   (4  vs.) 

Words  by  Dr.'  Duffy;  music  by  Stephen  C.  Foster; 
publ.  Horace  Waters  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  232, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

2090.  SHE  WAS  SUCH  A  NICE  YOUNG  GAL.-StoM)  on, 
ye  winds ,  and  crack  your  cheeks    (6  vs .) 

Sheet  no.  465;  publ.  Wrigley  (2). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.  24.9  x  16. 2  cm. 

2091.  SHE  WORE  A  WREATH  OF  -ROSES.-Sihe  wore  a 
wreath  of  roses  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.  24.2  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  607;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2092.  SHEEP  BUTCHER'S  DAUGHTER. -AToi  long  ago 
near  Market  Street  Bridge,  lived  a  sheep  butcher's 
pretty  little  daughter   (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  21.7  x  14  cm. 

2093.  SHEEPSKIN,  BEESWAX.— Now  I'm  gwine  to  sing 
a  song  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  As  sung  nightly  with  thunders  of  Applause,  by  Dan 
Emmit,  at  White's  Melodeon,  53  Bowery,  N.Y.;  print. 
Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  25  x  16  cm. 

2094.  SHELLS  OF  THE  OCEAN.— One  summer  eve,  with 
pensive  thought   (4  vs.  and  1  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.3  x  15.3  cm. 

2095.  SHERIDAN!  CAVALRY  SHERIDAN!— Come.'  Soldier's 
all,  lets  sing  this  song  (4  vs.)  Air— My  Normandy;  or. 

My  Maryland. 

Words  by  Geo.  P.Hardwick;  adv:  Soldiers  can  receive 
14  of  our  beautifully  illustrated  Ballads  by  addressing 
G.  P.  Hardwick  (1);  cop:  1864,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  DC. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  or- 
namental comers;  cavalry  in  battle.  20.2  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  olive  ink.    20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  green  ink.    20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

2096.  SHERIDAN'S  "EARLY"  VICTORY.-7n  the  Shenan- 
doah Valley    (3  vs.)  Air:  On  the  Banks  of  Allan  Water 

a.  Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  123,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  159,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

2097.  SHERIDAN'S  B.USE\—Up  from  the  South  at  break 
of  day    (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Haddock  &  Son. 

T.  o.  border.    21.8  x  13  cm. 

b.  Written  by  T.  Buchanan  Read;  composed  by  David 
A.  Warden  (4);  adv:  By  sending  J.  H.  Johnson  thirty-five 
Cents;  publ.  Johnson  (2).  23  x  13.2  cm. 

c.  [Without  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;]  by  Thomas 
Buchanan  Read;  cop:  1864,  J.  Magee;  with  7  vs.,  no  chor. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  flags 
and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union  Forever",  in  red  and 
blue.  20.4  X  13  cm. 

2098.  SHERMAN'S  ADDRESS.  — IWzew  Traitors  fired  on 
our  Flag   (3  vs.) 

By  ex- Lieut.  P.  Kelly,  99th  Regt.  N.Y.S.V. 

a.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.5  x  16. 3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1317;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

2099.  SHERMAN'S  BONNY  BOYS  IN  BLUE-Kai/, 
glorious  chief!  the  country's  pride  (8  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Song  and  Chorus  by  H.  Angelo;  cop:  1865,  John 
Marsh,  EDPa.;  J.  Marsh's  Music  Store  (2);  publ.  Auner 
(5). 

Double-line  border;  eagle  with  flag.  20.5  x  12  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Gen'l  Sherman's  Bonny  Boys";  Air^Bonny 
Havens,  O!;  1  chor.  only;  published  and  sang  by  James 
D.  Gay. 


140 


Letter  paper;  battle  scene  of  charging  infantry  with- 
in ornamental  frame.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

2100.  SHERMAN'S  CAMPAIGN,  •64-'65. -On  the  sec- 
ond day  of  May     (11  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  G.  P.  Hardwick;  adv:  Copies  of  this  Poem 
will  be  sent  by  mail;  cop:  1865,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  DC. 

Blue  and  red  ink;  double-line  border  in  blue;  two 
battle  scenes  and  regimental  insignias  in  red  and  blue. 
25  X  20.2  cm. 

2101.  SHERMAN'S  CAMPAIGNS  FROM  ATLANTA  TO 
KALEIGU.  — When  Sherman  left  Atlanta  his  drums  loudly 
beating   (31  vs.) 

By  S.  Pepper,  Co.  G,  78th  Regt.  Ohio  V.  V.  Infantry. 
T.  o.  border.  27.4  x  17.6  cm. 

2102.  SHERMAN'S  MABCH.-Now,  listen  to  my  song 
(2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  Ginger  Blue. 

By  Michael  Fee;  (publ.)  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  26.2  x  16.4  cm. 

2103.  SHERMAN'S  MARCH  TO  THE  SEA.-Owr  camp  fires 
shone  bright  on  the  mountain    (5  vs.) 

a.  Title:  "When  Sherman  Marched  to  the  Sea";  written 
by  Adjt.  Boyers,  of  the  5th  Iowa,  while  confined  in  the 
Rebel  Prison  Camp,  Columbia,  S.  C;  S.  Brainard  &  Co., 
Music  &  Musical  Works;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.6  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  With  varying  first  line:  "camp-fires"  and  "on  the 
mountains";  sung  by  Miss  Effie  Germon;  music  by 
Charles  Koppitz;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  25.2  x  I6  cm. 

c.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  words  (in  part)  and 
music,  by  David  A.  Warden;  with  4  vs.  only  and  chor.; 
first  line  varying  "o'er  the  mountain";  published  by 

the  Composer  (4);  publ.  Johnson  (cropped).  17.4  x  10  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  but  with  "published  by  the  Composer  (1)"; 
[publ.]  Johnson  &  Cartlitch.  20  x  10  cm. 

e.  Sung  by  Miss  Effie  Germon  in  Aladdin;  music  by 
Charles  Koppitz;  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus 

(1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  42a,  col.; 
[publ.]  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  43,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).  20  X  11.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  50,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).  21  X  13  cm. 

h.  [As  above;!  hdpc.  Magnus  64,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.4  X  12.5  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  67,  col.;  publ.  Magnus. 
21  X  13.2  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  69,  col.  21.4  x  13  cm. 

k.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  72,  col.  20.2  x  13  cm. 

1.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  89,  col.;  lith  &  print, 
by  F.  Sachse.  19.7  x  12.5  cm. 

m.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  90,  col.  20  x  12.5  cjn. 

n.  [As  above;)  hdpc.  Magnus  99,  col,;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

19.5  X  12.5  cm. 

o.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  130,  col.  19.5  x  12.5  cm. 

p.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  132,  col.;  publ.  Magnus. 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 


q.   Air:  Kitty  Tyrrell;  publ.  Randolph. 
Double-line  border.  20.5  x  12  cm. 

2104.  SHERMAN'S  ON  THE  TRACK.  CONTRABAND 
SONG  &  CHORUS.— 0/z  look  away  out  yonder   (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  D.  A.  Warden. 

a.  Cop:  1865,  W.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;  W.  R.  Smith,  Agt. 
Music  [Pu]blisher;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

Multi-line  border.   20.8  <  11.5  cm. 

b.  Published  by  W.  R.  Smith,  Agt.;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 
T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14  cm. 

2105.  SHIP  A-UOY\—When  o'er  the  silent  seas  alone 
(2  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.7  x  14.4  cm. 

2106.  THE  SHODDY  CONTRACTOR.-/'ZZ  sing  to  you  a 
little  song,  made  by  a  modern  pate  (7  vs.)  Air:  The 
Fine  Old  Irish  Gentleman. 

a.  Varying  with  "English"  in  Air;  print.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.8  x  13.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.4  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  By  E.  T.  Johnston;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  By  E.  T.  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1182;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  13.8  cm. 

2107.  SHODDY  ON  THE  BRAIN.— /n  times  like  these,  the 
nation  sees  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  composed  by  David  A.  Warden;  adv:  Send 
Johnson  25  cents;  print.  Johnson  (5);  advs:  Cards,  Bill 
Heads,  Circulars,  etc.,  and  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor.  22.2  x  15.6  cm. 

2108.  SHOULDER  STRAPS. -T^e  sentinel  paced  before 
the  door  (10  vs.) 

With  narrative  preceding  text,  beginning:  "The  follow- 
ing lines  more  especially  apply  to  the  by-gone  days  of 
the  war  ..." 

Double-line  border.  36.5  x  n  cm. 

2109.  SHOULDN'T  BUY  TRIPE  ON  A  FRIDAY. -/'I'e 
often  heard  my  poor  old  Granny  say  (recitative  and  4  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.4  x  14.9  cm. 

2110.  SHULE  'MIT  THE  RULE.— S/zwte  he  come  to  the 
garden  gate   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  715;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  15.4  cm. 

2111.  SIEGE  OF  UJCKHOV^.- Beneath  famed  India's 
burning  sun  (11  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

2112.  SIGHTS  FOR  A  FATHER.- lV7ja/  a  pleasure  it  is 
to  have  a  good  ivife  (6  vs.) 

a.  With  Astley's  imprint. 

T.  o.  [Andrews]  border.  25  x  15.3  cm. 


141 


b.  Sheet  no.  632;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

2113.  THE  SILENT  HARP.-Oh  Erin  dear  Erin  thy 
harp  is  unstrung  (5  vs.) 

By  Timothy  B.  O'Regan;  sheet  no.  1051;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

a.  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.8  x  14  cm. 

b.  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  22  x  12.8  cm. 

SILENT  SAM,  OR  I  NEVER  SAYS  NOTHING  TO 
NOBODY,  see  I  NEVER  SAYS  NOTHING  TO  NOBODY. 

2114.  SILVER  MOONLIGHT  WmDS.-Silver  moonlight 
winds  are  blowing  (Z  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  697;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

a.  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  THE  IRISH  VOLUNTEERS  on  verso.] 
22.2  X  13.7  cm. 

2115.  SIMOM[sic]  THE  CELLARER.-OW  Sjmow,  the 
Cellarer,  keeps  a  rare  store   (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  655;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2116.  SINCE  I'VE  BEEN  IN  THE  ABMY.~I'm  Paddy 
Whack,  from  Bally-na-hack,  not  long  ago  tum'd  soldier 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  with  great  applause,  by  Edward  Berry. 

a.  Print  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  25  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  [Without  singer's  name;]  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  21.9  x  14.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (5).  22.5  x  14.2  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  bill  collector  and  soldier.  20.3  x  13.5  cm. 
(cropped) 

e.  With  "by  by  Edward  Berry";  sheet  no.  158. 
Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23.3  x  15.4  cm. 

2117.  SING  ME  TO  SLEEP,  MY  UOTOER.Sing  me  to 
sleep,  m.y  mother  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.2  x  14.8  cm. 

2118.  SING  TOME  OF  HEAVEN.-O  sing  to  me  of  heav- 
en   (6  vs.) 

Sold  comer  of  Eleventh  and  Jefferson  Sts. 
T.  o.  border.  21  x  13. 2  cm. 

2119.  SINGLE  YOUNG  MAN  LODGER.-/  was  by  trade 
a  snob    (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  443;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

2120.  THE  SINKING  OF  THE  PIRATE  ALABAMA  BY 
THE  U.  S.  GUNBOAT  "KEARSARGE,"  CAPTAIN 
WINSLOW,  JUNE  19TH,  1864.-/  sing  the  doom  and 
dark  career    (5  vs.  and  4  chors.)  Tune:  "Teddy  the 
Tiler,"  or  "Cannibal  Islands." 

Written  by  Silas  S.  Steele,  Esq. 

a.  Title:  "Kearsarge  and  Alabama";  [without  Tune;] 
sung  by  D.  McConahy,  the  Razor  Powder  Man;  advs:  If  you 
wish  to  dance  properly,  and  Kromer's  (Upham's)Hair 
Dye;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 


b.  Title:  "New  Patriotic  and  Comic  Song  on  the  Sink- 
ing of  the  Pirate  Alabama.    By  the  U.  S.  Gunboat  Kear- 
sarge, Captain  Wlnslow.  June  19th,  1864";  cop:  1864, 
J.  Magee,  Philadelphia. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with 
flags  and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union"  in  red  and  blue. 
20.4  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  98,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1),  with  "Cha^"  in  imprint.  20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  "Ch^"  in  imprint.  19.8  x  12.5  cm. 

2121.  THE  SISTER'S  FAREWELL  TO  HER  BROTHER 
GOING  TO  'BA.TT:'LE..—Away,  Away  my  best  beloved! 

I  would  not  have  thee  stay    (5  vs.) 

Headed:  "Union  War  Lyrics";  publ.  Wm.  V.  Spencer. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with 
rounded  corners  in  red;  Liberty  with  flag  in  red  and 
blue.  20.6  X  12. 9  cm. 

SIX  HUNDRED  THOUSAND  MORE,  see  WE  ARE 
COMING  FATHER  ABRAHAM,  SIX  HUNDRED  THOU- 
SAND MORE. 

2122.  THE  69TH  BRIGADE. -My  true  love,  William,  to 
the  war  he  is  gone   (9  vs.)    Air:  The  Night  Templers. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  13.6  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars 
and  stripes.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

2123.  69TH  REGIMENT.  NO.  i.—lt  was  in  the  month  of 
April  (4  vs.)  Air:  Sebastopol. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

SKEDADDLING  SONG.  A  PARODY  ON  "JUST  BEFORE 
THE  BATTLE",  see  A  PARODY  ON  JUST  BEFORE  THE 
BATTLE. 

2124.  THE  SLAIN  AT  BALTIMORE!— There's  sorrow  and 
there's  weeping  by  mountain,  vale  and  shore  (13  vs.) 

[Signed]  C.S.S. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  Adv:  Price  One  Cent;  published  at  No.  94  Washing- 
ton Street,  Boston  [William  V.  Spencer];  print.  E.  L. 
Mitchell.  17.3  x  io.7  cm.  (cropped) 

2125.  THE  SLAVE.  —Wide  over  the  tremulous  sea  (11  vs.) 
With  narrative  following  text,  beginning:  "It  may 

not  be  improper  to  remind  the  young  reader,  that  the 
anguish  of  the  unhappy  negroes";  print  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers.  20.3 
X  12.4  cm. 

2126.  THE  SLAVER  GORDON. -Accwrsed  thirst  for 
wealth  untold  (6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  905;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

2127.  SLAVE'S  DREAM.—/  had  a  dream,  a  happy  dream, 
I  dreamed  that  I  was  free  (3  vs.) 


142 


a.  2nd  song:  "Let's  Be  Gay";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  20.7  x  13  cm. 

b.  With  "Slaves,"  in  title;  sheet  no.  537;  2nd  song: 
"The  Slaves'  Funeral";  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.2  x  15.1  cm. 

2128.  SLEEP  DEAR  ELLA  SLEEP.-/  sit  me  down  to 
think  now  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  A.  B.  Eckerson. 

a.  Sheet  no.  1046;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  ROSA  LEE 
on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1046;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.4  cm. 

2129.  SLEEPING,  I  DREAM  hOVE-Sleeping  I  dream'd 
love  dream'd  love  of  thee  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  404;  2nd  song:  "Oh  Whisper  What  thou 
Feelest";  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

2130.  SMIGGEY  McGUIRREL.-/  fead  a  son,  he  came 
from  the  war  (3  vs.) 

a.  Presented  for  publication  by  Bennett;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.7  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  856;  as  sung  by  Charley  Gardner,  at  the 
American  Concert  Hall  444  Broadway;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

2131.  SMILES  AND  KIND  WORDS. -WTzstz  the  heart  is 
dejected,  and  pleasure  is  floiim  (3  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Merry  and  Wise";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

2132.  SMILING  FACES.—/  love  to  gaze  on  smiling  faces 
(2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  E.  Mordaunt  Spencer,  Esq.;  Music  by 
Stephen  Glover;  music  obtained  at  Lee  &  Walker's. 
A-J  border.  19.7  x  n.e  cm.  (cropped) 

2133.  SMITHEY.  NURSERY  RHYMES.  (FOR  ADVERTIS- 
ING CANVASSERS.) -Wto  does  the  dirty  work  for  Tag 
(6  vs.) 

Headed:  "Ex.-?  O.  Sunday  Black-Mail  Sheet" 
(cropped);  a  first  effort  by  our  "Devil". 
Double-line  border.  15.5  x  9.3  cm. 

2134.  SNOW  STORM.— The  cold  swept  the  mountain's 
height  (4  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.(l),  Owners 
of  the  Copyright;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.3  cm. 

2135.  THE  SOAP  FAT  MAN.-/«  Bowery  street,  not  long 
ago  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  890;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  SOAP  FAT  MAN,  see  also  THE  IRISH  SOAP 

FAT  MAN. 

2136.  SOFTLY  FELL  THE  EVENING  SHADES. -Softly 
fell  the  evening  shades  (4  vs.)  Air;  When  the  Swallows 
homeward  fly. 

Words  by  C.  Y.  Treval;  [publ.j  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.3  x  16.2  cm. 


2137.  SOFTLY  NOW,  TENDERLY,  LIFT  HIM  WITH 
CARE.— Softly  now,  tenderly!  lift  him  with  care  (3  vs.) 

Music  published  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1). 

a.  Publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.  20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc  Magnus  39a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12. 5  cm. 

2138.  SOFTLY  TREAD,  MY  NELLY'S  SLEEPING.-So^Zji 
tread,  my  Nelly's  sleeping  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  William  R.  Smith's. 
A-J  border.  20.4  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

A  SOLDIER  IN  THE  COLORED  BRIGADE,  see 
THE  COLORED  BRIGADE. 

2139.  A  SOLDIER  IS  MY  BEAU.-O/z.'a  soldier  is  my 
beau,  I  would  have  you  to  know  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Music  had  at  John  J.  Daly's  (2). 

a.  Sung  with  immense  applause  by:  Miss  Fannie  Denham. 
Miss  Carrie  C.  Austin,  etc.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  17  cm. 

c.  Sung  with  great  applause  by  Miss  Fannie  Denham;  adv: 
Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  124,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  adv.;]  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  12. 5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  244,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12. 5  cm. 

f.  [Without  "music  had  at";]  with  exclamation  point  at 
end  of  title;  sheet  no.  835;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.5  x  15. 3  cm. 

g.  Sung  with  great  applause  by  Miss  Fannie  Denham; 
sheet  no.  1114;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

h.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.    22.4  x 
13.4  cm. 

2140.  SOLDIER  PLUCK.  SOLDATENMUTH.-Trae  soWier- 
pluck,  the  wide  world  o'er(  5  vs.) 

From  the  German  Hauff,  by  Lieutenant  Henry  B. 
Kelly,  U.S.A. 

a.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  137, 
col.  21  X  13.2  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  138,  bronze; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

SOLDIER'S  BURIAL,  see  BURIAL  OF  SIR  JOHN 
MOORE. 

2141.  SOLDIER'S  CALL!-/Jjse,  Soldiers,  rise,  with  free, 
bold,  brave  acclaim  (4  vs.)  Tune— Russia. 

Sheet  no.  766;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border;  flag.  20.5  x  12.2  cm. 


143 


2142.  THE  SOLDIER'S  CHILD.— A  mother  sat  by  her  open 
door   (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  784;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  19  x  11.2  cm. 

2143.  THE  SOLDIER'S  CHORUS. -GZory  "■"^  love  to  the 
men  of  old  (3  chors.  and  2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1). 

a.  Adv:  Magic  Photographs,  by  F.  G.  Adams,  403  Chest- 
nut St.,  Phila.,  Pa.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  harbor  and  factories  in  back- 
ground. 20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  A-J  border;  eagle.  20.4  x  13.7  cm.  (cropped) 

THE  SOLDIER'S  DEATH,  OR  THE  SOLDIER  TO  HIS 
MOTHER,  see  THE  DYING  SOLDIER  TO  HIS  MOTHER. 

2144.  THE  SOLDIER'S  DEATHBED. -izfee  thee  to  die, 
thou  sunt  —My  boyhood's  dream  (40  lines) 

By  Mrs.  Felicia  Hemans;  Sept.  1863;  print.  Johnson 
(2);  [with  letter  calling  for  votes  from  National  Union 
Executive  Committee  of  the  Ward  on  verso.] 

Double-line  border.  20.2  x  13. 3  cm. 

THE  SOLDIER'S  DEPARTURE,  see  THE  SOLDER'S 
PRAYER. 

2145.  THE  SOLDIER'S  DREAM.— Oar  bugles  sang  truce - 
for  the  night  cloud  had  lour'd    (g  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "The  Soldier's  Tear". 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12. 5  cm. 

d.  Adv:  Ten  i[l]lustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  171,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  19.6  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  174,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  19.5  x  12. 2  cm.  (cropped) 

f.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  478; 
publ.  Partridge  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  15.3  cm. 

2146.  A  SOLDIER'S  DREAM  BEFORE  A  BATTLE. -«'s 
midnight  now  in  Tennessee  (6  vs.)  Air,— "Shells  of  the 
Ocean." 

By  a  Soldier  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland. 

a.  Adv:  Price  Ten  Cents. 

Letter  paper;  red  and  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  flag. 
20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:  Price,  10  Cents;  Camp  Smith,  Tennessee, 
October  28th,  1864. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  t.  o.  border  and  flag  in  red. 
20  X  12.6  cm. 


2146A.  SOLDIER'S  FAREWELL. -ifow  can  I  bear  to 
leave  thee  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  369;  publ.  G.  &  M.  Morse. 

T.  o.  border;  musical  instruments.  21.3  x  14  cm. 

2147.  SOLDIER'S  FAREWELL.— Now  dear  friends  we 
are  to  leave  you  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— Gay  and  Happy. 

By  Mrs.  G.  P.  Hardwick,  Washington,  D.C.;  cop: 
1863,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  D.C. 

a.  Letter  paper;  red  ink;  double-line  border;  woman 
in  farm  scene,  and  soldier  with  flag  and  bayonet. 

20  X  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  ink.  20.2  x  13  cm. 

2148.  THE  SOLDIER'S   FAREWELL  TO  HIS  BRIDE.-/ 
m.ust  part]  the  Soldier's  dutyifi  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  When 
this  cruel  War  is  over. 

By  Max  Langenschwartz;  cop:  1864,  SDN.Y.,  Charles 

Magnus . 

a.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  182,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.2  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  adv.]  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

2149.  THE  SOLDIER'S  FRIEND.-ife  kneeled  beside  the 
soldier's  couch  (3  vs.) 

Words  by  D.  Brainard  Williamson;  with  narrative 
preceding  text,  beginning:  "A  few  days  after  the  battle 
of  Williamsburg,  in  May,  1862,  the  author  witnessed  the 
scene  upon  which  this  song  is  founded." 

a.  Music  by  John  S.  Cox;  Lee  &  Walker.    Music  and 
Musical  Instruments;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Music  by  J.  S.  Cox;  adv:  Johnson  (2)  publishes  600 
different  Songs,  Also  "Brooks,  Ball  Room  Monitor." 
Price  25  cents. 

Double-line  border.  19  x  11.4  cm. 

c.  Narrative  varying:  "The  following  touching  ballad, 
set  to  music  by  John  S.  Coxe  for  J.  L.  Camross,  the 
celebrated  Tenor. ..is  published  by  Lee  &  Walker." 

T.  o.  border.  18  x  11.7  cm. 

2150.  THE  SOLDIER'S  FUNERAL. -//arfe 7  to  the  shrill 
trumpet  calling  (Z  vs.) 

a.  [Without  "The"  in  title  and  exclamation  point  in 
first  line;]  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.7  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  A-J  border;  eagle.  20.2  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.5  x  16. 3  cm. 

e.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  angel  blowing  trumpet,  with  globe,  flags 
and  eagle.  24.3  x  16  cm. 

f.  As  taught  by  T.  Myers,  the  Blind  Teacher;  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  le  cm. 

g.  Title:  "The  Officer's  Funeral" [on  two  lines];  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  22.3  x  15  cm. 


144 


h.  [Title  as  above,  on  three  lines.] 

A-J  border.  20.1  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

2151.  THE  SOLDIER'S  FUNERAL.-He  mingled  not  with 
the  glorious  Slain  (3  vs.)  Air:  The  Minstrel  Boy. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  197,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  19.5  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
20.5  X  12.8  cm. 

2152.  THE  SOLDIER'S   HOMELESS  BOY.— The  snow 
flakes  they  were  falling  (i  vs.)  Air.— The  Summer  Eve 
is  Gliding. 

By  Chas.  Bender. 

a.  Arranged  by  A.  Anderson;  sold  by  A.  Anderson; 
March  24,  1864. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  author's  name;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Music  composed  by  David  A.  Warden,  had  of  J.  H. 
Johnson  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  New  Songs  not  on  our 
Catalogue.  20.4  x  11.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  adv.;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 
17.5  X  8.8  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  [As  above;  without  "Music  composed  by".] 
21.5  X  11.5  cm. 

f.  Arranged  by  A.  Anderson;  adv:  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2);  with  ornament  below  text. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  19  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  without  ornament  below  text.] 
20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

2153.  THE  SOLDIER'S  'LAME'ST .—Adieu  my  mustachios! 
farewell  to  my  tip  (6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1275;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.4  x  15.3  cm. 

2154.  SOLDIER'S  VW^YER.— Almighty  God!  may  we  pre- 
pare (34  lines) 

Written  by  James  B.  Spencer,  No.  115  Reed  Street. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  22.4  x  13.2  cm. 

b.  T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  22.2  x  14. 4  cm. 

c.  Title:  "The  Soldier's  Departure".  21.5  x  n  cm. 

2155.  THE  SOLDIER'S  RETURN.-Ofe,  now  the  battle  is 
over,  mother  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

A  Sequel  to  just  "Just  Before  the  Battle";  by  Sam. 
Hotaling;  sheet  no.  1357;  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.9  x  15.5  cm. 

2156.  THE  SOLDIER'S  RETURN.-Poor  Nellie  was  a 
Soldier's  Wife  (2  vs.)  Air:  "The  Harp  that  once." 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:  1864,  Charles  Magnus, 
SDN.Y.;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  195,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  19  x  11.5  cm. 

2157.  THE  SOLDIER'S  RETURN. -We  parted  wUh  a 
cheerful  smile  (2  vs.) 

Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  2nd  song: 
"I  am  Wandering  All  Alone";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25.5  x  17.3  cm. 


2158.   THE  SOLDIER'S  RETURN  TO  HIS  HOME, 

AND  THE  STAR  SPANGLED  GRID -IROt^. -With  weapons 

of  death  we  have  joyously  parted  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  N.  S.  McLay,  Drum  Major,  55th  Beg. 
Penna.  Vols.,  Camp  West  Wood,  near  Richmond,  Va.; 
print.  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border.  20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

SOLDIER'S  REVEILLE,  see  JOIN  THE  REVEILLE. 

2159.  SOLDIER'S  SISTER.-/  am  sitting  in  our  camp. 
Sister  (6  vs.)  Tune,  Irish  Emigrant's  Lament. 

Written  by  J.  Dyer,  of  the  104th  Reg't  P.V.  Col. 
W.W.H.  Davis. 

a.  Title:  "To  the  Soldier's  Sister";  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border;  bust  of  woman.  24  x  X5  cm. 

b.  Advs:  New  Songs,  and  Johnson's  assortment  of 
Union  Songs. 

Bust  of  woman.  22.5  x  14.8  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  Print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circu- 
lars, etc. 

Head  of  girl.  22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  Print.  Johnson  (5);  advs:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Cir- 
culars, etc.,  and  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

Bust  of  woman.  24  x  15  cm. 

2160.  THE  SOLDIER'S  SONG.— T^z ere 's  joy  enough  in  a 
soldier's  life  (4  vs.  and  chor.  with  music  to  vs.  1  &  2 
and  chor.) 

Printed  on  double  sheet.  19  x  13  cm. 

2161.  SOLDIER'S  lEKR.-Upon  the  hill  he  turned  (3  vs.) 
For  Sale  at  Doyle's. 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  21  x  13  cm. 

THE  SOLDIER'S  TEAR,  see  also  THE  SOLDIER'S 
DREAM. 

2162.  THE  SOLDIERS  WELCOME  HOME. -From  the  camp 
and  field  returning  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1353;  music  obtained  of  H.M.  Higgins; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

2163.  SOLDIER'S  WIFE.— T/zey  tell  me  he  has  gone  to 
fight  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  24.6  x  17  cm. 

b.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  Paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  5,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12. 7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  94,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
19.5  X  12  cm. 

d.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  183,  col.; 

publ.  Magnus  (1).    20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  932;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

SOLDIER'S  WIFE  &  HOME,  see  WE  HAVE  LIVED 
AND  LOVED  TOGETHER. 

2164.  SOME  LOVE  TO  DRINK.  A  POPULAR  TEMPER- 
ANCE SONG.--5ome  love  to  drink  from  the  foamy  brink 
(5  vd.  and  chor.)  Air.— Lilly  Dale. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 


145 


2165.  SOME  ONE  TO  LOVE.— Some  one  to  love  in  this  wide 
world  of  sorrow  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Charles  Melville;  adv:  500  Illustrated 
Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  chor.;]  sheet  no.  629;  publ.  Wrigley  (1) 
[imperfectly  printed]. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.5  cm. 

SOME  ONE  TO  LOVE,  see  also  NO  ONE  TO  LOVE. 

2166.  SOMEBODY'S  COURTING  SOMEBODY. -Sowze- 
body's  curling  [sic]  somebody  (3  vs.) 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.; 
publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).  20.3  X  12.8  cm. 

2167.  "SOMEBODY'S  DARLING,  "-/rate  a  ward  of  the 
white  washed  halls  (5  vs.) 

[By  Marie  Ravenal  de  la  Coste.] 
Dotted  double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners. 
21.3  X  12.7  cm. 

2168.  SOMEBODY'S  WAITING  FOR  SOME  BODY. -flajnji 
and  rough  is  the  day  (3  vs.) 

a.  By  E.  Atherton;  to  Mrs.  Barney  Williams;  music 
obtained  at  Horace  Waters'  (2);  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  With  "Somebody  Is"  in  title;  sheet  no.  369;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

2169.  SOMETHING  TO  LOVE  ME. -Something  to  love 
me,  something  to  bless  (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.;  print. 
Andrews;  [with  adv.  for  Monthly  Singers'  Journal, 
signed  by  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.] 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.1  cm. 

2170.  THE  SON  OF  A  DUTCHMAN.-T/ze  day  that  the 
young  Prince  of  Wales  (9  vs.)   Air:  Billy's  Birth-Day. 

a.  Found  by  C.J.  Bell,  on  the  road  to  Bull-Run, 
17th  June,  1861,  and  dedicated  to  the  69th  N.Y. 
Regiment;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.8  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  P.  Gearighty:  dedicated  to  the  69th  N.Y.S.M.; 
sheet  no.  842;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24.2  x  14.8  cm. 

2171.  SONG.— 0/j,  seek  him.  a  spot  in  som.e  lone  shady 
woodland  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air.— Araby's  Daughter. 

With  narrative  preceding  text,  beginning:  "On  the 
death  of  the  brave  young  Fleetwood,  a  member  of  the 
Moyamensing  Hose  Company... February  8th,  1865"; 
print.  Johnson  (2).  22.2  x  11.5  cm. 

2173.   SONG  ABOUT  NOTHING. -/'m  thinking  just  now 
of  nothing  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

A  SONG,  DEDICATED  TO  THE  COLORED  VOLUN- 
TEER, see  COLORED  VOLUNTEER. 


2174.  THE  SONG  FOR  ALL  PARTIES. -Owr/af/zers 
fought,  our  fathers  died  {3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Yankee 
Doodle. 

By  Francis  F.  Eastlack;  cop:  1857,  A.  Lemuel  Adams, 
EDPa.;  publ.  A.  Lemuel  Adams. 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  11.8  cm. 

2175.  SONG  FOR  THE  GALLANT    HEARTS!  AN  ORIGI- 
NAL FIREMEN'S  SONG.— ^  song  for  the  gallant  hearts 
(5  vs.)  Air:- "A  Life  on  the  Ocean  Wave." 

Dedicated  to  the  Firemen  &  the  friends  of  Firemen; 
publ.  Auner  &  Johnson;  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc.;  cop:1857,  Auner  &  Johnson,  EDPa. 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  14.8  cm. 

2176.  SONG  FOR  THE  LOYAL  NATIONAL  LEAGUE, 
ON  THE  ANNIVERSARY  OF  THE  ATTACK  ON  FORT 
SUMTER. ^Wfcen  our  banner  went  down,  with  its  ancient 
renown  (3  vs.  and  chors.,  music  for  1st  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:  "National  Songs  Issued  By  The  Loyal 
National  League";  by  George  H.  Boker,  April  3,  1863; 
Issued  from  the  Offices  of  the  Rebellion  Record,  441 
and  448  Broadway,  New-York.  24.7  x  17. 4  cm. 

2177.  A  SONG  FOR  THE  PENNSYLVANIA  MOUNTED 
RANGERS.— O,  a  song  for  the  Rangers,  that  gallant 
young  band  (3  vs.)  Tune— The  Flag  of  Our  Union  Forever. 

By  Miss  A.  L.  G. 

T.  o.  border.  15.9  x  10.4  cm. 

2178.  A  SONG  FOR  THE  TIMES,  OR  JOHN  BROWN. 
NO.  4.— Tom  all  have  heard  of  old  John  Brown  (10  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  [Without  "No.  4"  in  title;]  sheet  no.  747;  sold  by 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.3  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  but  without  comma  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1033; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

d.  Title:  "A  Song  For  The  Times";  title  on  1st  page, 
text  on  2nd  and  3rd.  23.6  x  14  cm. 

2179.  THE  SONG  I  LOVE. -Dear  Mary,  sing  for  me  the 
song  (6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  313;  publ.  Wrigley  (1) . 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

2180.  THE  SONG  MY  MOTHER  USED  TO  SWG.-Oh'. 
Lady  sing  that  song  again   (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  232;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

2181.  THE  SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS.->ls  you've  walked 
through  the  town,  on  a  fine  Summer's  day  (5  vs.) 
Air:  The  Captain  with  his  whiskers. 

Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  25.2  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  With  2nd  to  4th  vs.  printed  as  one. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  68,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.4  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.1  X  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 


146 


e.  With  "No.  1."  in  title;  [without  Pastor's  name;] 
sheet  no.  867;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  16.5  cm. 

f.  [Without  Air,  name  of  singer,  or  verse  divisions;] 
adv:  Send  for  Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album; 
[sold  by]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  clown,  col.  23  x  13.7  cm. 

g.  With  quotation  marks  around  Air;  and  "the  great 
Comic  Vocalist"  before  singer's  name;  sheet  no.  1165; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

2182.  THE  SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS,  NO.  2.-You've  heard 
of  many  songs,  but  of  one  thing  I'm.  sure  (5  vs.) 

a.  [Without  comma  after  "Songs",  and  period  after 
"No";]  first  line  ending:  "but  there's  something  I'm 
sure";  as  sung  by  H.  Byron;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  25.6  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  Air:  "The  Captain  with  his  Whiskers";  written  by 
John  F.  Poole;  sung  by  Charles  E.  Collins,  at  the  Ameri- 
can Theatre,  444  Broadway;  advs:  Ten  illustrated  Songs, 
and  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  48,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus.  20.2  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  70,  col.  20.9  x  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  71,  col.  20.9  x  13.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  81,  col.  21  x  13.1  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  85,  col.  21  x  13.1  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  86,  col.  20.8  x  13.2  cm. 

h.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  88,  col.  20.9  x  13  cm. 

i.    [As  above;  but  without  advs.;]  hdpc.  Magnus  216a, 
col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).  20.1  x  12. 3  cm. 

j.  [As  above;  with  period  after  "Songs";]  sheet  no. 
1170;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.2  x  15.1  cm. 

2183.  SONG  OF  ALL  SONGS.  NO.  Z .—Kind friends ,  come 
listen  and  spare  a  little  time  (9  vs.)  Air:  Mankind  are 
all  Birds. 

By  H.  B.  Rothwell. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.5  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.6  x 
16.1  cm. 

2184.  THE  SONG  OF  COMPANY  \.-Ye  Frankford  Boys 
attention  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  John  S.  Settle,  of  Co.  I;  respectfully  ded- 
icated to  St.  Marks  Union  Tent;  print.  Johnson  (2); 
Copyright  Secured. 

Eagle  with  flags  and  musical  instruments.  23.3  x 
14.8  cm. 

2185.  THE  SONG  OF  COMPANY  I. -Though  far  away 
from  hom.e   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:  "J.  C.  Martin's  Camp  Songs";  by  J.  C. 
Martin,  of  Co.  I,  112th  Reg't  Pa.  Volunteers. 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.  17.8  x 
11.1  cm.  (cropped) 

2186.  SONG  OF  "GIDEON'S  BAND,"  COMPANY  F, 
"GRAY  RESERVES. "-0/;,  put  your  name  upon  the 
roll  (9  vs.) 


Dedicated  to  Company  F,  Second  Company  Washing- 
ton Grays;  print.  Crissy  &  Markley. 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers. 
20.1  X  12.9  cm. 

2187.  SONG  OF  LIBERTY. -ye  sons  of  Columbia,  from 
Ireland  I  came  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Johnson  (3);  advs:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc..  and  You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your 
Printing  done  at  Johnson's. 

T.  o.  border.  20.1  x  10.7  cm.  (cropped) 

2188.  SONG  OF  MANY  SONGS. -"//osawna,"  "Honest 
Abe,"  "There's  Music  in  the  air"  (4  vs.)  Tune.— Con- 
tinental March,  or  The  Captain  with  his  Whiskers. 

2nd  vs.  beginning:  "I  have  something",  arranged 
and  sung  by  A.  Anderson;  cop:  A.  Anderson,  EDPa., 
1863. 

a.  A-J  border.  24  x  15. 9  cm. 

b.  Nov.  1863:  Address  of  the  Author,  [publ.l  Anderson. 
A-J  border.  20.2  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

c. [Without  Anderson's  name  and  cop.;]  Tune— The  Cap- 
tain with  his  Whiskers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border;  eagle.  23.5  x  14.9  cm. 

2189.  SONG  OF  MANY  SONGS. -"ffosaremz, "  "Hallelujah" 
"There's  Music  in  the  Air"  (4  vs.)  Tune.— The  Captain  with 
the  Whiskers. 

2nd  vs.  beginning:  "We  are  Coming  Father  Abraham"; 
by  A.  Anderson. 

a.  Cop:  A.  Anderson,  EDPa.,  1863. 
T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  &  Co.  19.6  x  11.6  cm. 

2190.  SONG  OF  MY  LIGHT  CANOE  OR  THE  WILD 
GAZELLE.— O,  com.e  with  me  in  my  light  canoe  (2  vs. 
and  chors.) 

Publ.  Auner  and  Johnson;  adv:  Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill  Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  12.3  cm. 

2191.  SONG  OF  THE  CONVALESCENT  CAMP  NEAR 
ALEXANDRIA,  Vk.—Pray  give  me  your  attention,  until 
I  sing  a  song  (12  vs.)  Air.- Root  Hog  or  Die. 

Print.  Johnson  (2).  22.7  x  14.4  cm. 

2192.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  EXILE. -O  Erin!  for  thee  how 
oft  I  have  sighed  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  22.8  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  By  Henry  Nelson  Hanna;  sheet  no.  1137;  publ.  Wrig- 
ley (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

2193.  SONG  OF  THE  FARMER.-/  have  cattle  that  feed 
in  the  valley  (3  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 

2194.  SONG  OF  THE  FIRST  OF  ARKANSAS. -O/i.'  we're 
de  bully  soldiers  of  de  "First  of  Arkansas"  (8  vs.) 

With  e.xplanation  of  song:  "The  following  song  was 
written  by  Captain  Lindley  Miller,  of  the  First  Arkansas 
Colored  Regiment  ...";  publ.  by  the  Supervisory  Com- 
mittee for  Recruiting  Colored  Regiments.  24.3  x  15  cm. 

2195.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  LOCOMOTIVE. -Beiwire.' 
beware!  for  I  come  in  my  might  (10  vs.) 


147 


Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.2  x  14.6  cm. 

2196.  SONG  OF  THE  NEGRO  BOATMAN.- O/i,  praise 
an'  tanks!  De  Lord  he  come {4  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  John  G.  Whittier;  publ.  by  the  Supervisory 
Committee  for  Recruiting  Colored  Regiments.  24  x  15  cm. 

2197.  SONG  OF  THE  PEACE-MAKER  HOSE.-Ofc  list  to 
my  song,  all  ye  firemen  so  brave  (3  vs.)  Air— Star 
Spangled  Banner. 

By  Young  'Un;  publ.  by  W.  D.  Fisher  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.6  cm. 

SONG  OF  THE  POTOMAC  VETERANS;  OR  GALLANT 
FIGHTING  JOE,  see  GALLANT  FIGHTING  JOE. 

2198.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  SEXTON-O/i,  the  sights  that 
I  see  as  I  ply  my  lone  trade  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1279;  composed  by  Lewis  Emanuel;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23.8  x  i5.i  cm. 

2199.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  S^^S.1  .-With  fingers  weary 
and  worn,  with  eye-lids  heavy  and  red  (6  vs.) 

By  Thomas  Hood,  Esq. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  14.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24.6  x  15  cm. 

2200.  SONG  OF  THE  214TH  REGT.  P.  V.  NO.  I.-On  the 
Eighth  day  of  April,  I  suppose  you  all  know  (4  vs.)  Tune- 
Long  Barney. 

Written  by  "Ibex";  print.  Johnson  (2).  19.5  x  n.i  cm. 

2201.  SONG  OF  THE  UNION,  DEDICATED  TO  THE  29TH 
REG.  PA.  VOL.  COL.  J.  K.  MVRVWi  —Fellow  Soldiers 
join  the  chorus  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— Gay  and  Happy. 

By  B.  F.  Kern,  Phila.;  [sold  by]  William  F.  Richmond. 
Single-line  border.  24.1  x  10.8  cm. 

2202.  SONG  OF  THE  VOLUNTEERS.-^roMse  to  the  con- 
flict; why  linger  ye  here  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— March- 
ing Along. 

The  following  truly  patriotic  Song  will  be  sung  at  the 
commencement  and  closing  of  all  Recruiting  Meetings; 
2nd  page:  adv.  of  books  published  by  T.O.H.P.  Burnham; 
3rd  page:  letter  of  George  Livermore,  August  9,  1862,  on 
fund  for  soldiers'  families;  4th  page:  adv.  of  Burnham. 
20  X  12.4  cm. 

2203.  SONG  OF  THE  ZOUAVES.— /i  was  a  lovely  Sum- 
mer's day  (4  vs.) 

Words  by  Edward  Riley,  Corporal  of  Co.  B,  1st 
Regt.  of  Fire-Zouaves,  and  dedicated  to  Capt.  Edward 
Byrnes,  Assistant-Foreman  of  Mohawk  Engine  Co.  10; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  26.1  x  16. 5  cm. 

2204.  SONG  OF  THESE  TIMES-Good  people,  all,  I  pray 
attend  (17  vs.  and  chor.) 

Air:— "Villikins  and  Dinah." 
Print.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.2  cm. 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  UNION  PRISONERS  FROM 
DIXIE'S  SUNNY  LAND,  see  DIXIE'S  SUNNY  LAND. 
OR,  THE  CRUELTY  TO  OUR  UNION  PRISONERS. 


SONG  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  COLONEL  ELLSWORTH, 
see  ELLSWORTH  THE  GALLANT  ZOUAVE. 

2205.  SONG,  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  PRESIDENT  ABRAHAM 
LINCOLN.— //aZZs  and  Homes  in  black  are  shrouded  (5  vs.) 
Tune.— Annie  Laurie. 

By  Silas  S.  Steele. 

a.  Cop:  1865,  J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  mourning  border.  20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border 
in  red  and  blue  with  flags  at  upper  corners  and  motto 
"Liberty  and  Union  Forever".  18.9  x  12.6  cm. 

2206.  SONG  ON  THE  GREAT  CONFLAGRATION,  ON 
THE  MORNING  OF  WEDNESDAY,  FEB.8,  1865,  NINTH 
STREET,  NEAR  FEDERAL.-Tz<)<zs  at  the  solemn  mid- 
night hour  (9  vs.)  Air.— The  Wife's  Dream. 

Print.  Auner  (5).  22.9  x  14.6  cm. 

2207.  A  SONG  ON  THE  PENINSULAR  CAMPAIGN, 
UNDER  McCLELLAN  —When  I  joined  the  army  some 
thirty  m.onths  ago  (18  vs.) 

By  O.  A.  Goodrich;  print.  Dickson. 
T.  o.  border.  30.5  x  23.1  cm. 

2208.  SONS  OF  COLUMBIA.  A  NATIONAL  SONG. -Re- 
joice, ye  Sons  of  Columbia  (3  vs.) 

Written  for  the  Fourth  of  July,  and  Set  to  Music  by 
Theodore  Ascherfeld;  music  for  sale  at  G.  Andre  &  Go's; 
publ .  Aune  r  (3) . 

A-J  border.  23.1  x  15  cm. 

2209.  SONS  OF  COLUMBIA. -So)zs  of  Columbia,  your 
Country  now  calls  you  (5  vs.) 

a.  By  Mrs.  Thomas  M.  Coleman;  N.  B.— This  beautiful 
and  patriotic  Song  has  been  set  to  Music  by  Geo.  Felix 
Benkert,  Esq.,  and  printed  by  permission  of  the  publish- 
ers, G.  Andre  &  Co.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Cir- 
culars, Bill-Heads,  etc. 

A-J  border.  23.4  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  (As  above;]  but  with  title: 
15  cm. 


'Save  the  Union."  23.5  x 


2210.  THE  SONS  OF  NEW  JERSEY. -T/zere  was  a  call  for 
Volunteers  sometime  in  last  year  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air- 
Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

Composed  at  Dividing  Creek,  By  F.  B.  Johnson;  print. 
Johnson  (2).  24.4  x  10. 4  cm. 

2211.  THE  SON'S  RETURN!— H^zY/z  joy  I  hail  your  safe  re- 
turn (6  vs.)  Air,— "Bonny  Doon." 

By  A.  Anderson;  sold  by  A.  Anderson. 
T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14  cm. 

2212.  SORROW  SHALL  COME  AGAIN  NO  MORE-WTzaf 
to  m.e  are  earth's  pleasures,  and  what  its  flowing  tears 
(4  vs.  and  chor.)    Tune.— "Hard  Times." 

Published  by  Request;  From  the  Choral  Hymns; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 
T.  o.  border.  23.9  x  15.2  cm. 

2213.  SOUND  ON  THE  GOOSE.— A  new  song  I've  got  to 
please  you  to-night  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Tony  Pastor's  Comic  Songster,  published  by  Dick 
&  Fitzgerald;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  22.2  x  14.6  cm. 


148 


2214.  LE  SOUPm  DES  ESC  LAVES. -QweUe  horreur  et 
quelle  infamie  (4  vs.  and  chor.)Air:  L'Ignorance  a 
bris6  ses  armes. 

Par  Gustave  Dime;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  26  x  16.8  cm. 

2215.  SOUR  APPLE  TREE.  OR  JEFF  DAVIS  LAST 
DITCH.— T/ze  Yankee  boys  have  caught  him.  The  Traitor, 
Old  Jeff  D  (3  vs.) 

a.  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.,  Music  Publishers  (1);  publ. 
Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  Jeff  Davis  running  past  tree  with  noose 
slung  over  branch;  2nd  part  of  title  written  on  tree  trunk. 
23.9  X  14.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  NO  ONE  TO  LOVE  on  recto.]  23.6  x 
14.8  cm. 

0.  Title:  "The  Sour  Apple-Tree";  3  vs.  and  chor.; 
music  publ.  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1),  obtained  of  Wm. 
A.  Pond  &  Co. ;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.6  x  16.3  cm. 

d.  Title  as  above,  but  without  hyphen;  3  vs.  and  chor.; 
sheet  no.  1327;  music  publ.  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1); 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

e.  [As  above;)  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.6  x 
15.1  cm. 

2216.  SOURKROUT  AND  SAUSAGES.-/  marry  my  Jrow- 
some  childer  I  gets  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sung  by  Mr.  S.  Barry,  at  the  Bowery  Theatre,  with 
Thunders  of  Applause;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's 
imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

2217.  SOUTH  CAROLINA  GENTLEMAN. -Domw  in  a 
small  Palmetto  State,  the  curious  ones  may  find  (6  vs. 
uneven  length)  Air:  The  Fine  Old  English  Gentleman. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.2  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  804;  as  sung  by  J.  C.  Cross,  the  favorite 
Ethiopian  Comedian;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

2218.  SOUTHERN  CHIVALRY.-SfcaH  Northern  Statesmen, 
when  they  speak  (18  vs.)  Tune— Bonny  Doon. 

Dedicated  to  Anson  Burlingame. 
T.  o.  border;  flag  and  eagle  with  motto  "E  Pluribus 
Unum".  30.5  x  15.3  cm. 

2219.  SOUTHERN  WAGON.-Je#.  Davis  built  a  wagon,  and 
on  it  put  his  name  (11  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Wait  for  the 
Wagon. 

a.  Title:  "Secession  Wagon";  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  23.2  x  15. 2  cm. 

b.  With  "That"  before  "Southern"  in  title;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  13.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  26  x  16. 3  cm. 

d.  Title:  "The  Secession  Wagon";  print.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.  23.6  x  15. 2  cm. 

e.  As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  36;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20.8  x  12.7  cm. 


f.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2) . 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  25a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  10.2  cm. 

g.  Title:  "Wanamaker's  Secession  Song";  [sold  by] 
Samuel  R.  Wanamaker,  Provision  Dealer;  adv:  All  Orders 
sent  to  the  Store  promptly  filled  and  delivered;  print. 
Johnson  (2).  23.5  x  15  cm. 

h.  Sheet  no.  1061;  as  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1)  [imprint  upside  down]. 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border.  24  x  15.4  cm. 

2220.  SPARKING  SARAH  JANE. -Sitting  on  the  sofa,  lean- 
ing on  m,y  breast  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  692;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  25  x  15.6  cm. 

2221.  SPECIE.  WE  HAVE  MISSED  YOV.-Oh  Specie,  we 
have  miss'd  you!  confound  the  rotten  banks  (9  vs.)  Tune— 
"Willie,  we  have  missed  You." 

A  Pathetic  Ballad,  by  Professor  Shortfellow;  headed: 
"The  Great  Bank  Song!";  designed  expressly  to  be  sung 
by  the  Crowds  waiting  to  have  their  Notes  cash'd,  during 
the  "Suspension"  of  1857;  cop:  1847,  Quipps  &  Co.,  EDPa.; 
Quipps  &  Co's  Comic  Miscellany,    No.  XV.;  adv:  Price 
Two  Cents.— Liberal  Terms  to  Newsmen,  Publication 
Office,  No.  1169  S.  11th  St.  (near  Federal,)  Phil. 

T.  o.  border;  "Illustration— a  Bank  Officer  Suspended" 
39.6  X  13.5  cm. 

2222.  THE  SPELL  IS  BROKEN.-Mji  heart  is  like  a  faded 
flower  (2  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  J.  B.  Howe,  in  the  New  Drama  of  Katy, 
or  the  Hot  Corn  Girl,  at  the  National  Theatre,  N.Y.; 
2nd  song:  "The  Kiss";  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's 
imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

2223.  SQUIRE  JONES'S  DAUGHTER. -Sj/Jsef  is  the  gush 
of  waterfalls  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.8  x  16. 6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  484;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25.4  x  16.I  cm. 

2224.  ST.  PATRICK'S  DAY.  NO.  2.  — You,  Sons  of  the  Gael, 
wherever  you  kneel  (12  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
comers.  26  x  16  cm. 

b.  By  P.  McAviney;  sheet  no.  916;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2225.  ST.  PATRICK'S  DAY  IN  NEW  YORK.  A  NEW  SONG. 
—Come,  all  you  true  bred  Irishmen,  wherever  you  may 
be  (9  vs.)  Air,  Donnally  &  Cooper. 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  I6  cm. 

STAND  BY  OUR  FLAG,  see  STAND  BY  THE  FLAG. 

2226.  STAND  BY  THAT  FLAG.-"yV  sons  of  Freedom, 
wake  to  glory  (3  vs.)  Tune.— Marsailles  Hymn. 


149 


Cop:  DMass.;  dedicated  to  the  Fourth  Batallion 
Rifles,  M.V.M.;  print.  C.C.P.  Moody. 
T.  o.  border;  flag.   24.8  x  13  cm. 

2227.  STAND  BY  THE  Y'LAG.-May  patriots  defend  our 
flag  to  the  last  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 

T.  o.  border;  flag.   27  x  14.6  cm. 

2228.  STAND  BY  THE  VLkG.-Stand  by  the  Flag,  its 
folds  have  stream'd  in  glory    (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "Stand  by  our  Flag";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  22  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  flag  border  with  center  star, 
col.  24  X  16  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.3  x  16. 4  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  747;  music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co. 
(1);  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  13.5  cm. 

2229.  STAND  BY  THE  FIAG-Stand  by  the  flag  ye 
gallant  sons  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  Beck  &  Lawton,  and  taught  in 
the  Public  Schools  by  Thomas  Woolverton. 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor;  with  3-pointed  line  below  title. 

A-J  border.   21.2  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  With  5-pointed  line  below  title. 
A-J  border.  20  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

2229A.   STAND  BY  THE  VNIOli. -America,  land  of 
Freedom's  birth    (2  vs.) 

Dedicated  to  the  1st  Regiment  California  Volunteers. 

T.  o.  border  in  blue;  sailor  nailing  flag  to  mast, 
col.   21.5  X  13.9  cm. 

2230.  STAND  BY  THE  VmOT^. -Fellow  citizens  and 
soldiers!  I've  a  word  or  two  to  say  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 
Air— Wait  for  the  Wagon. 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15. 5  cm. 

2231.  STAND  BY  THE  UNION. -Stered  by  the  Union  the 
glorious  band   (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  600;  words  published  by  permission  of 
Russell  &  Tolman,  (owners  of  the  copyright)  of  whom 
music  may  tie  obtained;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  25  x  15.2  cm. 

2232.  STAND  TO  YOUR  GUNS!-Sia?zd  to  your  guns,  my 
hearts  of  oak  (2  vs.) 

a.  With  6-line  stanza  headed  "Patriotism"  below  text; 
[publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  [Without  exclamation  point  in  title;]  sheet  no.  991; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  25.1  x  14.2  cm. 

2233.  "STAND  UP  FOR  JESUS. "-0  "Stand  up  for  Jesus! 
ye  friends  of  the  Lord  (10  vs.)  Air— "I  would  not  live 
alway  [sic];"  "Portuguese  Hymn,"  or  "Hinton." 

The  dying  words  of  Rev.  Dudley  A.  Tyng,  who  de- 
parted this  life  on  Monday,  April  19th,  1858,  in  the  34th 
year  of  his  age;  inscribed  to  "The  Young  Men's 
Christian  Association  of  Philadelphia,"  by  Chas.  Collins, 


Jr.;  publ.  A.  M.  Seip,  and  sold  by  King  &  Baird  (1); 
Copyright  Secured. 

Single-line  border  with  spaced  ornaments.  19  x  18.5 
cm. 

2234.  STAND  UP  FOR  3Y.SXSS\— Stand  up  for  Jesus! 
Strengthen' d  by  His  hand  (8  vs.) 

Dying  Charge  of  Rev.  Dudley  A.  Tyng;  Jayne's  Hall 
Union  Prayer  Meeting. 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15  cm. 

2235.  THE  STANDARD  BEARER. -f/po«  the  tented  field 
a  Minstrel  Knight  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border;  flag.  23.4  x  15  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Mr.  J.  Sellman;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
"Printed  &  Sold  by",  address  blank;  adv:  Cards,  Cir- 
culars, Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border;  helmetted  woman  with  flag  and  shield. 
19.5  X  10.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  Johnson's  name  and  adv.;] 
Printed  &  Sold  by  G.  S.  Harris.   18.7  x  n  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1003;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

2236.  THE  STANDARD  OF  THE  FREE.  NATIONAL 
SONG  AND  CaOmjS. -Fling  out  that  Banner,  the 
Standard  of  the  free   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Dedicated  to  Col.  Lefferts,  and  officers  and  men  of 
the  Gallant  New-York  Seventh  Regiment;  sung  with 
great  Applause  at  the  Tammany  Celebration,  4th.  July 
1861;  Words  and  Music  by  John  Mahon;  music  had  of 
John  J.  Daly  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  26  x  17  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  14  cm. 

c.  [Without  "National  Song  and  Chorus"  in  title;]  sheet 
no.  882;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  14  cm. 

STANZAS,  FOR  THE  CENTENNIAL  ANNIVERSARY 
OF  ROBERT  BURNS,  see  A  HUNDRED  YEARS  AGO. 

STAR  OF  COLUMBIA,  see  HARRY  BLUFF,  and  OUR 
FLAG  IS  THERE. 

2237.  THE  STAR  OF  GLENGARY.— T/ze  red  mom  is  up 
on  the  m.oss  covered  mountain  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Comin  Thro'  The  Rye";  [publ.]  De  Mar- 
san (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.8  cm. 

2238.  STAR  OF  THE  NORTH,  OR,  POTOMAC'S  YOUNG 
HERO!— Potomac's  Young  Hero!  Imm.ortal  his  name 

(6  vs.)  Tune— Continental  March. 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philada.,  September,  1863;  print. 
Harris. 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  14  cm. 

2239.  STAR  OF  THE  TWILIGHT. -Siar  of  the  twilight! 
Beautiful  star  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "To  the  Highlands";  sheet  no.  709;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 


150 


2240.  STAR  OF  THE  WEST.  — T/zere's  a  Star  in  our  skies 
that  will  never  go  doivn  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  745;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  POOR  BLACK 
BESS  on  recto.) 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

2241.  THE  STAR  SPANGLED  BANNER.-O.'  say,  can  you 
see  by  the  dawn's  early  light  (4  vs.) 

a.  Title  without  "The"  and  with  hyphen;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  revised  and  printed  ex- 
pressly for  the  Public  Schools;  print.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag  and  scroll.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Title  without  "The"  and  with  hyphen;  with  Auner's 
address  after  each  vs.;  headed  "Reception  of  the  State 
Flags  July  4th,  1866";  with  7  lines,  beginning:  "The  Pro- 
cession will  form  on  Broad  Street...";  print.  Auner  (5). 

Flag;  motto  in  red  and  blue  ink:  "Our  Country  and 
Our  Flag  the  Union  at  all  Hazards"  on  verso,  with  sailor 
nailing  up  flag.  20  x  6.8  cm. 

d.  With  quote  following  text:  "If  any  one  attempts  to 
haul  down  the  American  Flag,  shoot  him  on  the  spot. 
General  John  A.  Dix";  publ.  Baker  &  Godwin  (2). 

Card  paper;  red  and  blue  ink;  double-line  border 
with  small  scenes  in  each  comer;  fortress  with  flag. 
26.5  X  17  cm. 

e.  [Publ.]  Louis  Bonsai;  adv:  All  Kinds  of  Books  Bound. 
T.  o.  border.  20  x  12  cm. 

f.  [Publ.]  G.W.  Cottrell;  print.  A.  Holland. 

Text  in  brown  ink;  star  border  in  red  and  blue; 
fortress  with  flag  within  ornamental  frame,  and  motto 
"In  God  is  Our  Trust",  col.  25.5  x  15  cm. 

g.  With  hyphen  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.  24.5  x  16.4  cm. 

h.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  comers.  26  x  16.5  cm. 

i.    Title:  "Das  Star-Spangled  Banner";  in  German; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  23  x  14.6  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.  26  x  16.6  cm. 

k.  Printed  on  double  sheet,  4pp;  with  music  to  vs.  1  & 
2  and  chor.;  adv.  below  first  page  of  text:  We  Will  furnish 
the  music  to  any  person. ..Address,  Heath,  Wynkoop  &  Co.; 
headed:  "The  Good  Old  Flag";  publ.  Heath,  Wynkoop 
&  Co.,  Perfumers,  1861;  last  page  in  red  and  blue,  with 
advs. 

T.  o.  border  on  cover  page;  red  and  blue  ink;  flag. 
18  X  12  cm. 

1.    Headed:  "National  Songs";  2nd  song:  "Save  the 
Union";  3rd  song:  "Our  Country's  Flag";  4th  song:  "My 
Country";  print.  Johnson  (2).   28.4  x  14  cm. 

m.  Revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
publ.  Johnson  (2),  [without  initials;)  adv:  Johnson's  New 
Catalogue  of  Songs. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag  and  scroll.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

n.   [As  above;  with  Johnson's  initials;  without  adv.] 
21.5  X  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

o.  As  sung  at  the  Festival  given  to  the  "Volunteer 
Refreshment  Saloons,"  January  8,  1862;  print.  H.  G. 
Leisenring. 

Single-line  border  with  spaced  ornaments.   18.5  x 
12.5  cm. 


p.  With  5  vs. 

Flag  with  "1861"  at  sides.  17.8  x  9.5  cm.  (cropped) 

q.   Letter  paper;  line  border  with  lattice  comers;  hdpc. 
Magnus  205,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   21  x  14.2  cm. 

r.   Title:  "Das  Star-Spangled  Banner";  in  German;  zu 
haben  bei  Charles  Magnus  (1);  adv:  Magnus's  Ornamental 
and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  double-line  arched  border;  hdpc.  Magnus 
205,  col.   20.2  X  12.2  cm. 

s.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  206a,  col.  20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

t.    [As  above;]  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  206b,  col.   17.3 
X  12.5  cm. 

u.  Headed:  "National  Songs  Issued  By  The  Loyal  Nation- 
al League";  with  hyphen  in  title;  1st  vs.  with  music; 
Issued  from  the  Offices  of  the  Rebellion  Record.  25  x  17 
cm. 

V.  Headed:  "To  be  Read  or  Sung,  by  a  Willing  Tongue"; 
publ.  D.  A.  Woodworth. 

Single-line  border  with  ornamental  comers;  fortress 
with  flag.  27.4  x  21.3  cm. 

w.  Sheet  no.  46;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.3  x  13  cm. 

X.  Title:  "Das  Star-Spangled  Banner";  in  German; 
sheet  no.  801;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.8  x  14  cm. 

2242.  THE  STARRY  BANNER.— AToio  may  our  starry 
Banner  (3  vs.)  Air— God  bless  our  stars  forever. 

Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2);  copy-right. 

T.  o.  border;  flag  with  motto  "Freedom's  Banner!" 

24.4  X  14.5  cm. 

2243.  STARS  AND  BARS.— 0  say,  can  you  see-though 
perhaps  you're  too  tight  (4  vs.)  Air- Star  Spangled 
Banner. 

Headed:  "Southern  National  Song." 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  Tune  in  quotation  marks;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Printing  of  all  description  executed  25  per  cent  less. 

A-J  border.  24  x  13.3  cm. 

2244.  STARS  &  STRIPES. -Arrse.'  ye  brave,  and  show 
your  hand  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Tune.— "Dixey's  Land";  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag  and  scroll  with  motto 
"Our  Country".  23  x  15  cm. 

b.  Air:  Dixie's  Land;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.4  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  [Air  as  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  Revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
with  4  chors. 

A-J  border.  23.8  x  15.4  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  Tune,— "Dixey's  Land";  adv:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Eagle  with  flag  and  scroll  with  motto  "Our  Country". 
24  X  14.3  cm. 

f.  Tune.— "Dixey's  Land". 

Eagle  with  flag  and  scroll  with  motto  "Our  Country". 

16.5  X  15  cm.  (cropped) 


151 


g.  With  "The"  in  title. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  13  cm. 

2245.  STARS  &  STRIPES  NO.  2. -The  Stars  and  Stripes! 
what  hand  shall  dare  (3  vs.) 

Revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools, 
by  permission  of  the  publishers  of  the  music,  Lee  & 
Walker. 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.   23  x  15  cm. 

STARS  AND  STRIPES,  see  also  RALLY  ROUND  THE 
FLAG,  BOYS. 


b.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  25  x  16  cm. 

2256.   STRIKE,  BOYS,  STRTKE. -Strike,  boys,  strike 
with  all  your  might   (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Way  Down  in  Cairo";  adv:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  [Johnson]  border.  21.7  x  9.7  cm. 

STRIKE  THE  HARP  GENTLY,  see  HATTIE  LEE  and 
OLD  K.  Y.  KY. 


2246.  THE  STARS  ON  OUR  BANNER. -Are  the  Stars  on 
our  Banner  less  brilliant  to-day  (2  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery  with  stars 
and  stripes,  col.   25.7  x  16.7  cm. 

2247.  STATE  OF  ILLINOIS. -Come  all  you  jolly  Farmers, 
bold,  who  on  the  plow  depend  (9  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  639;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  homed  imp  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2248.  THE  STEAM  ARM.— 0/z,  wonders  sure,  will  never 
cease  (12  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

2249.  STEPH.  A.  DOUGLAS  AND  H.  V.  JOHNSON. -M^e'ZZ 
raise  our  glorious  banner  high  (3  vs.)  Air:— Dandy  Jim 
of  Caroline. 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   22.7  x  14.8  cm. 

2250.  STEPHEN'S  FAREWELL  ADVICE  TO  YOUNG  MEN. 
—'Tis  the  last  golden  sunbeam  I  ever  zajHI  see  (10  vs.) 

By  A.  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4);  copyright  secured. 
De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.   24.5  x  16. 5  cm. 

2251.  STOP  DAT  KNOCKIN-'— /  once  did  love  a  yaller  gal, 
whose  name  was  Susy  Broum  (2  vs.  and  one  section 
spoken) 

Sheet  no.  516;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  16  cm. 

2252.  THE  STORM. -Cease,  rude  Boreas,  blust'ring 
railer    (9  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  899;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.  24.7  x  15.7  cm. 

2253.  STOVE-PIPE  VOLUNTEERS-'Tz<;as  in  the  State 
of  Maryland,  not  many  years  ago  (8  vs.)  Air— "Raging 
Canawl." 

Founded  on  Facts;  by  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

A-J  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

2254.  STRANGER  IN  THE  ARMYl-Come  soldiers  all 
give  ear  (11  vs.)  Air— Limerick  Races. 

Print.  Johnson  (2).  21.7  x  13.6  cm.  (cropped) 

2255.  THE  STREETS  OF  NEW-YORK^All  you  who've 
been  around  the  town    (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Original. 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   22.4  x  14.5  cm. 


2257.  STRIKING  IhE.  — The  world  it  revolves  on  its  own 
axle-tree   (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Dan  D.  Emmett;  music  obtained  of  Wm.  A. 
Pond  &  Co. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.  24.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1302;  as  sung  by  J.  P.  Johnson,  with  unusual 
success,  at  the  American  Theatre,  444  Broadway,  New 
York;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

2258.  DE  SUGAR  CANE  GREEN.- Cowze  niggas  and  listen 
to  dis  darkey  child    (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  de  Colored  Society  in  General;  adv:  Price 
One  Cent.  All  the  New  Songs  constantly  on  hand;  publ. 
Auner  &  Johnson,  and  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  22  x  11.5  cm. 

2259.  SUMMONS  TO  -BATTLE. -Away!  away!  to  the  free- 
man's fight  (3  vs.)  Air— Away!  to  the  mountain's  brow. 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  96,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  110,  col.  21.5  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  139,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   19.3  X  12.  4  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  145,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   21  X  13  cm. 

2260.  SUNLIGHT  ON  THE  SEA.-Sunshine  on  the  wave 
is  lying  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.6  x  16. 2 
cm. 

2261.  SUNLIGHT  WITHIN  MY  BEAUT. -Nightfall  o'er 
earth  and  sky   (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1250;  words  by  Emilie  Cleveland;  music 
by  J.  W.  Groschel;  music  olDtained  of  Frederick  Blume 
(1);  publ.  Wrigley  [address  not  printed). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

2262.  SUSAN'S  SUNDAY  OUT-O/z.'  shan't  I  be  delighted 
just,  when  Sunday  com.es  I  know  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23  x  15.1  cm. 

2263.  SUSY  AND  PAT  MURPHY.-Oc^,  it's  of  a  rich 
farmer  in  Lim,erick  did  dwell   (8  vs.  and  chor.  with  7 
interlocutory  lines,  and  moral)  Air.— "Vilikins  and  his 
Dinah". 

Wrigley  moon  border.  23.8  x  14.4  cm. 


152 


2264.  SWASH  SHAY,  HANDS  ACROSS.— 0  /  went  down  to 
New  Orleans,  I  got  upon  de  landin  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:  "Gaily  the  Troubadour";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

2265.  SWEEP  0\— I  come  from  old  Louisiana    (4  vs.  un- 
even length)  Air— "Buy  a  Broom." 

Sung  by  the  Original  Virginia  Serenaders;  advs:  you 
will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your  Printing  done,  and 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads,  etc.;  publ.  Johnson  (3). 

T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

2266.  SWEET  EVANGELmE.-Sweet  Evangeline,my 
lost  Evangeline  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  composed  by  Will  S.  Hays;  cop:  1862, 
S.  Brainard  &  Co.,  NDO;  S.  Brainard&  Co.,  Music  Pub- 
lishers; publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  14.4  cm. 

2267.  SWEET  EVELINA.— Way  down  in  the  meadow  where 
the  lily  first  blows  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  233,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  X  12.6  cm. 

2268.  A  SWEET  FACE  AT  THE  WINDOW. -A  sweet  face 
at  the  window  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  W.  C.  Baker;  music  by  H.  P.  Danks;  music 
published  by  Van  Duyn  &  Panormo,  obtained  of  Frederick 
Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.1  x  17  cm. 

2269.  SWEET  HIGHLAND  MARY.  A  FAVORITE  SCOTCH 
BALLAD.  — ye  banks,  and  braes,  and  streams  around 

(4  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

2270.  SWEET  HOME  RECEIVE  ME-Far  o'er  the  wave 
the  morn's  bright  beams  returning  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

2nd  song:  "In  Happy  Moments". 

a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  15. 4  cm. 

b.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  I6  cm. 

2271.  SWEET  JENNY  OF  THE  MOOR. -One  mom,  for 
recreation  as  I  strayed  by  the  sea-side     (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  986;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

2272.  SWEET  KATHLANE  MACREE.-Fe  winds  and  ye 
waves,  bear  my  sorroivs  away   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  217,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  13  cm. 

2273.  SWEET  LUCY  MAY-A  longtime  since,  when  I  was 
young  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

2274.  SWEET  MlSSlSSIPPI.-Sweet  Mississippi,  pride 
of  the  West  (1  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  small  sailboat.   22  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  A  Popular  Ethiopian  Song;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
600  different  kinds  of  Songs. 

T.  o.  border;  two  men  in  sailboat.   22.6  x  12.2  cm. 


2275.  SWEET  ROSE  OF  CAROLINE-Come  darkies  all 
draw  near  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Price  One  Cent. 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  13.6  cm. 

2276.  THE  SWILL  MILK  SONG. -Hurrah!  for  the  steaming 
swill  (  6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "A  Life  on  the  Ocean  Wave." 

By  Brick-Bat;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  22.3  x  14. 1  cm. 

2277.  SWILL  MILK  NO.  2. -Kind  folks,  to  my  song  will 
you  listen  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Broth  of  a  Boy 

By  G.  W.  Anderson;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

SWITZER'S  SONG  OF  HOME,  see  ANGEL'S  WHISPER. 

2278.  THE  SWORD  AND  THE  RED,  WHITE  AND  BLUE.- 
Fort  Sumpter,  Fort  Sum.pter  is  taken  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border.  25.6  x  16. 2 
cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  exclamation  point  in  place 
of  comma  in  first  line;  sheet  no.  767;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  14.3  cm 

2279.  THE  SWORD  OF  BUNKER  HILL.-He  lay  upon 
his  dying  bed  (4  vs.) 

a.  With  hyphen  in  title;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.9  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  chor.;  published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  2nd 
song:  "The  Veteran's  Return  From  The  War". 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  171. 
23.7  X  13.9  cm. 

c.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  long  lines;  publ. 
Edwin  J.  Gibson;  for  sale  at  J.  Rafferty's. 

T.  o.  border;  blue  paper;  eagle  flying  over  floating 
hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto:  "Our  Country".  23.3  x 
13.3  cm. 

d.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  long  lines;  2nd  song:  "Fort 
Donelson  Is  Taken";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.9  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  adv:  Ball  Room  Monitor.  23.8  x 
14.9  cm. 

f.  [Title  as  above,  but  without  period;]  long  lines;  adv: 
The  Dancer's  Guide,  by  Prof.  Brooks;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
20.2  X  11.7  cm. 

g.  Publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.5  X  13.9  cm. 

h.  T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.  21.6  x  12.3 
cm.  (cropped) 

2280.  SWORD  SOUG. -Sword,  on  my  left  side,  gleaming, 

(17  vs.) 

[By]  Korner;  with  explanation  at  t)eginning  of  song: 
"Korner  was  born  Sept.  23,  1791...";  2nd  song:  "Wash- 
ington's Statue";  3rd  song:  "Prayer  During  Battle"; 
with  2  notes  at  end  of  songs;  "Presented  to  the  sick  and 
wounded  Soldiers  of  America...",  and  "On  that  day.  in 
the  beautiful  language  of  Robert  Burns..."  36.4  x  15.3  cm. 

TAKE  BACK  THOSE  GEMS,  see  WITH  ALL  MY  SOUL 
THEN  LET  US  PART. 


153 


2281.  TAKE  CARE  OF  NUMBER  ONE. -White  folks ,  gib 
attention,  -I've  fotched  de  banjo  'long  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Short  lines;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.   22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  701;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

2282.  TAKE  ME  HOME  TO  DIE. -T/zis  land  is  very  bright, 
mother  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  8  vs.;  long  lines. 

Yellow  paper;  A-J  border.   20.2  x  14.1  cm.  (cropped). 

b.  Sheet  no.  630;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.    19.7  x  11.5  cm. 

2283.  TAKEN  IN  AND  DONE  FOR. -One  day,  I  strolled 
out  West,  round  every  street  went  dodging  (7  vs.)  Air: 
Down  in  Piccadilly. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.7  x  16.2  cm. 

2284.  TAKING  UP  QUARTERS.— So Wzers  are  coming,  good 
people,  be  gay  (5  vs.) 

a.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  104,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  141,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.6  x  12.4  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  187,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  13.2  cm. 

2285.  TARDY  GEORGE. -Wzaf  are  you  waiting  for,  George, 
I  pray  (7  vs.)   20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

2286.  THE  TAX-BILL. -T/ze  Tax-bill  now  is  all  the  go 
(5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   New  Policeman. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  hyphen,  and  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  semi- 
colon after  "Air";  sheet  no.  1153;  by  Eugene  T.  Johnston; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  15.4  cm. 

2287.  TEDDY  0'NEALE.-/'z;e  come  to  the  cabin  he  danced 
his  wild  jigs  in  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  993;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.8  x  15.6  cm. 

2288.  TEDDY  REGAN. -Tediy  Regan  courted  Winnie 
(7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  751. 

Wrigley  moon  border.  24.1  x  15.6  cm. 

2289.  TELL  ME,  MARY. -Tell  me,  Mary,  how  to  woe  thee 
(2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:  "I  Long  For  The  Mountains";  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  after  "Me";]   sheet  no.  990;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

2290.  TELL  MOTHER  I  DIE  HAPPY.-/  am  dying.  Com- 
rades, dying  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  Music  obtained  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (3);  [publ.]   De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.3  x  17  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   23.2  x  14.9  cm. 

c.  With  comma  after  "Mother";  with  explanation:   "The 
last  words  of  Lieut.  Crosby,  who  was  killed  in  his  battery 
at  Salem  Heights,  in  the  fight  of  Sunday  evening,  May  2d, 
1863;"  publ.  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  2nd  song:  "I 
Dreamed  My  Boy  Was  Home  Again". 

Single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  193b.   23.6  x  13.8  cm. 

d.  [Title  and  explanation  as  above;]  words  by  C.  A. 
Vosburgh,  Music  by  Jabez  Burns;  publ.  S.  T.  Gordon  (3); 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  107,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  152,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.8  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  but  with  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Ballads, 
publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  193,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  Sheet  no.  1213;  music  obtained  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (3); 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.7  x  13.2  cm. 

2291.  TEMPERANCE  ODE. -Good  morning  old  fellow, 
why  how  do  you  do  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Come  Tune— Jolly  Red 
Nose. 

Composed  by  George  M.  Roberts,  of  New  York;  print. 
Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   24.7  x  15.3  cm. 

2292.  THE  TEMPEST.  — We  were  crowded  in  the  cabin 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2293.  "A  TEMPEST  IN  A  TEA  POT."-Co»2e  listen  all 
good  citizens  (14  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "A  Doleful  Ditty.";  followed  by  a  rhyme 
from  Mother  Goose  and  long  explanation  of  song:   "A  great 
many  years  ago,  when  civilization,  the  fine  arts  and  mili- 
tary tactics,  were  all  in  their  infancy  .  .  .";  by  Mr.  Caliban. 
27.2  X  18.7  cm. 

2294.  THE  TEMPEST  OF  THE  HEART. -vlH  is  hush'd, 
save  night  winds  stealing  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Battle  Chorus";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  23.4  x  13.9  cm. 

2295.  TEN  LITTLE  INJUNS. -Ten  little  "Injuns"  standing 
in  a  line  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Comic  song  &  Chorus;  Sep.  Winner  &  Co.  (7),  music 
publishers. 

A-J  border.   19.6  x  13  cm.  (cropped) 

TEN  O'CLOCK,  OR  REMEMBER  LOVE  REMEMBER, 
see  REMEMBER  LOVE  REMEMBER. 

2296.  THE  TENTH,  MONTGOMERY  REGIMENT.  COL. 
W.  H.  LYTLE.— /  am  a  bold  Montgomery,  to  the  Tenth  I 
do  belong  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  W.  H.  Divine. 


154 


a.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.8  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   23  x  13.8  cm. 

2297.   TENTING  ON  THE  OLD  CAMP  GROUND. -W'e're 
Tenting  to  night  on  the  old  camp  ground  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Words  and  music  by  Walter  Kittredge;  cop:    1864, 

O.  Ditson  &  Co.,  U.  S.  D.  Mass.;  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1), 
Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   24.3  x  13.8  cm. 

b.  With  hyphen  in  title;  and  "to-night",  and  "camp- 
ground" in  first  line;  music  publ.  by  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.; 
obtained  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.8  x   16.9  cm. 


c.    [Without  "We're"  in  first  line; 
"to-night";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 


with  hyphen  in 


2298.  TERRY  O'RANN.-Terrj)  O'Rann  was  a  fine  young 
man,  and  from,  a  boy,  it  was  his  joy  (7  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  646. 

Wrigley  moon  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

2299.  TKANKSGlNmG  SOaC- Ruler  of  Nations'.  Sovereign 
Lord  (9  vs.)  Air— Old  Hundred. 

By  C.  C.  Haven;  Trenton,  N.  J.,  November  24,  1864. 
T.  o.  border.   27.3  x  13.1  cm. 

2300.  THAT  BABY  ON  THE  HALF  SHELL.- 'Tis  of  a  gay 
widoiv  in  Bond  Street  did  dwell  (11  vs.) 

Headed  No.  4;  by  Snodgas,  Jr. 

T.  0.  [Johnson]  border.  20  x  12  cm.  (cropped) 

2301.  THAT  BLESSED  BABY,  OR,  THE  MOTHER'S 
APPEAL.— "Z)o«'i  take  m.y  dear  baby  away"  (8  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Headed:  "No.  2";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.4  cm.  (cropped) 

2302.  THAT  COTTAGE  HOME.-/  dreamed  a  dream  the 
other  night,  when  all  around  was  still  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air.— Oh!  Susannah. 

Sheet  no.  686;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.   25  x  15.7  cm. 

THAT  SOUTHERN  WAGON,  see  SOUTHERN  WAGON. 

THAT'S  JUST  SO,  see  THE  REBEL  RAID  IN  PENN- 
SYLVANIA. 

2303.  THAT'S  SO.— The  world  gets  wiser  every  day  (5  vs. 
and  chor.) 

As  Sung  by  John  H.  Duley,  of  Perham's  Opera  Troupe, 
at  the  Melodeon,  Boston;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's 
imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  14.8  cm. 

2304.  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER?-/^  these  exciting 
times  I  suppose  you  all  do  know  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Published  by  permission  of  the  "Great  Wray",  and 
sung  by  him  at  the  Canterbury  Hall.  N.  W.  Corner  Fifth 
and  Chestnut;  advs:   You  will  save  30  per  cent  by  getting 
your  printing  done,  and  Pike's  Vegetable  Tooth  Ache 
Drops;  publ.  Warren  (2). 


T.  o.  border;  5  small  comic  figures  left  of  text.   21.5 
X  12.1  cm. 

2305.  THATS  WHAT'S   TWZ  UATTY.'B..- They  say  Johnny 
Bull  is  sending  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Wait  for  the 
Wagon". 

Sung  with  Immense  Success  by  Mat  Gebler. 

a.  17.8  X  10.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  [Without  quotation  marks  around  Air;)  adv:  Johnson's 
assortment  of  Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.9  x  14  cm, 

2306.  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER. -R/g  live  in  hard 
and  stirring  tim.es  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Stephen  C.  Foster;  music  publ.  by  Firth,  Pond  & 
Co.  (1). 

a.  With  exclamation  point  in  title;  [publ. J  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  22.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  959;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.9  x  15.5  cm. 

THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER,  see  also  KINGDOM 
COMING. 

2307.  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER.  NO.  2. -If  down 
South  they'd  hear  to  reason  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Wait  for 
the  Wagon. 

a.  As  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  2nd  song;  ["That's  What's 
The  Matter]  No.  3.";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.3  x  16. 8  cm. 

b.  Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no.  1059; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  LITTLE  BLACKSMITH  on 
recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  14.3  cm. 

2308.  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER  NO  3. -New  York 
is  quite  a  little  town  (5  vs.)  Air:   Bow-wow-wow. 

As  Sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
21.4  X  13.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  ink.   20.2  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  106;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  LITTLE 
BLACKSMITH  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  15.6  cm. 

2309.  THAT'S  WHAT'S  THE  MATTER  WITH  HANNAH. - 
By-words  up  and  doum  are  the  life  of  the  town  (6  vs.  and 
2  chors.) 

Cop:    1865,  W.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;  Wm.  R.  Smith.  Agt.. 
Music  Publisher;  publ.  Auner  (5).   24.1  x  15. 3  cm. 

2310.  THAT'S  WHERE  THE  LAUGH  COMES  m\-Augustus 
Don  Pedro,  a  handso7ne  young  man  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Eastburn;  cop:    1865,  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  SDN.Y.; 
Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.,  Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   23.5  x  15. 4  cm. 

2311.  THEE,  THEE,  ONLY  TaV:-£..-The  daivning  of  mon- 
the  daylight's  sinking  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.6  x  16  cm. 


155 


2312.  THEIR  SHAM  SHOULDER-STRAPS. -fivery  day  of 
our  lives  as  we  walk  through  the  street  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Air:   Gee  ho  Dobbin. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  181,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

2313.  THEIR  TROPHIES. -Tte  veteran  troops  at  old  York- 
toum  (5  vs.)  Air.   "Johnny  fill  up  the  Bowl." 

Headed:    "Ballad  No.  2.";  By  A.  Anderson;  cop:    1864, 
A.  Anderson,  EDPa.;  January,  1864;  Address  of  the  Author, 
[publ.]  Anderson. 

a.  Horseshoe  t.  o.  border.   24.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Leafy  scroll  t.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

THEN  WEEP  NO,  LOVE,  OH!  WEEP  NOT,  see  I 
REMEMBER  THE  HOUR,  WHEN  SADLY  WE  PARTED. 

2314.  THERE  GOES  ANOTHER  GUY.-/  took  a  walk  one 
summer's  day,  to  see  my  Mary  Anne  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— Do  you  really  think  she  did! 

Written  and  sung  by  Mr.  T.  K.  Symns;  sheet  no.  1271; 
publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.2  x  15.4  cm. 

2315.  THERE  IS  A  FLOWER  THAT  BLOOMETH.-Ttere 
is  a  flower  that  blootneth  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1057;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  I'LL  TOUCH 
MY  HARP  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

THERE  IS  A  FLOWER  THAT  BLOOMETH,  see  also 
THE  CONVENT  CELL. 

2316.  THERE'S  A  GOOD  TIME  COMING. -T/zere's  a  good 
time  coming,  boys  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  3  vs.;  the  3d  vs.  beginning:   "There's  a  good  time 
coming  .  .  .  Let  us  aid  it  all  we  can  .  .  .";  words  by 
Charles  MacKay;  music  by  Henry  Russell;  publ.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  With  3d  vs.  beginning:  "There's  a  good  time  coming 
.  .  .  And  a  poor  man's  family  .  .  .";  words  by  Charles 
Macray,  LL.D.;  advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illus- 
trated Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  25,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus.   21.2  x  13.2  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  58,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
20.7  x  12.9  cm. 


d.   [As  above; 
20  X  12.2  cm. 


hdpc.  Magnus  63,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 


2317.  THERE'S  A  HEAP  OF  WORK  TO  DO. -Now,  the  war 
is  gone  and  past  (4  vs.  and'  chors.) 

By  Edward  Burke;  sung,  nightly,  by  James  Gaynor, 
the  Celebrated  Banjoist,  at  Tony  Pastor's  Opera-House, 
Bowery,  New-York;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   22.4  x  14.9  cm. 

2318.  THERE'S  A  SOUND  AMONG  THE  FOREST  TREES. 
—  There's  a  sound  among  the  forest  trees,  away,  boys 

(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  by  Fanny  Crosby;  music  by  Wm.  B.  Bradbury; 
music  publ.  by  Bradbury  (2);  cop:   1861,  William  B.  Brad- 
bury, DN.J.;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   23.5  x  15. 5  cm. 


b.   Music  obtained  at  Bradbury's  (2);  print.  Johnson  (2). 
18  X  9.9  cm. 

THERE'S  MUSIC  IN  THE  AIR,  see  WE  MAY  BE 
HAPPY  YET. 

2319.  THERE'S  ROOM  ENOUOH  [sic]   FOR  ALL.-Wfeai 
need  of  all  this  fuss  and  strife  (4  vs.  and  4  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  340;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24  x  16.5  cm. 

2320.  THERE'S  WHISKEY  IN  THE  JAR.-/  am  a  sporting 
fellow,  I  never  yet  was  daunted  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  122;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.9  x  16.3  cm. 

2321.  THEY  ARE  COMING  FROM  THE  WARS. -T/zeji  are 
com,ing from,  the  wars  (2  vs.) 

Words  by  Eugene  H.  Munday;  music  by  J.  H.  Ross; 
cop:    1865,  W.  R.  Smith,  EDPa.;  [sold  by]  William  R. 
Smith;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23  x  14. 1  cm. 

2322.  THEY  DON'T  WISH  ME  AT  nOUE.-They  don't  wish 
me  at  home,  though  they  m.iss  me  (4  vs.) 

A  Parody  on  "Do  They  Miss  Me  at  Home,"  By  John 
L.  Zieber;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

2323.  THEY  HAVE  BROKEN  UP  THEIR  CAMPSI-T/tej; 
have  broken  up  their  camps  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Maj.  John  B.  Jewell;  music  by  Geo.  F.  Root; 
music  publ.  by  Root  &  Cady  (1). 

a.  [Music]  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1341;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.5  x  14.5  cm. 

2324.  THEY  TOLD  ME  NOT  TO  LOVE  UWl—They  told 
m.e  not  to  love  him.  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

2325.  THE  THIRTIETH  STREET  MURDER.  A  HORRIBLE 
TRAGEDY.— A  tragic  scene  transpired  of  late  (8  vs.) 
Air— Burns  Farewell. 

By  Saugerties  Bard,  N.Y.  Oct.  26th,  1858;  print. 
Andrews . 

T.  o.  border.  23.1  x  14.5  cm. 

2326.  THOSE  STRIPES  AND  BRIGHT  STARSX— What  is  it  I 
see  so  proudly  o'er  us  streaming  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no. 
888;  by  A.  B.  Eckerson;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  14.7  cm. 

2327.  THOU  ART  GONE  FROM  MY  GAZE. -Thou  art  gone 
from  my  gaze,  like  a  beautiful  dream.  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "I  Saw  Thee  When  Thy  Heart  Was  Light"; 
[publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.8  cm. 


156 


THOU  ART  GONE  FROM  MY  GAZE,  see  also  THE 
LONE  STARRY  HOURS. 

2328.  THOU  ART  SO  NEAR,  AND  YET  SO  FAR!-/  know 
an  eye  so  softly  bright  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Son  &  Co. 

a.  [Without  comma  after  "Near,")  and  with  period  at  end 
of  title;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  24.8  x  16  cm. 

c.  [Without  comma  after  "Near"]  and  with  period  at  end 
of  title;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  235,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  sheet  no.  1185;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

THOU  HAST  CAST  OFF  THE  HEART  THAT  I  GAVE 
THEE,  see  HOMEWARD  BOUND. 

2329.  THOU  HAST  LEARNED  TO  LOVE  ANOTHER.-TfeoM 
has  learned  to  love  another  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

THREE  HUNDRED  THOUSAND  MORE,  see  WE  ARE 
COMING  FATHER  ABRAHAM,  THREE  HUNDRED  THOU- 
SAND MORE. 

2330.  THOU  HAST  WOUNDED  THE  SPIRIT  THAT  LOVED 
THEE.  — TfcoM  hast  wounded  the  spirit  that  loved  thee 

(2  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2331.  THUS  SAITH  THE  LORD,  I  OFFER  THEE  THREE 
t^WGS."— In  poisonous  dens  where  traitors  hide  (6  vs.) 

By  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes.   20.5  x  11.7  cm. 

2332.  THY  VOICE  HATH  A  CHARM. -T/t^j  voice  hath  a 
charm.  Thy  smile  hath  a  spell  (2  vs.) 

Words  and  music  by  Lucas  Brinley;  cop:   1862,  Winner 
&  Co.,  EDPa.;  Winner  &  Co.  (3),  Music  and  Musical  In- 
struments; publ.  Auner  (3). 

Yellow  paper;  A-J  border.  23.6  x  14.6  cm. 

THY  VOICE  HATH  A  CHARM,  see  also  HER  BRIGHT 
SMILES  HAUNT  ME  STILL. 

2333.  THE  TICKLER.  — T/zere  was  a  young  man,  as  I've 
heard  say  (4  vs.) 

Sung  by  Jacob  K.  Search,  the  Great  Comic  Singer,  now 
performing  at  the  New  Grotto  Concert  Hall.  N.W.  Cor.  6th 
&  Chestnut  sts.;  publ.  Warren  (2);  adv:   Pike's  Vegetable 
Tooth  Ache  Drops. 

T.  o.  border;  donkey.   23.7  x  15.4  cm.  (cropped) 

2334.  'TILDA  TOOTS:  OR,  YOU  SHOULD  HAVE  SEEN 
HER  BOOTS.— 0«e/rosi})  day  on  pleasure  bent  I  stroll'd 
into  the  park  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1367;  music  had  of  Fredk.  Blume  (1);  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23.9  x  14.6  cm. 

2335.  TIM  FINIGAN'S  WAKE. -Tim  Finigan  lived  in  Bally- 
mackree  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 


a.  With  "Market  street"  in  1st  line;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   24.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   24.5  x  14.8  cm. 

c.  Adv:   Send  for  Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album 
Drolleries;  [publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  Irishman  with  shillelagh,  saying  "How 
are  ye's  boys?",  col.   21  x  14  cm. 

2336.  THE  TIMES  OF  NEW  YORK.-Oh!  white  folks  now 
I'll  sing  you  a  ditty  (5  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "The  Charleston 
Gals." 

Composed  and  sung  with  shouts  of  applause  by  C.  H. 
Fox,  the  celebrated  Banjoist;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's 
imprint  pasted  over  Andrews'. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  15.7  cm. 

2337.  THE  TIRED  SOLDIER.-T/ze  tired  soldier,  bold  and 
brave  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

2338.  'TIS  BUT  A  LITTLE  FADED  FLOWER  -'Tis  but  a 
little  faded  flower  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  702;  music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co. 
(1);  adv:   Wanamaker  &  Brown,  Oak  Hall  Clothing. 
T.  o.  border.   18.8  x  11.9  cm.  (cropped) 

2339.  'TIS  FINISHED!  OR,  SMG  HALLELUJAH. -Tts 
finished!  tis  ended!  the  dread  and  awful  task  is  done 

(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  Henry  C.  Work;  published  by  Root 
&  Cady  (1);  publ.  Johnson  (2).    19.7  x  11.3  cm. 

2340.  'TIS  HARD  TO  GIVE  THE  HAND,  WHERE  THE 
HEART  CAN  NEVER  BY.. -Though  I  mingle  in  the  throng 
(2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  726;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.6  x  15.5  cm. 

2341.  'TIS  HOME  WHERE  THE  HEART  IS. -'Tis  home 
where  e'er  the  heart  is  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  Music  published  by  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  adv:   500  Il- 
lustrated Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  tjlue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  51,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  56,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  13  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  57,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
20.7  X  13  cm. 

2342.  'TIS  MIDNIGHT  HOUR.-'TYs  midnight  hour,  the 
moon  shines  bright  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "Oft  in  the  Stilly  Night";  print.  Andrews; 
with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   24  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "  'Tis"  in  title;]    publ.  Scroggy. 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  15  cm. 

'TIS  MIDNIGHT  HOUR,  see  also  THE  CARRIER  DOVE. 

2343.  'TIS  SAID  THAT  ABSENCE  CONQUERS  LOVE. -'Tis 
said  that  absence  conquers  love  (4  vs.) 


157 


a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc.  .  .  .  And  25  Per  Cent.  Less  than  any  other  Printer  in 
this  City. 

T.  o.  border;  boy  leaning  against  tree  with  owl  and 
oyster  barrel.   21.5  x  12.6  cm. 

2344.  TO  A  BROTHER  FIGHTING  FOR  THE  UNION.- 
There  came  to  Columbia  a  young  Son  of  Erin  (3  vs.) 

By  Mary  Josephine  Higgins;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.6  x  15.8  cm. 

2345.  TO  ARMS.—Harkl  'tis  martial  music  falls  upon  the 
ear  (3  vs.  and  ohor.)  Tune— Prairie  Flower. 

By  the  Rev.  S.  T.  Kemble;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   23.8  x  15.5  cm. 

2346.  TO  ARUS\— What's  that,  brother  7  booming  cannon 
(6  vs.) 

Inscribed  to  our  Brave  Volunteers,  by  Mrs.  E.  S. 
Rogers;  adv:  Great  Inducements!  One  Hundred  Dollars  to 
be  drawn  by  the  Volunteers.   17  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

2347.  TO  CHARMING  KATE  IN  IRELAND.-Ofe.'  dearest 
Kate ,  farewell  a  while  (4  vs.)   Air:    The  Orphan  Boys 
Lament. 

By  A.  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.  24  x  16  cm. 

2348.  TO  ME  SHE  TOOK  A  FANCY. -^s  /  was  walking 
down  the  mall  (4  vs.)  Air:   "Green  Corn." 

Sheet  no.  1075;  as  sung  by  Billy  Pell,  Comic  Dancer 
and  Delineator;  publ.  Partridg[e]   (2). 

Double-line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  22.6  x 
15.5  cm. 

2349.  TO  MY  DEARLY  BELOVED. -W%era  war  was  heard, 
and  Freedom's  call  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

2350.  TO  MY  LOVED  ONE.— Dearest,  do  you  still  remem- 
ber (5  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— Annie  Lisle. 

By  E.  Walter  Lowe,  19th  N.Y.  Cavalry. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20  x  12  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 

Magnus  247b,  col.   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  adv.;]  hdpc.  Magnus  248c,  col.  18.2 
X  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  gold  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  249,  col.   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

2351.  TO  MY  WIFE. -Come  to  me,  my  dearest-I'm 
lonely  without  thee  (5  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

2352.  TO  THE  GLORIOUS  69THI-T/!ose  noble  sons  of 
Erin,  who  to  this  country  came  (10  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.7  x  14.7  cm. 


TO  THE  HIGHLANDS,  see  STAR  OF  THE  TWILIGHT. 

2353.  TO  THE  ONE  I  LOVE. -Owe  look  of  love  from  those 
bright  eyes  (3  vs.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   23.5  x  13.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;)  with  Astley's  imprint  added.  24  x  15.3  cm. 
TO  THE  SOLDIER'S  SISTER,  see  SOLDIER'S  SISTER. 

2354.  TO  THE  WEST!-To  the  west!  to  the  west!  to  the 
land  of  the  free  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  Imprint  added.   25  x  15.2  cm. 

c.  With  period  at  end  of  title;  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border.  22.5  x  14.4  cm. 

d.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.9  x  17.2  cm. 

2355.  "TO  WHOM  IT  MAY  CONCERN."-Wow  all  you 
Politicians  I'll  sing  a  bran  [sic]  new  song  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— The  old  English  Gentleman. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  205,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

2356.  TOM  BOWLING.— ffere,  a  sheer  hulk,  lies  poor  Tom 
Bowling  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  James  R.  White;  sheet  no.  896;  [without 
commas  in  first  line;]  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

2357.  TOMMY  DOOD  [sic].—/  lead  a  somewhat  easy  life 
(4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Sheet  no.  1565;  with  explanation:  "Tommy  Dodd  Is  an 
expression  used  to  signify:  Toss  up";  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

2358.  THE  TOPER'S  APPEAL.  A  PARODY  ON  THE 
MANIAC— Stey,  landlord,  stay  and  hear  m.y  woe  (5  vs.) 

By  "Ned  Buntline."  [Edward  Zane  Carroll  Judson]; 
publ.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.3  x  14.7  cm. 

2359.  THE  TOPER'S  LAMENT.  A  DOLEFUL  DITTY. -/i's 
come  all  you  bold  drunkards,  and  hear  to  my  song  (5  vs. 
and  chor.)  Air— "Villikens  and  his  Dinah." 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  13.6  cm. 

2360.  A  TOUGH  YARN.— Ladtes  and  gents,  if  you  will 
listen  a  little  while  to  me  (8  vs.)  Air— Wonderful  Croco- 
dile. 

Sheet  no.  590;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.   24.9  x  16.3  cm. 

2361.  TRAITOR,  SPARE  THAT  FLAG. -Traiior,  spare 
that  Flag  (4  vs.  with  2nd  line  reading:   "Touch  not  a  single 
Star")  Air— "Woodman  spare  that  tree". 

a.  Varying,  with  colon  after  "Air";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  By  the  Rev.  J.  P.  Lundy. 

A-J  border.  20.2  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 


158 


c.  [As  above;]  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus 

(1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  41a,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  41b,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.4  cm. 

e.  By  the  Rev.  J.  P.  Lundy. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  202, 
col.   20.2  X  12.6  cm. 

f.  With  'Parody.  "Woodman,  spare  that  Tree".'  following 
title;  with  exclamation  points  in  title  and  first  line;  [without 
"Air";]  sung  at  the  Academy  of  Music,  May  16,  by  the 
Pupils  of  the  Zane  Street  Grammar  School,  for  the  forma- 
tion of  a  Fund  for  the  relief  of  Volunteers;  print.  C.  Myers. 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  12  cm.  (cropped) 

g.  With  exclamation  points  in  title  and  first  line;  with 
"Adaptation  of  Woodman,  Spare  that  Tree"  following  title; 
[without  "Air";]  by  Rev.  J. P.  Lundy;  print.  Thompson  (2). 

Flag.   17  X  11.5  cm. 

2362.  TRAITOR,  SPARE  THAT  FLAG. -Traitors,  spare 
that  flag  (4  vs.  with  2nd  line  reading:  "Look  up  at  its 
bright  folds")  Air.— Woodman  spare  that  Tree. 

Sheet  no.  728;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22  x  13.5  cm. 

2363.  THE  TRAITOR'S  DOOM.— Jeff  Davis,  thy  doom  thou 
should  dread  (14  vs.) 

(Signed]  J.  B.  L. 

Double  t.  o.  border.  28.2  x  13.5  cm. 

2364.  THE  TRAITOR'S  LAND.-^zway  doum  South  in  the 
land  of  Traitors  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Dixie's  Land. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border,  cop:   1860,  H.  De  Marsan, 
SDN.Y.   25.8  X  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  796;  with  period  and  dash  after  "Air";  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.5  x  12.8  cm. 

2365.  TRAITORS'  MARCH  TO  THE  WHITE -HOUSE  1-JDid 
you  ever  go  into  the  Southern  Dominions  (4  vs.)  Air: 
Irishman's  Shanty. 

2nd  song:   "Gen.  F.  Siegel,  Brig.  Gen.,  U.N.A." 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  21.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  border,  eagle,  drapery  with 
stars  and  stripes,  col.  25.5  x  16  cm. 

c.  [Without  "Air";]  sheet  no.  826;  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  HATTIE  LEE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   21.8  x  13.2  cm. 

2366.  TRAITORS  PLAYED  OUT.   THE  TRAITOR'S  DOOM. 
—Come  listen  to  me,  white  folks  all  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Tune.— "Gay  Conductor." 

Composed  by  Wm.  H.  Murphy;  adv:   This  Song  and  500 
others  can  be  had  at  Mrs.  Murphy's;  print.  J.  W.  Du  Bree. 

Double-line  border  with  comer  fleurons;  gallows.  20 
X  11.2  cm. 

2367.  "TRAMP,  TRAMP,  THE  BOYS  ARE  MARCHINGl" 
—In  our  homes  we  sat  in  peace  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

19  X  11.7  cm. 


2368.  TRAMPl   TRAMP!   TRAMP!   THE  PRISONER'S 
HOPE.— /n  the  prison-cell  I  sit  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1). 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   23  x  13.7  cm. 

b.  Title:   "The  Prisoner's  Hope";  [without  "music  ob- 
tained of";]  published  by  James  D.  Gay;  adv:   All  of  Gay's 
Illustrated  Army  Songs  Lithographed,  and  All  of  Gay's  Il- 
lustrated Army  Songs  and  Ballads,  Sold  Wholesale. 

T.  o.  border.   18.5  x  11.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  published  by  Root  &  Cady;  words  and 
music  by  Geo.  F.  Root;  publ.  Johnson  &  Cartlitch.   20  x 
10  cm. 

d.  Adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  76,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  79,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ. 
IVIagnus  (1).   20.5  X  12.7  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  144a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.5  X  12.6  cm. 

2369.  TRAVELLING  TINKER.  — 'Tfe  tivo  years  ago  I'd 
have  you  to  know  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  95;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

2370.  A  TRIBUTE  TO  OUR  GALLANT  VOLUNTEERS. - 
Our  Volunteers— a  noble  band  (3  vs.) 

Heavy  glazed  paper;  blue  ink;  Union  soldier  with  flag, 
trampling  on  Confederate  flag,  col.   11.2  x  8  cm. 

2371.  THE  TRIUMPH  OF  THE  OLD  FLAG,  OR,  OUR 
FLAG  O'ER  RICHMOND  WAVES  AGAIN!-OMr  Flag  o'er 
Richm.ond's  fated  walls  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Eastburn;  publ.  W.  R.  Smith;  cop:  W.  R.  Smith, 
Ag't. 

a.  Sung  nightly  by  J.  A.  Palmer,  with  immense  applause, 
at  Carncross  &  Dixey's  Opera  House;  adv:  Just  Issued— 
"Why  don't  they  do  so  now?  ";  print.  Johnson  (2). 

Eagle  with  flag,  factory  and  ship  in  background.  22.3 
X  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sung  nightly  and  received  with  immense  applause  at 
Carncross  &  Dixey's  Opera  House;  adv:  This  Song,  Sold 
Wholesale  and  Retail,  at  Johnson  &  Go's. 

Eagle  with  flag,  factory  and  ship  in  background.   22  x 
12  cm. 

2372.  TRUE  BLUE  IS  THE  COLOR  FOR  UE. -There  are 
fifty  fine  colors  that  flaunt  and  flare  (8  vs.)  Tune— I've 
kissed  and  I've  prattled  with  fifty  fair  maids. 

By  Rev.  Jno.  Eagles;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.8  x  15  cm. 

2373.  TRUE  F'RVET^USnTP.-Ohl  what  happiness,  what 
brightness  (3  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

2374.  THE  TRUE  JERSEY  BLUE.-T/x?  brave  volunteers 
of  Neiv  Jersey  (4  vs.)  Tune— The  "Red,  White  and  Blue." 

By  T.  T.  Price,  M.  D.;  June,  1861;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 


159 


2375.  DER  TRUNKENBOLD.-Der  Trunkenbold-dies 
schreckUch  Bild  (18  vs.)  Melodie:   "Ihr  jungen  Helden 
aufgewacht! ' ' 

T.  o.  border  within  double-line  border.   31.2  x  21  cm. 

2376.  TRUST  TO  hXSCK.-Trust  to  luck,  trust  to  luck,  and 
stare  fate  in  the  face  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "Way  down  in  Cairo";  print.  Andrews;  with 
Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.3  cm. 

TRY,  TRY  AGAIN,  see  THE  DRUNKARD'S  WIFE. 

TRYING  TO  RAISE  A  SQUARE  MEAL,  see  PARODY 
ON  NORAH  O'NEAL. 

'TWAS  RANK  AND  FAME,  see  THE  GOOD-BYE  AT 
THE  DOOR. 

2377.  'TWAS  WITHIN  A  MILE  OF  EDINBURG  TOWN.- 
'Twas  within  a  mile  of  Edinburgh  town  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

2378.  12TH  REGIMENT,  NEW-YORK  STATE  MILITIA. - 
The  gallant  Twelfth  where  e'er  they  go  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 
Air:   Viva  la. 

By  Archibald  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  lyre  border.  26  x  14.7  cm. 

2379.  THE  23D  PENN'A  REG.'S  BRAVE  ACTION  ON  THE 
31ST  OF  MAY,  AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  FAIR  OAKS.- Fou 
Soldiers  all,  both  great  and  small,  you  heroes  and  you 
braves  (10  vs.)   Tune.— Raging  Canal. 

By  James  Smith,  Co.  H.  23d  Regt.  Penn'a  Volunteers. 

a.  Varying,  without  apostrophe  in  "Penna.",  and  with 
"23d  Regiment,  P.  V."  as  author's  designation;  with  "Air" 
instead  of  "Tune";  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  With  "1862"  in  title;  "Commanded  by  Col.  Neill"; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   See  his  large  Assortment  of  Union 
Songs.    20  X  11.8  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  With  "Va"  at  end  of  title;  print.  Johnson  (2).   22  x 
13.4  cm. 

d.  Title:   "Fair  Oaks  Battle,  Fought  on  the  31st  of  May 
1862";  respectfully  dedicated  to  the  Gallant  23d  Pa.  Regt. 
Commanded  by  Col.  Neill;  [publ.]  Johnson  (2).   24.2  x 
12.2  cm. 

e.  Title:   "The  23d  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  in  Action"; 
[signed]  James  Smith,  23d  R.,  P.  V.   25,5  x  9.5  cm. 
(cropped) 

2380.  TWENTY  YEARS  AGO.-/  have  wandered  by  the  vil- 
lage, Tom— I've  sat  beneath  the  tree  (9  vs.) 

Wrigley  Pat  and  Mike  border.  23.2  x  15  cm. 

2381.  TWINKLING  STABS.— Twinkling  stars  are  laughing, 
love  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Sung  with  tremendous  applause  by  Charles  Melville,  of 
Kemble's  Celebrated  Minstrels;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  mark  after  title;  sheet  no.  253;  sold 
by  Partridge  (3). 

T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Geo.  W.  Peckham. 

Double  t.  o.  border.  22.5  x  15  cm. 


2382.  THE  TWO  LOVERS.— T/zere  was  an  old  woman  who 
somewhere  did  dwell  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  A  highly  romantic  Song,  to  the  tune  of  Vilikins  and  his 
Dinah;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15  cm. 

2383.  THE  TWO  PICKETS. -SjZew^y,  watchfully,  weary  of 
day  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  David  A.  Warden;  with  narrative 
preceding  text:    "This  beautiful  song  is  founded  on  a  thrill- 
ing incident  of  the  present  rebellion". 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Send  Johnson  25  cents  and  he  will  forward  you 
the  Music;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.;  [sold  by]  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  15.8  cm. 

2384.  TWO  YEARS  AGO.-/  was  a  glorious  Wide-Awake 
(6  vs.  and  chors.) 

By  a  Drafted  Wide -Awake. 

a.  19.5  X  6  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Orange  glazed  paper  (oxidized).   22.7  x  7.5  cm. 

2385.  U.  S.  G.  A  SONG  FOR  THE  TIMES.-/  suppose  you 
have  heard  of  the  great  Commander  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Advs:   Send  for  Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album 
Drolleries,  and  Orders  supplied  at  Publisher's  Prices  by 
Geo.  P.  Jenkins;  [publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  portrait  of  U.  S.  Grant,  col.   21  x  14  cm. 

2386.  UMBRELLA  COURTSHIP. -A  belle  and  a  beau  would 
walking  go  (6  vs.)  Air.— "Yankee  Volunteer." 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  15  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  454;  "Comic  Song"  after  title;  sold  by  Par- 
tridge (2). 

T.  o.  border.   21.4  x  14.4  cm. 

c.  With  5  vs.;  [without  Air;]  sheet  no.  927;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  15.7  cm. 

2387.  UNCLE  BILL.  A  PARODY  ON  "NANCY.  TILL,"- 
Way  up  town  near  the  top  of  the  hill  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:   "New  Song". 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   25.5  x  15  cm. 
UNCLE  EDWARD,  see  OLD  UNCLE  EDWARD. 

2388.  UNCLE  GABRIEL.-/  was  gwan  to  Sandy  Point  de 
Oder  arternoon  [sic]    (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

Yellow  paper;  A-J  border;  t.  o.  border  below  title. 
22.5  X  15.1  cm. 

2389.  UNCLE  NED.—/  once  knew  a  darkey,  and  his  nam.e 
was  Uncle  Ned  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24.8  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24  x  15.5  cm. 


160 


c.  As  sung  by  de  Colored  Society  in  General;  with  3  chors; 
adv:   Price  One  Cent.  All  the  New  Songs  constantly  on 
hand. 

T.  o.  border.   20  x  11  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  [As  above;  without  border.]   19.3  x  ii.s  cm. 

2390.  UNCLE  PAT'S  CABIN. -Wow  all  brave  sons  of  Erin 
(6  vs.)  Air:   Uncle  Mike. 

By  John  Cross;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

2391.  UNCLE  SAM  AND  BETSY.  Our  country's  cause  is 
in  a  fix  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Dixie  Land. 

Sung  by  Miss  Jennie  Wilkinson,  at  the  Kossuth  Free 
Concert  Saloon,  S.  Seventh  St.,  below  Market;  publ.  Warren 
(2),  (6). 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto 
"Our  Country".  20.5  x  12  cm. 

2392.  UNCLE  SAMMY.—/  am  a  simple  darkey,  I  come 
from  Old  Virginny  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Billy  Birch,  at  Maguire's  Opera  House; 
2nd  Song:   "Ham-Fat";  publ.  Boyd;  adv:   20,000  Songs  For 
Sale. 

T.  o.  border.   22.1  x  13.8  cm. 

2393.  UNCLE  SAM'S  BOYS.-New  songs  of  late,  we've  had 

a  score  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:— King  of  the  Cannibal  Islands. 

Written  by  H.  Angelo,  expressly  for  the  Scott  Legion; 
publ.  T.  G.  Funston. 

T.  o.  border.   22.2  x  11.5  cm. 

2394.  UNCLE  SAM'S  FARM.-0/aZZ  the  mighty  Nations,  in 
the  East  or  in  the  West  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.  Walk  in  de 
Parlor  and  hear  de  Banjo  Play. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.  24  x  14.7  cm. 

c.  Tune:  "Walk  into  the  parlor  boys,  and  hear  the  banjo 
play";  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.1  x  14.8  cm. 

d.  Tune:  "Walk  into  my  parlor,  boys,  and  hear  the  banjo 
play." 

A-J  border;  eagle.  20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   25.5  x  I6.8  cm. 

f.  Title:  "Uncle  Sam's  Farm  not  to  be  Divided!";  with 
7  vs.  and  chor.  slightly  varying;  [without  "Tune";]  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

g.  Title:  "Uncle  Sam's  Fence";  with  10  vs.  and  chor. 
slightly  varying;  "Tune— 'Uncle  Sams  Farm'  ".  22.7  x 
14.2  cm.  (cropped) 

2395.  UNCLE  SNOW.— 0/;,  my  name  is  Uncle  Snow  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  By  Ben  Cotton;  Air.— Happy  Land  of  Cannan;  sheet  no, 
853;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   22  x  13.4  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  with  longer  lines  and 
slightly  varying  te.xt. 

T.  o.  border.   20.9  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

2396.  UNCLE  TIM  THE  TO'P'E'R.-There  was  an  old  Toper, 
his  name  was  Uncle  Tim  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 


Print.  Andrews;  adv:   All  the  New  Songs  constantly  on 
hand.   Price  One  Cent,  each. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2397.  UNCLE  TOM'S  RELIGION. -Far  away  from  wife  and 
children  (3  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  over  200  nights  at  the  National  Theatre,  N.Y., 
in  the  Drama  of  "Uncle  Tom's  Cabin.";  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  14  cm. 

b.  Sung  over  300  nights  in  the  Drama  of  'Uncle  Tom's 
Cabin'  at  the  National  Theatre,  New-York;   print.  Jackson. 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  n  cm. 

2398.  THE  UNCONSTANT  LOVIER  [sic]. -Oh!  it's  meet- 
ing's a  pleasure,  and  it's  parting's  a  grief  (4  vs.) 

By  J.  H.  Collins;  publ.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

2399.  UNDER  THE  GASLIGHT.  OR  POOR  LITTLE  LAURA. 
—  Under  the  gas-light,  while  the  snow  falls  (3  vs.) 

Words  by  Geo.  Cooper;  music  by  Henry  Tucker;  music 
obtained  of  Wm.  Hall  &  Son  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

2400.  UNDER  THE  WILLOW  SHE'S  S  LEE  PING. -J7rarfer  the 
willow  she's  laid  with  care  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  198, 
col.  20.5  X  13.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  248a,  col.   20.5  x 
12.7  cm. 

2401.  UNFURL  THE  GLORIOUS  BANNER. -C/«/MrZ  the 
glorious  banner,  let  it  sway  upon  the  breeze  (4  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower  cor- 
ners. 23.5  X  15.2  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  27, 

col.   20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  Adv:    Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  33a,  col.;  [publ.) 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  41a,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.5  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  455;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.   21.5 
X  13  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  21.5  x 
13  cm. 

2402.  UNFURL  THE  STARS  AND  STRIPES-C/n/wrZ  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  M.  L.  Hofford;   printed  by  permission;  Lee  & 
Walker,  Music  and  Musical  Instruments;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

UNFURL  THE  STARS  AND  STRIPES,  see  also  MASSA, 
MASSA,  HALLELUJAH!  THE  FLAG'S  COME  BACK  TO 
TENNESSEE. 

2403.  UNHAPPY  JEREMUH  A  HIGHLY  POPULAR 
COMIC  SONG.— /'rf  often  heard  of  married  life,  of  pleasures 
without  equal  (5  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Happy  Hezekiah". 


161 


a.  Print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.5  cm. 


UNION  BATTLE  CRY,  see  ABE  LINCOLN'S  BATTLE 


b.   Title:   "Unhappy  Jeremiah. 
A-J  border.   23.2  x  15  cm. 


publ.  Auner  (2). 


2404.  THE  UNIONl— Fellow  soldiers,  join  the  chorus  (5  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.  Air.— "Gay  and  Happy.";  adv:   This  Song  and  500  others, 
can  be  bought  at  Mrs.  Murphy's;  print.  J.  W.  Du  Bree. 

Double-line  border  with  comer  fleurons.   20  x  11  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Miss  Fanny  Forrest,  at  the  New  Grotto 
Saloon,  Corner  Fifth  and  Chestnut  Sts.;  print.  Warren, (3). 

T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  12  cm. 

2405.  THE  UNION.  A  NATIONAL  SONG-T/ze  Union!  The 
Union!  The  hope  of  the  free  (5  vs.) 

By  Francis  De  Haes  Janvier;  music  by  J.  M.  Deems; 
publ.  Philip  &  Solomons;  cop:   1861,  Philip  &  Solomons, 
DC  D.C.;  copyright  secured. 

a.  With  music  to  1st  vs.  and  chor.  printed  within  shield 
on  recto;  text  on  verso. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  recto  of  sheet  in  red  and  blue, 
with  eagle  and  motto  ' '  Liberty  and  Union  Now  and  Forever 
One  and  Inseparable".   22  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  On  double  sheet;  with  text  printed  within  shield  on  1st 
page,  and  music  to  1st  vs.  and  chor.  on  3rd  page. 

1st  page  in  red  and  blue,  with  eagle  and  motto  "Lib- 
erty and  Union  Now  and  Forever  One  and  Inseparable." 
23  X  14.2  cm. 

2406.  THE  VmONl-When  pestilential  strife  (4  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air,  "Lillie  Dale." 

Headed:   "The  Union!";  2nd  song:   "Re-Union";  pub- 
lished at  No.  94  Washington  Street  Boston    [William  V. 
Spencer];  adv:   Price,  .  .  .  Two  Cents. 

Double-line  border.   25  x  18.5  cm. 

2407.  THE  UmON.  —  When  traitors  hold  conventions  (3  vs. 
and  chor.) 

By  J.  E.  Gerristi. 

T.  o.  border.   19  x  11  cm.  (cropped) 

2408.  UNION  ALPHABET.—^  is  for  Anderson,  both  gal- 
lant and  brave  (52  lines)  Tune— "Continental  March." 

Copyright  Secured;  print.  Harris. 

Double-line  border  with  cornerpieces.   20.5  x  10.2  cm. 

2409.  UNION  &  LIBERTY,-///  M;ere  ask'd  to  write  a  piece 
(5  vs.) 

By  James  M 'Cully,  Jr.;  Philadelphia,  March  22nd, 
1861. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.   20.6  x  14.2  cm. 

2410.  UNION  &  LIBERTY.  — TTze  Union,  Boys  it  is  our 
birthright  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  21.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  "And"  in  title;  sheet  no.  778;  Air.— Crambam- 
bule;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  21.8  x  13  cm. 

2411.  UNION  BANNER-CRY. -0/!,  say  can  you  see  urithout 
blasting  the  sight  (3  vs.  with  music)  Air.— Star-Spangled 
Banner. 

Words  by  Rev.  T.  J.  Greenwood;  publ.  Wm.  V.  Spencer 
[and]  Russell  &  Patee. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  rounded 
comers,  in  red;  eagle  with  flag,  col.   15.2  x  10. 2  cm. 


CRY. 

UNION  BONNIE  BLUE  FLAG, 
FLAG. 


see  BONNIE  BLUE 


2412.   THE  UNION  BOYS. -White  folks,  hold  your  tongues , 
listen  to  my  ditty  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:    Flip,  Flap. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  22.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border. 


24.4  X  15.6  cm. 


c.  With  period  and  dash  after  Air;  as  sung  by  J.  H.  Taylor, 
the  celebrated  ban] oist;  sheet  no.  1044;  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  WAIT  FOR  THE  LAGER  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 


d.   [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   21.7 


X  13  cm. 


2413.  THE  UNION  CRUSADE.-i/o.'  patriot  warriors  of  the 
North  (5  vs.) 

Cop:   1861,  Thomas  W.  Strong,  SDN.Y.;  publ.  Strong. 
Eagle  on  shield,  motto  "The  Union  must  and  shall  be 
preserved".  26.3  x  13.4  cm. 

2414.  THE  UNION  "DIXIE."— vl way  doum  South  were  [sic] 
grows  the  cotton  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

For  Sale  at  Doyle's. 

T.  o.  border;  floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto 
"America".  20.4  x  12.2  cm.  (cropped) 

2415.  UNION  EMOTIONS.-O/z.'  we'll  hang  Wendell  Phillips 
to  a  sour  apple-tree  (3  vs.  with  prose  and  chors.)  Air: 
Glory  Hallelujah. 

a.  Written  by  John  C.  Cross;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  written  for  Sam  Sharp- 
ley  by  John  C.  Cross;  sheet  no.  1216;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  21.6  x  13.2  cm. 

2416.  THE  UNION  FLAG.  — T/te  Union's  hallowed  ensign 
streams  (3  vs.) 

Cop:    1861,  Thomas  W.  Strong,  SDN.Y.;  with  note: 
"The  Stars  and  Stripes,  adopted  as  the  national  emblem  in 
June,  1777,  were  unfurled  for  the  first  time  in  the  decisive 
battle  of  Saratoga  .  .  .";  publ.  Strong. 

Eagle  on  shield  with  flags  and  motto  "E  Pluribus 
Unum".  25.7  x  15.9  cm. 

2417.  THE  UNION  FLAG.  WRITTEN  ON  A  PRESENTA- 
TION.—0/z  see  that  sweet  Flag  'neath  the  sun  brightly 
beaming  (5  vs.)  Air— The  Exile  of  Erin. 

Headed:   "Songs  Of  The  War";  by  R.  Hill,  a  discharged 
Soldier,  First  Wisconsin  Heavy  Artillery;  poetical  adv: 
Since  fate  such  luckless  times  can  send;  2nd  song:  "The 
Mississippi  Chase,  Or  the  Gunboat  Fight  at  Memphis,  Sixth 
of  June,  1862." 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  motto  "Victory";  and  a  river- 
boat.   26  X  21  cm.  (cropped) 

2418.  THE  UNION  FLAG  TRIUMPHANT  WAVES. -T/ze 
Union  Flag  triumphant  waves  (7  vs.) 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  People  of  the  United 
States;  by  C.  H.  Readel;  Philadelphia,  April  9th,  1865; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

Double-line  border.   18.5  x  n.2  cm. 


162 


2419.  UNION  FOR  EVER'.— The  Union  of  States  for  ever 
will  stand  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Words  and  Music  by  George  R.  Cromwell;  by  permis- 
sion of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1),  extensive  Publishers  of 
Music;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   25.8  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Union  Forever";  copied  by  permission  of 
Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1),  Music  Publishers,  owners  of  the 
copyright;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  176,  col.   20.4  x 
12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  red  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  179;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).   19.5  X  11.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  179,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

2420.  UNION  FOR  EVER— Fe  sons  of  Liberty  assert  your 
birthright  (4  vs.)  Air.  — Logic  of  Buckam. 

By  D.  K.  42  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  V;  sheet  no.  894;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

2421.  "THE  UNION  FOREVER,  "-/'m /or  i^ze  Union,  now 
and  forever  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune  "Free  and  Easy." 

[Signed]  J.  P.  H[arper]. 

a.  Te,\t  in  white  oval  within  single-line  border;  green 
paper.  20.3  x  13. 5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.   20.3  x  13.5  cm. 

2422.  THE  UNION  FOR  EVER  FOR  ME\-America!  Gem 
of  this  wide,  wide  world  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.  23  x  13.9  cm. 

2423.  UNION  HAPPY  LAND  OF  CANAAN. -O  I'm  almost 
79  and  I'll  tell  you  in  my  rhyms  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  by  permission  of  Charley  Monroe,  and  sung  by 
him  at  the  Metropolitan  Saloon,  Chestnut  below  Seventh; 
publ.  Warren  (1),   (2),   (5);  for  sale  by  Search. 

T.  o.  border;  eagle  with  flag.  24  x  15.3  cm. 

2424.  THE  UNION,  IT  MUST  BE  PRESERVED.-^  band 
of  traitors  vile  have  sworn  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Blow  ye 
Windy  Mornings. 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.1  x  15. 1  cm. 

2425.  THE  UNION  MARSEILLAISE.-AroKse,  ye  men  who 
love  your  Nation  (3  vs.)  Air:   Marseillaise  Hymn. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  21.3  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  border  with  eagle,  drapery 
with  stars  and  stripes,  col.  25  x  15.3  cm. 

c.  With  period  and  dash  after  Air;  sheet  no.  744;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.1  x  14.2  cm. 

2426.  THE  UNION  MARSEILLAISE. -Arjse.'  Arise!  ye 
sons  of  patriot  sires  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— The  Mar- 
seilles Hymn. 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  109;  hdpc.  without  title.   18.8  x   12.2  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Adv:   Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  109,  col.  20.8  x  13.3  cm. 


c.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  207,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

2427.  THE  UNION  MUST  AND  SHALL  BE  PRESERVED. - 
O  say,  can  a  thought  so  vile  and  base  come   (4  vs.)  Air: 
Star-Spangled  Banner. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   21  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  813;  by  Henry  Hack  Jr.;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  flag  border,  stars  within  two  stripes,  col.  21 

X  13.5  cm. 

2428.  THE  UNION  MUST  5TMi'D\- Arise,  arise!  your 
Country  now  calls  you  (4  vs.  and  music) 

Words  and  Music  by  Mrs.  CM.  Meriam;  dedicated 
by  permission  to  Maj.  Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan;  with 
McClellan's  letter  of  acceptance  below  verses,  Camp  near 
Rectortown,  Va.,  November  7th,  1862;  Van  Ingen  &  Snyder, 
Engravers;  print.  Ringwalt  &  Brown;   cop:    1862,  Mrs. 
C.  M.  Meriam,  EDPa. 

Eagle  with  shield  at  top,  Zouave  and  Union  soldier 
holding  banners  at  sides,  col.   29.1  x  22.2  cm. 

2429.  UNION  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIEI-JVom;  gentlemen  all  lis- 
ten, a  story  you  shall  know  (8  vs.) 

Words  by  Wattle  Rusher;  sung  by  Miss  Annie  Rush,  at 
Kossuth  E.xchange  Seventh  St.,  Below  Market;  publ.  Warren 
(2);  advs:   Pike's  Vegetable  Tooth  Ache  Drops,  and  You  will 
save  30  per  cent. 

T.  o.  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

2430.  THE  UNION  ROOT  HOG  OR  DIE.— Away  down  in 
South  Carolina,  they're  kicking  up  a  muss  (7  vs.) 

By  Mick  Ryan,  3d.  Regiment  N.  Y.  Volunteers;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  23  x  13.9  cm. 

2431.  THE  UNION  SOLDIERS  ADDRESS  TO  THE  FLAG.- 
When  freemens'  hearts,  with  one  accord  (10  vs.  and  2 
chors.) 

The  following  Poem  was  composed  and  written  by  John 
Y.  Wren,  of  Battery  G.  Second  Artillery,  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers,  while  acting  Canonier  ...  at  Fort  Lincoln, 
D.C.,  December  2d,  1863  .  .  .;  sold  only  by  W.  W.  Pell. 

T.   o.  border;  flags.   22.5  x  12.9  cm. 

2432.  THE   UNION  SOLDIER'S  VBJ^^ER.-Almighty  God! 
eternal  friend  (3  vs.)  Tune— "Old  Hundred." 

Dedicated  to  the  U.  S.  Army,  by  H.  V.  McCuUy;  print. 
Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.3  x  10.5  cm. 

THE  UNION  SOLDIER'S  SONG,  see  KEYSTONE 
BRIGADE. 

2433.  THE  UNION  SOUG.-Boys  and  girls  are  all  for 
Union  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  ^ 

Words  by  Wm.  Oland  Bourne.  20.2^  11.3  cm. 

2434.  UNION  SONG.   BELL  AND  EVERETT  CAMPAIGN 
SONG— Tfee  ivide-awakes  they  like  to  bluster  (7  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air— Dixie's  Land. 

By  Frank;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:    1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.   22.8  x  14.6  cm. 

2435.  THE  UNION  VOLUNTEER. -Cowc  list  to  me  one 
and  all  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 


163 


Composed  by  Walter  W.  Warren  and  dedicated  to 
Corporal  Wm.  H.  Smith,  Co.  G,  Col.  Small's  26th  Penna 
Regiment;   sung  nightly  at  the  Kossuth  Concert  Saloon,  7th 
St.  above  Chestnut,  by  Jacob  S.  Search;  publ.  Warren  (1). 

T.  o.  border,  with  soldier  at  top  and  soldier  with 
horse  at  bottom.   23.2  x  14.3  cm. 

2436.  THE  UNION  VOLUNTEER. -Sie^/ori^z,  ye  sons  of 
freedom  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   25.5  x  15.8  cm. 

2437.  THE  UNION  VOLUNTEERS. -Come  all,  ye  gallant 
Northerners ,  I  pray  you  lend  an  ear  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
The  Yacht  America. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.4  x  16  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  22.8  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  quotation  marks  around  Air;  by  Mrs.  N.  Willis; 
sheet  no.  1083;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  AMERICAN 
GIRL  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22.2  x  13,8  cm. 

THE  UNION  WAGON,  see  THE  OLD  UNION  WAGON. 

2438.  THE  UNION.  WHOLE  HOG  OR  ^O'H'E— Listen  to  de 
Banjo,  Oh  listen  to  me  sing  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  by  H.  Angelo,  and  sung  nightly  at  Sanford's 
Opera  House,  by  Sam.  Sharpley,  With  Thunders  of  Applause. 
A-J  border.  21.4  x  13.7  cm. 

2439.  THE  UNION!  WHOLE  HOG,  OR  NONE. -Come,  lis- 
ten all,  you  old  and  young,  I've  got  a  song  that's  new  (5  vs. 
and  2  chors.) 

Composed  by  William  H.  Murphy;  This  Song  can  be 
bought'at  Mrs.  Murphy's;  print.  Du  Bree. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners.   20.3  x  10.9  cm. 

2440.  THE  UNITED  BROTHERS. -Wg  are  a  band  of 
brothers  united  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Wm.  C.  Marion. 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.   22  x  9.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  added.   24.3  x 

14.8  cm. 

2441.  UNITED  STATES  SANITARY  COMMISSION, 
WOMEN'S  PENN'A  BRANCH,  1307  CHESTNUT  STREET. - 
My  dear  Mrs.  Plitt  (8  vs.) 

Philadelphia,  May  15,  1865.   20.2  x  12.2  cm. 

2442.  THE  UNKNOWN  SOLDIER!  WHO  IS  HE? -Lei  me 
gaze  upon  this  picture  (6  vs.) 

Headed:   "Whose  Father  was  He?",  with  explanation 
beginning:   "After  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  July  1st,  2d 
and  3d,  1863,  a  Union  Soldier  was  found  .  .  .  where, 
wounded,  he  had  laid  himself  to  die;"  by  William  H.  Hay- 
ward;  cop:   1863,  Wm.  H.  Hayward,  DCMd.;  with  note  at 
foot  identifying  soldier  as  Sergt.  A.  Humerton,  Co.  C, 
154th  N.Y.  Vols.;  print.  Slater. 

Single -line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  26.1  x 

14.9  cm. 

UNLUCKY  DINAH  CROW,  see  WITCHING  DINAH 
CROW. 

2443.  THE  UNWELCOME  VISIT.  OR,  DOMESTIC  ASIDES. 
— "/  really  take  it  very  kind  (4  vs.)  Air:   The  Washing-Day. 


(1). 


Sheet  no.  1351;  as  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ.  Wrigley 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  15.6  cm. 


2444.  UP  IN  TENTH  AVENUE.— 7  was  promenading  out, 
one  lovely  morn  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1197;  sung  with  great  success  by  Tony 
Pastor;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

UP  WITH  THE  FLAG,  LONG  MAY  IT  WAVE,  see 
HOIST  UP  THE  FLAG. 

2445.  UP  WITH  THE  RED,  WHITE  AND  BLUE. -Mji 
friends,  will  you  all  have  compassion  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

Composed  by  J.  MoQuaid;  This  Song  can  be  had  at  440 
Monroe  Street;  print.  Du  Bree. 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   23.8  x 
15.2  cm. 

2446.  THE  UTAH  HORROR!    THE  DARKEST  DEED  OF 
THE  19TH  CENTURY.  MOUNTAIN  MEADOW  MASSACRE- 
Come  all  ye  Sons  of  Freedom  (11  vs.) 

Bruce 's  Printing  House. 

T.  o.  border.   21.2  x  8.6  cm. 

2447.  THE  VACANT  CHAIR.-We  shall  meet,  but  we  shall 
m.iss  him.  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Henry  S.  Washburn.] 

a.  Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   26.5  x  16  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   23  x  14. 7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   25.2  x  16.1  cm. 

d.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  with  3  chors. 
A-J  border.   20.3  x  13.1  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  [Title  as  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border;  chair.   21  x  12.5  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.   22.9  x  12.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  with  different  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill- 
Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  15.2  cm. 

h.    [Without  "The"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.    19.8  x 
11.4  cm. 

i.    Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  155,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  with  advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500 
Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  129,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   19.3  x  12.8  cm. 

k.   Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  sheet  no.  1111. 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   22.8  x  14.2  cm. 

2448.  VALENTINE  &  JULIA. -My  Julia  dear,  my  dear 
wife,  I'm.  going  to  the  war  (3  vs.)  Air:  Jeannette  and 
Jeannot. 

Written  by  Chas.  A.  Clark  for  Valentine  L***  of  Dur- 
yee's  Zouaves;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   24.8  x  15.7  cm. 

2448A.  VEGETABLE  IVORY  ALPHABET.-A  stands  for 
Articles  fancy  and  rare  (37  lines). 


164 


Cop;    1862,  William  Kingsley,  EDPa.;  adv.  on  verso: 
Great  Natural  Curiosity!  Ivory  That  Grows  on  Trees; 
print.  E.  Ketterlinus. 

Printed  in  red  and  blue;  red  and  blue  border.   21.4  x 
12.8  cm. 

2449.  VENETIAN  BOAT-SONG.  — Tte  daybeam  is  over  the 
sea  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  609;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

2450.  VENGEONS  LA  VATW.'E.-Debout,  Fits  de  I'Union 
(3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Gloire  aux  martyrs  victorieu.x! 

Hymne  patriotique  par  Gustave  Dime,  ouvrier- 
estampeur;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  iVIarsan  eagle  border,  col.  23.6  x  15.8  cm. 

2451.  VERLANGEN  NACH  JESUM.-Wo  is t  Jesus  mein 
Verlangen  (9  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  18.2  cm. 

2452.  VERSES  COMPOSED  TO  ILLUSTRATE  THE  CASE 
OF  A  YOUNG  SOLDIER,  WHO  FELL  IN  THE  BATTLE  OF 
ANTIETAM,   SEPT.    17TH,  A.D.,  1862. -Come  my  Chris- 
tian friends  and  neighbours  (18  vs.) 

By  G.  W.  W.  Tanner,  of  Wisconsin;  print.  Swan. 
T.  o.  border.  24.5  x  15  cm. 

2453.  VERSES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MISS.  ANNIE  LILLY, 
ONE  OF  THE  VICTIMS  OF  THE  ACCIDENT  ON  THE 
NORTH  PENNSYLVANIA  RAILROAD. -Jfj?zrf  reader,  view 
this  happy  throng  (4  vs.) 

Advs:   You  will  save  25  per  cent,  by  getting  your 
Printing  done,  and  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.; 
publ.  Johnson  (3). 

a.  T.  o.  border;  train.   23.3  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  T.  o.  border.   22.6  x  14.6  cm. 

2454.  VETERAN  CAVALRY  SONG. -Come  listen  all  your 
Cavaliers,  a  song  to  you  I'll  sing  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— 
Old  Virginia  Low  Lands. 

By  Smooth  Bore,  of  the  1st  Me.  Cavalry;  publ.  Hard- 
wick;  cop:   1863,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  D.C. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  105, 
col.   20.5  X  12.7  cm. 

2455.  THE  VETERAN'S  RETURN  FROM  THE  ViAR-'Twas 
on  a  Sabbath  mom  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  of  Philadelphia, 
the  celebrated  Army  Song  Publisher,  formerly  a  member 
of  the  Ringgold  Artillery,  of  Reading,  Pa.;  adv:   Sutlers 
and  dealers  supplied  with  all  of  Gay's  celebrated  Army 
Songs . 

Letter  paper;  child  on  memorial  holding  flag,  figure 
of  Liberty  and  battle  scene  at  top.  Zouave  to  right  on  page, 
and  naval  scene  at  bottom,  in  orange.  24.7  x  17.3  cm. 

THE  VETERAN'S  RETURN  FROM  THE  WAR,  see  also 
THE  SWORD  OF  BUNKER  HILL. 

2456.  THE  VETERAN'S  SO^G. -Come  gather  'round  the 
Camp-fire  and  till  the  break  of  day  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Old  Virginia  Low  Lands. 

By  John  Ross  Di.\;  cop:    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  200,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  107,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.7  cm. 


2457.  VICTORIOUS  GENERAL  GRANT. -Tis  of  a  noble 
soldier  (8  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air— "The  Spider  and  the  Fly." 

Composed,  published,  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;   cop: 
1868,  James  D.  Gay,  EDPa. 

Single-line  border;  Union  soldiers  returning  home 
from  war,  in  oval.   23  x  14.3  cm. 

2458.  VICTORIOUS  GENERAL  GRANT!-'Tjs  of  a  noble 
soldier  that  now  I  am  going  to  sing  (5  vs.  and  chors.) 
Air— "No  Irish  Need  Apply." 

Published  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay,  the  celebrated 
Army  Song  Dealer;  adv:   All  of  Gay's  beautiful  Army  Songs 
are  lithographed  in  colors;  cop:    1865,  James  D.  Gay, 
EDPa. 

T.  o.  border.   19.6  x  11.3  cm.  (cropped) 

2459.  VICTORY  AND  DEATH. -Bwi  late  from  town  and 
village  (10  vs.) 

[Signed]   Belle  F.;  copyright  secured  by  W.  T.  Foster. 
Mourning  border;  eagle  with  flags,  arms,  and  musical 
instruments.   20.1  x  13.1  cm. 

2460.  VICTORY  AT  LAST. -For  many  years  we've  waited 
(3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Mrs.  M.  A.  Kidder;  music  by  Wm.  B.  Brad- 
bury. 

a.  Cop:    1865,  Wm.  B.  Bradbury,  DN.J.;  [sold  by]  Wm.  B. 
Bradbury  (2);  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  eagle.   23.2  x  14.2  cm. 

b.  [Without  names  of  author  and  composer;]  with  excla- 
mation point  at  end  of  title;  sung  at  the  raising  of  the  Old 
Flag  over  Fort  Sumter,  April  14th,  1865;  music  obtained 
of  Wra.  B.  Bradbury  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   22.2  x  13.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25.1  x 
15.5  cm. 

e.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  cop:  1865,  Wm. 
B.  Bradbury,  DN.J.;  music  publ.  by  Wm.  B.  Bradbury  (2), 
and  obtained  of  him;  publ.  Johnson  &  Co.   18.9  x  10.4  cm. 

f.  From  Bradbury's  "Golden  Censer". 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  62, 
col.;  wreath  surrounding  title  with  motto  "E  Pluribus 
Unum".   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  62a.   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

i.    [Without  names  of  author  and  composer;]  sheet  no. 
984;  Sung  at  the  raising  of  the  "Old  Flag"  over  Fort  Sum- 
ter, April  14,  1865;  music  obtained  of  Wm.  B.  Bradburj- 
(1);  [publ.]  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.7  x  14.2  cm. 

2461.  VILIKINS  AND  HIS  DINAH!  OR,  THE  CUP  OF  COLD 
PISON.  — Tjs  of  a  rich  merchant  who  in  London  did  dwell 
(6  vs.  and  moral) 

a.  Sung  nightly  by  Charley  White,  with  Shouts  of  Applause, 
at  49  Bowery,  N.Y.;  print.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint 
added. 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  15. 4  cm. 

b.  With  "and"  spelled  "avd",  and  without  comma  in  title; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.9  x  16  cm. 


165 


2462.  VIR-GIN-A.— Now  kind  folks,  your  attention,  come, 
listen,  one  and  all  (11  vs.)  Air:  New-Jers-A. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.5  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  By  William  Buckley,  of  New  York. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  34,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.6  x  13  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  208,  col.   21.2  x 
13.2  cm. 

d.  By  William  Buckley,  of  New  York;  sheet  no.  1109; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1)  [imprint  upside-down]. 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

VIRGINIA  LOWLANDS,  see  SEVEN  DAYS  FIGHT  BE- 
FORE RICHMOND. 

2463.  THE  VIRGINIA  ROSE-BUD;  OR,  THE  LOST  CHILD. 
— /  had  a  bud— 'twas  in  my  garden  growing  (2  vs.  and 
chors.) 

a.  As  sung  by  F.  Leslie,  at  White's  Concert  Saloon,  53 
Bowery,  New  York;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Astley's  imprint  pasted  over 
Andrews'.  23.2  x  15.2  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Virginia  Rose  Bud";  1st  line:   "I  had  a  flower 
within  my  garden  growing"  and  other  variations;  chor. 
divided  in  four  parts;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   600  different 
kinds  of  Songs. 

A-J  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

d.  [Without  "The"  and  punctuation  in  title;]  sheet  no. 
966;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.2  cm. 

2464.  A  VISIT  TO  BARNUM'S  MUSEUM.-/  came  to  this 
city  but  a  few  days  ago  (5  vs.)  Air:  The  Man  in  the  Moon. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.6  x  I6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1148. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  15.2  cm. 

2465.  VIVA  L'AMERICA.— AToftfe  Republic]  happiest  of 
lands  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  3  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border;  eagle.  21  x  12.3  cm. 

b.  Sung  by  J.  Stratton,  at  Bryant's  Minstrels,  472  Broad- 
way, N.Y.;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border.   24.7  x  16.3  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Printing  of  all  description 
executed. 

A-J  border.   22.8  x  13.5  cm. 

d.  With  "Vive"  in  title;  print.  Johnson  (2);  advs:  Cards, 
Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.,  Johnson  is  now  Publishing  the 
Largest  and  the  best  selection  of  Songs,  and  Ball  Room 
Monitor,  by  Prof.  C.  Brooks. 

Floating  hemisphere  with  flag  and  motto  "Our  Country" 
between  two  eagles.  20.5  x  13  cm. 

e.  2nd  song:  "Hail  to  the  Chief";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.  24  x  14  cm. 


f.  Adv:   500  Dlustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  17,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).   21  x  13  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  17a,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   21  X  13.2  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  17b,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus 
(1).   21  X  13  cm. 

i.    Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  176,  col.   19.7  x 
12  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  179,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

20.2  X  12.5  cm. 

k.   Sheet  no.  413;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col.   25 
X  14.5  cm. 

2466.  VIVE  LA  COMPAGNIE.-Lei  Bacchus  and  Venus  li- 
bations pour  forth  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22  x  14.6  cm. 

2467.  A  VOICE  FROM  ELLSWORTH.-^  ^afrioi's  name 
will  never  die  (7  vs.) 

By  Mrs.  R.  M.  Heldrick;  Respectfully  dedicated  to  the 
New  York  Fire  Zouaves. 

a.  [Without  author;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.   24  x  16  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  mark  after  title;  sheet  no.  [7?]  70; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.  20.3  x  12.2  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1056;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

2468.  THE  VOICE  OF  THE  PHILADELPHIA  UNION 
MEETING  I— P7e  love  the  North,  the  South  and  East  (7  vs.) 

First  vs.  headed  "Resolved";  2nd  vs.  headed  "There- 
fore, Resolved".  32  x  16.2  cm. 

2469.  VOICI  LE  SABRE  DE  MON  PERE.   HERE  IS  THE 
SABRE  OF  MY  FATHER. -Vozcz  le  sabre  de  man  pere 
(4  vs.  and  chors.,  with  English  translation) 

From  the  Opera-Bouffe  of  J.  Offenbach:   La  Grande 
Duchesse;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25  x  16  cm. 

2470.  THE  VOLUNTEER. -^rfjeM  to  peace  and  all  its 
charms  (8  vs.) 

Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  93,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

b.  [As above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

19.3  X  11.5  cm. 

c.  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  102,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  13  cm. 

d.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  103,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).    19.5  x  12.2  cm. 

2471.  THE  VOLUNTEER.— Oearesf  Mother,  I  am  going 
(3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air.— "Annie  Lisle". 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Catalogues  furnished  on  appli- 
cation. 

Double-line  border.   18.7  x  10.7  cm. 

2472.  THE  VOLUNTEER.— Owr  Country  calls  us  to  the 
Southern  tented  field  (10  vs.) 

24  X  15.4  cm. 


166 


2473.  THE  VOLUNTEER  FIREMAN. -T/ze  Evening  hour 
doth  wane  (41  lines)  Tune.— Old  Dog  Tray. 

By  W.  M.  S.,  of  the  Mechanic;  print.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   22.3  x  9.5  cm.  (cropped) 

2474.  VOLUNTEER'S  MEMENTO. -Frzewrf  .  .  .  of  our 
Union,  true  to  our  Nation  (6  vs.  with  3  bars  of  music) 

Copyright  secured  in  1862;  patent  applied  for  by 
James  P.  Herron;  [with  spaces  to  be  filled  in  by  soldier.] 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  ribbon  border  around  vs.  in 
red;  eagle  with  flag,  in  red  and  blue.   21  x  14  cm. 

2475.  VOLUNTEERS'  SONG.— Orezoard.'  onward!  is  the  cry 
now  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Free  and  Easy. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  21  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  94,  col;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

d.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  144.   21.5  x  13.7  cm. 

VOLUNTEER'S  SONG,  see  also  COMRADES,  JOIN 
THE  REVEILLE. 

2476.  VOLUNTEER'S  WATCH  SOT^G. -Behold!  how 
brightly  Freedom's  morning  (3  vs.)  Air.— Behold!    how 
brightly  breaks  the  morning. 

Words  by  A.  J.  H.  Duganne;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
A-J  border.  21.5  x  13  cm. 

2476A.  VOTE  FOR  CHARLEY  BROWN !-Democrafs  who 
love  your  State  (7  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.   21.1  x   14.3  cm. 

2477.  WAIT  FOR  THE  LAGER.  A  PARODY  ON  "WAIT 
FOR  THE  WAGON."— WiZ/  you  come  with  me,  my  Billy, 
into  the  cellar,  near  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border,  col.   24.5  x  I6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  719;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  UNION 
BOYS  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

WAIT  FOR  THE  TURN  OF  THE  TIDE,  see  PRETTY 
LITTLE  FLORA. 

2478.  WAIT  TILL  YOU  GET  IT. -Of  late,  around  town,  a 
new  by-word's  come  out  (6  vs.  and  chors.)  Air:  Gee  ho, 
Dobbin. 

Written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  235,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  Adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;   hdpc. 

Magnus  247b,  col.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 

Magnus  248b,  col.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  (As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  251,  col.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 


f.    Sheet  no.  1198;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.5  x  14  cm. 

2479.  WAITING  FOR  THE  UAY- Ah!  my  heart  is  weary, 
waiting  (3  vs.) 

[Publ.]   De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:   1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.5  x  16.3  cm. 

2480.  WAKE,  DINAH,  WAKEl-H'afee,  Dinah,  wake!  the 
bright  moon  is  beaming  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Poetry  &  Melody  by  S.  C.  Howard;  Sung  nightly  by 
Geo.  Christy  &  Woods'  Minstrels;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  24.8  x  14.9  cm. 

2481.  WAKE  NICODEMUS!— iVicodemMS  the  slave,  was  of 
African  birth  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  Henry  Clay  Work. 

a.  With  comma  after  "Nicodemus"  in  first  line;  Root  & 
Cady  (2),  Music  Publishers;  publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.   22.8  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Music  published  by  Root  &  Cady  (2);  obtained  of  Fred- 
erick Blume  (1);  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  I6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25  x  16  cm. 

d.  Root  &  Cady,  Music  Publishers  (2);  publ.  Johnson  & 
Cartlich,  and  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   24.6  x  13.5  cm. 

e.  Root  &  Cady,  Music  Publishers  (2);  print.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:   Look  out  for  Prof.  Brook's  Ball  Room  Monitor. 
Third  Edition.   19  x  10.5  cm. 

2482.  WALK  ALONG,  30mi.-All  the  way  from  North- 
Carolina  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Wood's  Minstrels;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.6  x  16.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  title,  and  without  hyphen  in  first 
line;]  as  sung  by  Eph  Horn  of  Wood's  Minstrels;  sheet  no. 
1029;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

WALK  IN  JOE,  see  COME  BACK,  STEBEN. 

2483.  WALKING  DOWN  BROADWAY. -T/ze  sweetest  thing 
in  life,  and  no  one  dare  say  nay  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1103;  by  William  Lingard;  music  published 
by  W.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.9  x  15.3  cm. 

WANAMAKER'S  SECESSION  SONG,  see  SOUTHERN 
WAGON. 

2484.  THE  WANDERER'S  FARE  WELL.- Fa  reu'eH,  dear 
friends,  once  more  farewell  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  Sung  by  Dick  McGowan,  Banjoist  and  Comedian; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   25.2  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  538;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  25  x  16.6  cm. 

2485.  WANDERER'S  FAREWELL. -T/ie  sails  are  all 
swelling,  the  streamers  float  gay    (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   22.8  x  14.7  cm. 


167 


2486.  WANDERER'S  RETURN. -0«ce  more  I  stand  by  the 
fountain  clear    (4  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  22.5  x  15  cm. 

2487.  WANDERING  REFUGEE. -FareweH  mother,  home 
and  friends  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

Music  publ.  by  Louis  Tripp;  publ.  Johnson  (2).   20.5  x 
12.8  cm. 

2488.  WANTED  A  SUBSTITUTE. -Wa?zierf  (2  SaftsijiMfe  (3 
vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  had  at  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Auner  (4). 
T.  o.  border.   20.3  x  11.7  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Want-A  Substitute";  by  George  P.  Holt;  Tune: 
Uncle  Sam's  farm;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  141,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

2489.  THE  WAR  IN  EUROPE. -From  Europe  the  news  did 
take  us  by  surprise  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:'  Billy  Barlow. 

By  Frederick  S.  English;  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.  22.7  x  14.5  cm. 

2490.  THE  WAR  IS  OVER  NOW.-Tfee  Cruel  war  is  over; 
Peace  has  come  again,  sirs  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Bow, 
wow,  wow. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  2  chors.;  sheet  no.  973;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  14.5  cm. 

2491.  WAR  SONG  FOR  THE  79TH  REGIMENT. -Sons  of 
Freedom  now  arise  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:  "79th  Regiment";  by  Mrs.  Winter;  dedicated  to 
Samuel  McKinzie  Elliott,  Lieut-Col.  commanding  the  N.Y. 
79th.  Regt.  per  favour  Commissary  John  White;  Air:  Scots 
wha  a  Wallace  bled;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   26  x  17  cm. 

b.  Air— "Scott's  wha  hae  wi  Wallace  Bled";   sheet  no. 
768;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
21.5  x  13.4  cm. 

2492.  WAR  SONG  OF  THE  NEW-YORK  69TH  REGIMENT. 
—The  country  calls  thee,  Sixty-Ninth  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

2493.  WAR  SONG  NO  2  OF  THE  69TH  REGIMENT. -Come 
all,  you  Irish  hayroes,  where  iver  that  you  be  (5  vs.  and 
chor.)  Air:   My  Boy  with  the  Auburn  Hair. 

a.  With  "Regimet"  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border,  ool.  23.3  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  border,  eagle,  drapery  with 
stars  and  stripes;  col.  25  x  I6  cm. 

c.  Title:   "New  War  Song  of  the  69th  Regiment";  with 
period  and  dash  after  "Air";  sheet  no.  513;  By  D.  S.  F.  of 
Brooklyn;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   28  x  21.7  cm. 

d.  Title  and  author  as  above;  sheet  no.  769;  publ.  Wrigley 
(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.5  x  12.7  cm. 


2494.  WAR-SONG  OF  THE  UNION.-To  arm^,  Ye  Brave] 
obey  your  Country's  call  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   The 
Standard-Bearer. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  With  Air  in  quotation  marks;  sheet  no.  798;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  flag  border,  stripes  with  starry  top,  col. 
24.3  X  14.7  cm. 

2495.  WARREN'S  ADDRESS.   TO  THE  AMERICAN  SOL- 
DIERS BEFORE  THE  BATTLE  OF  BUNKER  HILL.- 
Standl  the  ground's  your  own  my  braves  (3  vs.)  Air. — 
Bruce's  Address. 

a.  Sheet  no.  767;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  By  Saugerties  Bard;  sheet  no.  668;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  15.7  cm. 

2496.  WAS  MY  BROTHER  IN  THE  BATTLE ?-TeiJ  me, 
tell  me  weary  soldier  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  2  vs.  and  2  chors.;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
T.  o.  border.   20.6  x  12  cm. 

b.  With  exclamation  point  after  title;  by  Stephen  C.  Fos- 
ter; music  had  of  Horace  Waters  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  22  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  [Without  question  mark  after  title;]  with  2  vs.  only; 
Respectfully  Dedicated  to  A.  G.  Corbit,  Company  M,  of  the 
28th  Regt.  Pa.  Vols.;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Send  for 
Johnson's  New  Catalogue. 

A-J  border.  21.4  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  With  2  vs.  and  2  chors. 
A-J  border.  20.2  x  13  cm. 

f.  With  2  vs.  and  1  chor.;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.5  cm. 

g.  By  C.  S.  Foster;  adv:  Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glo- 
rious Union  Packet. 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  101, 
col.   20.2  X  12.7  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  bronze  ink.  20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

i.    By  C.  S.  Foster;  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ. 
Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  107,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

j.    By  C.  S.  Foster. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20  x  12  cm. 

k.  Sheet  no.  844;  music  by  Horace  Waters,  New  York; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

1.    By  Stephen  C.  Foster;  [without  question  mark  after 
title;]  sheet  no.  1128. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  23  x  15.3  cm. 

2497.  WASHINGTON,  STAR  OF  THE  WEST. -T/jere's  a 
Star  in  the  West  that  will  never  go  down  (3  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  Quayle. 


168 


a.  [Without  "as  sung  by";]  with  "never"  before  "will" 
in  1st  line;  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border;  bust  of  Washington.   21  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Delestatius;  adv:   Juvenile,  Blank,  and  School 
Books;  print.  Grattan  &  Bro. 

T.  o.  border.   17.7  x  10.4  cm. 

c.  [Without  comma  in  title;]  adv:  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  23,  col.   19.7  x 
10.8  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  double-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  24, 
col.   21.2  X  13.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   Purchase  Magnus's  Ornamental 
and  Glorious  Union  Packet.   21  x  13  cm. 

2498.  WASHINGTON'S  BIRTH  DAY  .-Awake,  arouse,  the 
day's  at  hand  (3  vs.) 

a.  Written  by  Archibald  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4);  copy- 
right secured. 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.   24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  335;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  14.9  cm. 

WASHINGTON'S  STATUE,  see  SWORD  SONG. 

2499.  THE  WATCHER. -Tfce  night  was  dark  and  fearful 
(4  vs.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23  x  14.7  cm. 

2500.  THE  WATCHMAN.— Good  ni^t,  good  night,  my  dear- 
est (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  15  cm. 

2501.  THE  WATCHMAN.— Pas<  twelve  O'clock:  past  twelve 
(4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  657;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

2502.  THE  WATCHMAN  NO.  2.-Tke  snow  was  falling  fast 
and  deep,  and  cold  the  north  wind  swept  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  727;  2nd  song:   "The  Rose  of  Tralee";  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.2  x  15.5  cm. 

2503.  THE  WATERFALL.-/  love  the  sweet  music  that 
floats  on  the  breeze  (8  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1308;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.6  cm. 

THE  WATERFALL,  see  also  ORIGINAL  WATERFALL. 

2504.  THE  WATER-MILL.— Listen  to  the  water-mill, 
through  the  livelong  day  (6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  71;  publ.  Wehman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  15.4  cm. 

2505.  THE  WATERY  GRAVE. -Tfee  sun  had  set  in  its 
crimson  bed  (3  vs.) 

Composed  by  A.  B.  E.;  2nd  Song:   "Nellie,  Wilt  Thou 
Be  My  Bride?;"  publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   23.9  x  14.9  cm. 

2506.  THE  WAVING  BANNER.-ATow  we  raise  our  joyful 
voices  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 


Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  14  cm. 

2507.  WAY  DOWN  IN  CAIRO.— O/z,  Ladies  don't  you  blush, 
when  I  come  out  to  play  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  George  S.  Harris. 
T.  o.  border.   16.5  x  10  cm. 

WAY  DOWN  IN  CAIRO,  see  also  STRIKE,  BOYS, 
STRIKE  and  TRUST  TO  LUCK. 

2508.  WAY  DOWN  SOUTH  IN  DE  ALABAMA. -'Waji  doum 
South,  in  de  Alabama  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

2509.  WE  ALL  HAVE  HEARTS  TO  FIGHT  FOR  HOME.- 
We  all  have  hearts  to  fight  for  home  (4  vs.)  Air— "Our 
warrior  hearts  for  battle  burn." 

Headed:  "Dedicated  to  the  Native  American  Party, 
by  R***";  2nd  song:  "The  Natives  Are  Up,  D'Ye  See"; 
Copyright  Secured. 

T.  o.  border.   25.8  x  22  cm. 

2510.  WE  ARE  COMING,  FATHER  ABRAHAM,  600,000 
MORE.— We  are  coming,  father  Abraham,,  six  hundred 
thousand  m.ore  (4  vs.) 

[By  James  Sloan  Gibbons.] 

a.  With  "Abraham"  spelled  "Abra'm"  in  title  and  ex- 
clamation point  at  end;  "Abram"  in  1st  line;  words  by 

J.  CuUen  Bryant;  music  by  D.  A.  Warden;  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.1  x  14.4  cm. 

b.  Title  and  authors  of  words  and  music  as  above;  with 
"Abra'm"  in  1st  line;  publ.  Auner  (3);  music  obtained  of 
D.  A.  Warden  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14.9  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Three  hundred  Thousand  more";  first  line  with 
"Abraam"  and  ending  "three  hundred  thousand  more"; 
[sold  by]   Louis  Bonsai. 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  13.7  cm. 

d.  Title  and  first  line  as  above;  but  with  "Abraham"  in 
1st  line;  from  the  New  York  Evening  Post.   13.9  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  [Without  "600,000  More"  in  title;]  but  with  chor.; 
short  lines;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   26  x  15.1  cm. 

f.  [Without  comma  after  "Coming"  in  title;]  with  last 
part  of  verses  indented  as  chor.;  words  by  J.  Cullen 
Bryant;  music  by  D.  A.  Warden;  song  with  Piano  accom- 
paniment had  at  Johnson's  (2);  publ.  Johnson  (2).  24.2  x 
15.2  cm. 

g.  [As  above,  but  without  "song  with  Piano  accompani- 
ment .  .  .";]  with  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc. 
24.5  X  15.3  cm. 

h.   [As  above;]  but  with  different  adv:   Prof.  Brooks' Ball 
Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  21.4  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

i.    [Without  commas  after  "Coming"  and  "Abraham"  in 
title;]  with  last  part  of  verses  indented  as  chor.;  [publ.] 
Johnson  &  Co. 

Double-line  border.   18.3  x  11.8  cm. 

j.    Title:   "Si.x  Hundred  Thousand  More";  with  "Abraam" 
in  first  line;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.2  x  15.5  cm. 

2511.  WE  ARE  COMING  SISTER  MARY. -On  a  stormy 
night  in  winter  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 


169 


Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   24  x  15  cm. 

2512.  "WE  ARE  FOR  THE  UNION. "-Cowe  now,  boys, 
and  listen  to  me  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air— "Gay  and 
Happy." 

By  a  Penn'a.  Volunteer,  driven  out  of  Baltimore. 
Eagle  with  flag.   24.2  x  12.3  cm. 

2513.  WE  ARE  FOR  THE  VNION .-Our  Flag  and  the  Union! 
in  the  North  is  the  cry  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Gay  and 
Happy. 

Revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
respectfully  dedicated  to  Wheelock  M.  Gardner,  Esq. 
Brooklyn,  N.Y. 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  15.1  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Our  Country's  Flag";  with  quotation  marks 
enclosing,  "Our  Flag  and  the  Union,"  in  first  line;  [without 
"Revised  and  printed  .  .  ."  and  "Respectfully  dedicated 

.  .  .";]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   24.4  x  16.1  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25.4  x  16.6 
cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  a  song  for  Volunteers; 
composed  by  William  Sutherland;  with  a  list  of  "National 
Songs"  at  bottom;  adv:   Union  Badges,  Letter  and  Note 
Paper,  etc. 

A-J  border.   22.9  x  15.3  cm. 

e.  First  line  and  publ.  as  above;  adv:   Cards,  Circulars, 
Bill-Heads,  etc. 

T.  o.  border.   22.5  x  11.8  cm. 

f.  With  "New  York"  written  out  in  dedication;  with  semi- 
colon after  "Union"  in  first  line;  adv:  500  Illustrated  Bal- 
lads [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  2,  col.;    [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.7  x  13.5  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  4,  bronze  ink;  [publ.]   Mag- 
nus (1).   21  X  13.1  cm. 

h.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  21,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
21.3  X  13.5  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  22,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus  (1). 
19.8  X  10.8  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  206a,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus. 
20.1  X  10.9  cm. 

k.    [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  212,  col.;  [publ.]   Magnus. 
20.1  X  10.9  cm. 

WE  ARE  FOR  THE  UNION,  see  also  THE  PENNSYL- 
VANIAN  BATTLE  CRY. 

WE  ARE  OUT  ON  THE  OCEAN  SAILING,  see  A  HOME 
BEYOND  THE  TIDE. 

2514.  [WE  HAVE  CHOSEN  FOR  OUR  CHIEF]— We  have 
chosen  for  our  chief  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Tramp,  tramp, 
tramp." 

18  X  11.7  cm. 

2515.  WE  HAVE  LIVED  AND  LOVED  TOGETHER.-We 
have  lived  and  loved  together  (3  vs.) 

a.    [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.9  x  15.8  cm. 


b.  Publ.  and  sung  by  James  D.  Gay;  2nd  song:  "Soldier's 
Wife  &  Home";  adv:  Gay's  Illustrated  Song  Sheet;  [sold  by] 
A.  Hennings. 

Single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  183a.  23.5  x  14.1  cm. 

c.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.   20.3  x 

12.6  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  239,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.7  cm. 

2516.  WE  MAY  BE  HAPPY  YET.-O/z,  smile  as  thou  wert 
wont  to  smile  (2  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "There's  Music  In  The  Air";  print. 
Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 

T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  636;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.7  x  15.5  cm. 

2517.  WE  MEET  AG  AJN  .-When  friend  from  friend  is 
doomed  to  stray  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  874;  as  sung  by  Frank  Spear,  with  Budworth 
&  Campbell's  Wood's  Minstrels;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.8  x  15.5  cm. 

2518.  WE  MEET  BY  CHANCE.  — IWzen  evening  brings  the 
twilight  hour  (3  vs.) 

a.  With  "Met"  for  "Meet"  throughout;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.  22.3  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  334;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.2  x  15.3  cm. 

2519.  WE  MET.  — We  met,  — 'twas  in  a  crowd— and  I  thought 
he  would  shun  m.e  (3  vs.) 

"A  beautiful  sentimental  song";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.6  cm. 

2520.  WE  PARTED  BY  THE  RIVER  SIDE. -We  parted  by 
the  river  side  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1073;  Words  and  Music  by  William  S.  Hays; 
music,  published  by  J.  L.  Peters  &  Brother,  can  be  ob- 
tained of  J.  L.  Peters;  [publ.]  Partridge  (2). 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   23.2  x 
15.4  cm. 

2521.  WE  SHALL  SEE  HER  NO  MORE.-Ofe,  the  bright 
sunny  South  where  the  sugar  cane  grows  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  C.  Hart;  music  by  F.  Buckley;  Sung  with 
Tremendous  Applause  by  Buckley's  celebrated  Band  of 
Minstrels;  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.4  x  14.2  cm. 

2522.  WE  STAND  BENEATH  OUR  FLAG  SOLDIERS' 
CWySM^.— Proudly  beneath  the  old  flag  we  stand  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  G.  D.  Russell  &  Go's  Music  Store; 
publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.5  x  15  cm. 

2523.  WE  WERE  BOYS  AND  GIRLS  TOGETHER.-We  were 
boys  and  girls  together  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.;  2nd  song:   "My 
Love  Is  Like  A  Red,  Red  Rose";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24.5  x  16  cm. 

2524.  WE  WILL  HAVE  THE  UNION  STlLh.-Will  you  lis- 
ten to  my  ditty  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Free  and  Easy  still. 

By  Robert  Smith;  with  5th  vs.  beginning:   "Let  but 
General  Scott  command  us  .  .  ." 


170 


a.  [Without  "still"  in  Air;]  with  Sth  vs.  beginning:   "Let 
but  McClellan  command  us  .  .  .";  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   23.1  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [Without  author's  name;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22.3  x  13.9  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  13.5  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  572;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.7  x  14.1  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  837;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

2525.  THE  WEARING  OF  THE  GREEN. -O  Paddy  dear, 
and  did  you  hear  the  news  that's  going  round  (6  vs.) 

Sung  by  J.  H.  Glenny,  at  Niblo's  Theatre,  in  the  Great 
Sensation-Play  of  "Arrah-na-Pogue";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.8  x  16.7  cm. 

2526.  THE  WEARING  OF  THE  GREY-li.— They've  trampled 
on  poor  Ould  Ireland  (5  vs.) 

Sung  by  J.  H.  Glenny,  the  celebrated  Irish  Comedian 
and  Vocalist,  in  the  drama  of  "Arrah  na  Pogue"  at  Niblo's 
Garden,  New-York. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clovni  border.   24.4  x  15.9  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  361;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.1  x  15. 1  cm. 

2527.  WEARING  OF  THE  GREEN.-/'w  a  poor  forsaken 
croppy  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  col.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

2528.  THE  WEDDING  OF  BAhhYVOB.Y.Y.H. -Descend  ye 
chaste  Nine,  to  a  true  Irish  bard  (10  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4);  copyright  secured. 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border,  col.   25.3  x  16.6  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  754;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  moon  border.   24.7  x  15.6  cm. 

WEE-HAW-KEN,  see  ISABELLA  WITH  THE  GINGHAM 
UMBRELLA. 

2529.  WEEP  NOT,  COMRADES,  FOR  ME. -Weep  not,  oh, 
weep  not!  Comrades  for  me   (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Extract  from  the  Diary  of  a  Union  Soldier:  "Manassas, 
July  22nd,  1861.— Ever  shall  I  remember  the  touching  inci- 
dents of  yesterday  .  .  .";  words  and  music  by  Geo.  Reed 
Cromwell;  publ.  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  157,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19.7  x  12.2  cm.  (cropped?) 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;   hdpc.  Magnus  192, 

col.  20.3  X  12.6  cm. 

2530.  WELCOME,  BONNY  BVSiD.  —  Tha'rt  welcome  little 
bonny  brid  (11  vs.) 

[Signed]  Samuel  Laycock. 
T.  o.  border.  25.8  x  11.2  cm. 

2531.  WELCOME,  BRAVE  BOYS.   RICHMOND  FALLS: 
THE  WAR  IS  O'ER.-Richmond falls !  the  War  is  o'er 
(5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Words  by  O.  Wheelock;  set  to  music  by  J.  Marsh  (2); 
cop:   1865,  J.  Marsh,  EDPa.;  publ.  Auner  (5);  with  narra- 


tive of  "The  Religious  Card-Player"  on  verso. 

Double-line  border;  eagle  with  flag.   20.2  x  12.2  cm. 

2532.  WELCOME  HOME.-M'efcome  home!  thou  long-lost 
rover  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Bal- 
lads [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  188,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19.3  x  11.3  cm. 

2533.  WELCOME  HOME.-Fe  Braves!  whose  hands  on 
Mexic's  plain  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

The  celebrated  song,  sung  by  Miss  Fanny  Heron,  & 
Messrs.  Guibilei  &  Johnston,  with  great  applause,  at  the 
banquet  in  honor  of  the  return  of  The  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers; written  by  John  W.  Watson,  Esq.;  music  composed 
and  arranged  by  Professor  James  Bellak;   cop.;  adv:   words 
and  music  to  be  had  at  the  People's  Music  Store,  Si.xth 
above  Chestnut  Street,  Phila.;  with  title  on  1st  page,  text 
on  2nd  and  3rd;  headed:   "Welcome  Song";  print.  Bryson 
&  Cooper. 

Wavy  line  border  with  ornamental  corners;  2  bee-hives 
and  fruit  on  1st  page;  2  cannons  and  lyre  on  last  page. 
19.7  X  12.7  cm. 

2534.  WELCOME  HOME. -My  Mary  comes !— It  is  the  hour 
(2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  314;  by  Geoge  [sic]   P.  Morris;  publ.  Wrigley 

(1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.6  x  16.3  cm. 

2535.  WELCOME  MOTHER.-WeZcome,  mother!  now  I 
greet  thee  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24  x  16.I  cm. 

b.  With  comma  in  title;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  68,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12. 5  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  604;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

2536.  WELCOME  OUR  GALLANT  69TH.-TAe  Sixty-Ninth 
you  all  must  say  (2  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Marshal  Ney. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border,  col.   23.9  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  border,  eagle,  drapery  with 
stars  and  stripes,  col.  24.4  x  16.2  cm. 

2537.  WELCOME  SONG,  DEDICATED  TO  THE  COM- 
MANDER, OFFICERS  AND  CREW  OF  THE  U.  S.  SLOOP- 
OF-WAR  KEARSARGE,  ON  HER  ARRIVAL  AT  THE 
CHARLESTOWN  NAVY  YARD,  NOV.  7,  1864. -Welcome, 
brave  Kearsarge's  crew  (18  vs.) 

By  Phineas  Stowe,  Pastor  of  1st  Bap.  Mariners' 
Church,  Boston;  Bethel,  Corner  of  North  Bennet  and 
Hanover  Streets;  publ.  by  Committee  of  the  Mariners'  Ex- 
change, for  the  National  Sailors'  Fair;  print.  W.   &  E. 
Howe;  with  facsimile  signature  of  the  Captain  of  the  Kear- 
sarge,  Nov.  14,  1864. 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.   29.9  x  16.8  cm. 

2538.  WELCOME  SONGS  FOR  SOLDIERS. -Wefconie, 
welcome,  sweetly  rings  (34  vs.  and  music  to  first  vs.) 
[Air]  "See  the  Conquering  Hero  Comes." 


171 


This  welcome  is  respectfully  dedicated  to  the  Heroes 
in  our  Army  and  Navy  on  their  Return  Home,  By  their 
Friend,  Phineas  Stowe,  Seamen's  Chaplain,  Boston. 

Wavy-line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.  31.7  x 
24.7  cm. 

2539.  A  WELCOME  TO  JAMES  STEPHENS. -^H  hail  to 
Jimmy  Stephens  (8  vs.) 

By  Michael  O'Donnell;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25.2  x  16.9  cm. 

WELCOME,  WELCOME  HOME,  see  THE  DEAREST 
SPOT  ON  EARTH  TO  ME  IS  HOME,  SWEET  HOME. 

2540.  WE'LL  FIGHT  FOR  UNCLE  SAM.-/  am  a  modern 
hairo:  my  nam.e  is  Paddy  Kearney  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
Whiskey  in  the  jar. 

a.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border. 


24.6  X  15.8  cm. 


b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes 
in  lower  corners.   23  x  14  cm. 

c.  With  quotation  marks  around  Air;  sheet  no.  1127;  sung 
by  J,  C,  Wallace,  Irish  Comedian  and  Vocalist,  with 
unusual  success;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.4  x  14.3  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  21.9  x 
13  cm. 

2541.  WE'LL  FOLLOW  GRANT  ONCE  MORE.-0;z.'  raise 
the  banner  high  again  (2  vs.)  Air— "Auld  Lang  Syne." 

By  Dexter  Smith.   17.9  x  10.4  cm. 

2542.  WE'LL  FOLLOW  THE  FLAG-0'er  the  land  and 
over  the  ocean  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Air— Gay  and  Happy;  music  obtained  of  Sep.  Winner 
(2);  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  flag.  23.3  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [Without  "the"  before  "ocean"  in  1st  line;]  Tune— 
"Gay  and  Happy";  revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the 
Public  Schools,  by  permission  of  the  Publisher,  Sep. 
Winner  (2);  print.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads, 
Circulars,  etc. 

Flag.   20.6  X  12.6  cm. 

2543.  WE'LL  HAVE  A  LITTLE  DANCE  TO-NIGHT,  BOYS. 
—Oh,  listen  to  this  good  old  tune  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Andrews;  with  Astley's  imprint  added. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  149;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  MARCHING 
ALONG  NO.  2  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  23  x  15.5  cm. 

2544.  WE'LL  HAVE  BUT  GRANT,  THE  GEN'RAL,  THERE. 
—  Why  have  our  traitor  foes  of  late  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1100;  [sold  by]   Partridge  (2). 
Double-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.  20.1  x 
12.5  cm. 

2545.  WE'LL  KEEP  WASHINGTON-Cowe,  arouse,  ye 
noble  freem.en  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air  "Gay  and  Happy." 

By  John  L.  Zieber,  dedicated  to  John  C.  Hornby,  Comp. 
E,  1st  Regt.  Artillery,  P.V. 

A-J  border.  20  x  12.6  cm.  (cropped) 

2546.  WELLAR'S  JAPAN  PASTE  BLACKING  HAS  RE- 
CEIVED THE  FIRST  PREMIUMS  AND  A  MEDAL  AT  THE 


FAIRS  OF  NEW  YORK,  PHILADELPHIA  AND  BALTIMORE. 
—Who  would  have  m.ud-covered  shoes  (10  vs.)   17.1  x  12  cm. 

WE'RE  MARCHING  ALONG,  see  MARCHING  ALONG. 

2547.  WE'RE  MARCHING  DOWN  TO  DIXIE'S  LAND-Good 
news,  good  news ,  from  Dixie's  Land  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Tune— Dixie's  Land. 

Publ.  Johnson  (2);  sold  by  J.  M.  Hess.   20.7  x  12.9  cm. 

2548.  A  WET  SHEET  AND  A  FLOWING  SEA.-^  wet  sheet 
and  a  flowing  sea  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  A-J  border.  20.2  x  13.8  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  exclamation  point  at  end  of  title;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(4). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [Without  first  "A"  in  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  sailing  ship  and  cargo  on  wharf.   23.8  x 
14.9  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  at  end  of  title;]  sheet  no.  889;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24.7  x  15,6  cm. 

2549.  WE'VE  A  MILLION  IN  THE  FIELD.- TOe  Flags  are 
flying,  and  brave  men  are  dying  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music,  composed  by  Stephen  C.  Foster,  obtained  of 
S.  T.  Gordon  (2);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   23.1  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  With  short  lines;  written  and  composed  by  Stephen  C. 
Foster;  publ.  S.  T.  Gordon  (1). 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  213b,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 
(1).   20.4  X  11.9  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  164.   20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  with  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  187,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  Written  and  composed  by  Stephen  C.  Foster;  sheet  no. 
929;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T."  o.  border.   19  x  11.7  cm. 

2550.  WHACK  ROW  DE  DOW  .—Good  people  all,  both  great 
and  small  (4  vs.,  2nd  vs.  reading:   "Down  South,  there's 
General  Beauregard".) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.  26.2  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  26  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  845;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24. 7x  13.7  cm. 

2551.  WHACK  ROW  DE  DOW;  OR,  HUNKEY  BOY  IS 
YANKEE  DOODLE.— ATozf  white  folks  all,  both  great  and 
small,  come  listen  to  my  song  (5  vs.  and  chor.,  2nd  vs. 
reading:   "On  Yorktown's  old  historic  site".) 

Headed:   "New";  as  sung  by  Frank  Moran  of  Cam- 
cross  &  Dixey's  Minstrels  and  Opera  Troupe;  advs:  Cards, 
Circulars,  Bill -Heads,  etc.,  and  Look  out  for  our  New 
Songs;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   24.5  x  15  cm. 

2552.  WHACK  ROW  DE  DOW;  OR,  HUNKEY  BOY  IS 
YANKEE  DOODLE.— .Wom;  white  folks  all,  both  great  and 


172 


small,  come  listen  to  my  sorig  (7  vs.  and  chors.,  2nd  vs. 
reading:   "Beauregard  the  traitor's  way  down  South") 

a.  Headed:   "The  Only  Correct  Edition";  publ.  Johnson 
(2). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  14  cm. 

b.  Headed:   "Original  and  Only  Correct  Edition";  with 
comma  after  "Dow";  as  sung  by  Frank  Kerns,  at  the  Kos- 
suth E,xchange,  Seventh,  below  Market;  publ.  Walter 
Warren  (2);  advs:  You  will  save  30  per  cent,  and  Pike's 
Vegetable  Tooth  Ache  Drops. 

T.  o.  border.   22  x  12. 2  cm. 

2553.  WHACK  ROW  BE  DOW.  NO  2. -The  Rebels  they  are 
getting  scared  (4  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Dan  Bryant. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  23  x 
14.7  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1031;  publ.  Wrlgley  (1);  [with  BUNCH  OF 
BLUE  RIBBONS  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  14.2  cm. 

WHA'S  NA  PROUD  O'ROBIN,  see  A  HUNDRED  YEARS 
AGO. 

2554.  WHAT  A  HEEL  SHE'S  GOT  BEHIND  HER.-Down  in 
de  hills  ob  Indian  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— The  Girl  I  Left 
Behind  Me. 

As  sung  by  Mr.  J.  Carroll;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  13.5  cm. 

2555.  WHAT  ARE  THE  WILD  WAVES  SAYmC?— What  are 
the  wild  waves  saying  (3  vs.,  uneven  length) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1142;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.2  x  15.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.    24  x 
15.4  cm. 

WHAT  FAIRY  LIKE  MUSIC,  see  DAYS  OF  ABSENCE. 

2556.  WHAT  I  DON'T  LIKE  TO  SEE. -A  song  I'll  sing  now 
in  jingle  and  rhymes  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   24.6  x  16  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  161;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  15.6  cm. 

2557.  WHAT  I  DON'T  LIKE  TO  SEE.-What  a  queer  set  of 
creatures  we  are,  I  declare  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Scroggy  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  12  cm.  (cropped) 

2558.  WHAT  IRISH  BOYS  CAN  DO.  ANSWER  TO:   NO 
IRISH  NEED  APPLY.— Tfeeji  insult  an  Irishman,  and  think 
nought  of  what  they  say  (7  vs.) 

a.   (Without  colon  in  title;)  Words  by  William  Sutherland, 
author  of  "Columbia's  Glorious  Banner";  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.   22.8  x  14.8  cm. 


b.   Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border. 


c.  [As  above;]   De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25  x 
16.2  cm. 

d.  Title:   "Answer  to  No  Irish  Need  Apply";  words  by 
William  Sutherland,  author  of  "Columbia's  Glorious 
Banner";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor. 

A-J  border.   23.3  x  15.4  cm. 

2559.  WHAT  IRISHMEN  HAVE  DONE.-Fe  gallant  sons  of 
Erin  Isle,  come  listen  to  my  lay  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air: 
The  Irish  jaunting  car. 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  adv:  Ten  illustrated  Songs, 
publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  61,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.5  x  12  cm. 

WHAT  IS  HOME  WITHOUT  A  MOTHER,  see  HOME 
WITHOUT  A  MOTHER. 

2560.  WHAT  IS  HOME  WITHOUT  A  SISTER?— H^zf  is 
hom.e  without  a  sister  (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  at  Oliver  Ditson  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  Auner 
(3). 

A-J  border.   23.4  x  15.3  cm. 

2561.  WHAT  MAN  WOULD  BE  WITHOUT  A  WOMAN. - 
Though  much  is  said  and  sung  about  a  woman's  tongue 
(4  vs.)  Air:    Ladies'  Tongues. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   24.8  x  16.4  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  722;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2562.  WHAT  NORAH  SAID.  REPLY  TO  NORAH  O'NEAL. - 
It  is  lonely  ye  are  then  without  me  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Words  by  Arthur  Matthison;  music  by  W.F.  Wellman, 
Jr.;  music  obtained  of  C.  H.  Ditson  &  Co.;  [publ.]   De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  With  "The  Reply"  in  title;  sheet  no.  736;  Oliver  Ditson 
&  Co.  (1),  Music  Publishers. 

T.  o.  border.   20  x  15.4  cm.  (cropped) 

2563.  WHAT  OTHER  NAME  THAN  THINE,  MOTHER.- 
What  other  name  than  thine,  mother  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:  1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

2564.  WHAT  WILL  MRS.  GRUNDY  S AY  1 —Oh ,  fashion  now 
is  all  the  rage  in  houses,  hoops  and  dress  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  14.6  cm. 

WHAT  WILL  THE  NEIGHBOURS  SAY,  see  BLOW  YE 
WINDS. 

2565.  WHAT  WILL  YOU  DO,  L0VE?-W7ia/  will  you  do. 
Love,  when  I  am  going  (6  vs.) 

a.  As  sung  by  C.  J.  Lane;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.4  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (4).   24  x  15.7  cm. 

2566.  WHAT'S  THE  iiEWSl-"WJiene'er  we  meet,  you  al- 
ways say  (7  vs.) 

T.  o.  [Johnson]   border.   20.2  x  11.5  cm.  (cropped) 


24.7  X  16.2  cm. 


173 


2567.  WHEN  ABE  COMES  MARCHING  ROME. -When 
"Abe"  comes  marching  home  again  (6  vs.)  Air:   When 
Johnny  comes  marching  home. 

By  "Our  Ned";  adv:   Clubs  and  Dealers  can  have  their 
orders  filled  by  addressing  Mason  &  Co. 

a.  Adv:   Now  ready,  McClellan  Campaign  Songster. 
T.  o.  border.   20.5  x  12.2  cm. 

b.  Title:   "When  Abe  comes  marching  Home  again. 
Fremont  Campaign  Song";  headed:   "Copyright  Secured". 

Double-line  border;  bust  of  Fremont.   23  x  16  cm. 

2568.  WHEN  I  AM  ON  A  DISTANT  SHOHE. -When  I  am  on 
a  distant  shore  (4  vs.)  Air:   The  Harp  that  once  through 
Tara's  Hall. 

By  M.  J.  Million. 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  172,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1119;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2569.  WHEN  I  DREAM  THAT  YOU  LOVE  UE.-When  I 
dream,  that  I  love  you  you'll  surely  forgive  (3  vs.) 

A  Favorite  Song;  sung  by  Mr.  Sims  Reeves;  sheet  no. 
980;  2nd  song:   "Give  me  Woman,  give  me  Wine";  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  15.7  cm. 

2570.  WHEN  I  SAW  SWEET  NELLIE  HOME.-/n  the  sky 
the  bright  stars  glittered  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Charles  Melville;  adv:  Ten  illustrated 
Songs;  publ.  Magnus  fl). 

a.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  248b,  col.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  251,  col.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

2571.  WHEN  I  WAS  IN  THE  TOMBS.-/  am  standing  in  the 
cell,  Dina  (3  vs.)  Air.— I'm  Sitting  on  the  Style,  Mary. 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  24  x  14  cm. 

2572.  WHEN  I  WAS  OUT  A  SLEIGHING. -ft  snow'd  so  hard 
the  other  day  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

b.  Printed  as  59  lines;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   25  x  14.7  cm. 

2573.  WHEN  I  WENT  OUT  A  SKATING. -Orae  day,  I  took 
it  in  my  head,  to  go  and  have  a  spree  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.7  x  is. 7  cm. 

b.  Written  by  Frank  Spear  and  Sung  by  him  with  great  ap- 
plause; sheet  no.  869;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24.4  x  15. 5  cm. 

WHEN  JAMIE  COMES  MARCHING  HOME,  see  WHEN 
JOHNNY  COMES  MARCHING  HOME. 

2574.  WHEN  JOHNNY  COMES  MARCHING  ViOWE.-When 
Johnny  comes  marching  home  again  (4  vs.) 

[By  Patrick  S.  Gilmore;]  Music  published  by  Henry 
Tolman  &  Co. 


a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.  23.2  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "music  published";]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  25  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.  25.3  x 

16.3  cm. 

d.  Air.— "Johnny  fill  up  the  bowl.";  published  and  sung 
by  J.  D.  Gay  of  Philadelphia,  the  celebrated  Army  Song 
Dealer  and  Vocalist. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  138,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  without  Gay's  imprint.]  20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

f.  Varying:  Music  published  by  Tolman  &  Co.;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

Indian  procession  with  two  elephants.   21.6  x  10. 7  cm. 

g.  [As  above;]  publ.  Johnson  &  Co. 

Indian  procession  with  two  elephants.  20.5  x  12  cm. 
(cropped) 

h.   Air.— "Johnny  fill  up  the  bowl.";  adv:   Ten  [i]llustrated 
Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  100,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

i.    [As  above;  without  adv.;]  hdpc.  Magnus  176,  col.   20.4 
X  12.5  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  178,  col.;  [publ.]  Magnus  (1). 

20.4  X  12  cm. 

k.  Title:  "When  Jamie  comes  marching  Home";  Air.- 
"When  Johnny  Comes  marching  home.";  varying:  Music 
obtained  of  O.  Ditson  &  Co.;  sheet  no.  875,  in  right  hand 
corner;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  11  cm. 

1.     [As  above;]  with  sheet  no.  printed  in  center.  23.6  x 

15.5  cm. 

m.  Air.— "Johnny  fill  up  the  bowl.";  sheet  no.  1179;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1),  (3-line  imprint). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  24  x  15.2  cm. 

n.   [As  above;]  with  2-line  imprint.  23.9  x  15.2  cm. 

2575.  WHEN  MOTHER  MARRIED  PAP.-Tfeis  world  is  but 
a  hum.bug  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  published  by  Joseph  E.  Winner;  cop:   1868,  J.  E. 
Winner,  EDPa.;  note  from  Winner  granting  publication 
right  to  Auner;  publ.  Auner  (4).   18.9  x  11.3  cm. 

2576.  [WHEN  OUTWARD  BOUND  FOR  DISTANT  SEAS.]- 
When  outward  bound  for  distant  seas  (5  vs.) 

[Signed]  W.A.W.,  Roxborough,  Philadelphia. 
T.  o.  border;  sailing  ship.   21.5  x  14  cm. 

WHEN  SHERMAN  MARCHED  TO  THE  SEA,  see 
SHERMAN'S  MARCH  TO  THE  SEA. 

2577.  WHEN  THE  BOYS  COME  HOME.-T/ze  boys  are 
coming  hom.e  again  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  music  by  Charles  Carroll  Sawyer;  music 
obtained  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  24  x  15.7  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22.5  x  14  cm. 

c.  Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  185, 

col.   20.5  X  12.5  cm. 


174 


d.  [As  above;]  bronze  ink.    19.6  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  blue  ink;  hdpc. 

Magnus  249,  col.   19.4  x  12  cm. 

f.  [As  above;)  hdpc.  Magnus  254,  col.   20.3  x  12.4  cm. 

2578.  WHEN  THE  BOYS  COME  MARCHING  HOME.-T^ze 
Veteran  troops  are  coming  home  (4  vs.  and  2  chors.) 
Air.— "Johnny  fill  up  the  Bowl." 

By  A.  Anderson,  Jan.  1864;  cop:   1864,  A.  Anderson, 
EDPa;  adv:   Address  of  the  Author,  A.  Anderson. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  23.5  x  15. 5  cm. 

b.  Headed:   "Ballad  No.  1." 

T.  o.  border.   21.5  x  12.5  cm. 

2579.  WHEN  THE  CORN  IS  WAVING. -IWzen  the  corn  is 
waving,  Annie  dear  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  Ashton,  At  the  Alhambra  Theater; 
publ.  San  Francisco  News  Company;   print.  Calhoun. 
T.  o.  border;  farmer  with  scythe.   29.4  x  11.6  cm. 

2580.  WHEN  THE  MOON  IS  ON  THE  WATERS. -Wzen  the 
Moon  is  on  the  waters  (2  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Frederick  Blume  (1);  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.2  x  16  cm. 

2581.  WHEN  THE  MOON  ON  THE  LAKE  IS  BEAMING. - 
When  the  moon  on  the  lake  is  beaming  (2  vs.) 

Words  and  music  by  Stephen  Massett;  music  had  at 
Wm.  Hall  &  Sons  (3);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

2582.  WHEN  THE  MOON  WITH  GLORY  BRIGHTENS. - 
When  the  moon  with  glory  brightens  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  M.  J.  Million. 

a.  Music  by  P.  B.  Isaacs;  obtained  from  the  Publishers, 
Firth,  Son  &  Co.;  sung  nightly,  for  weeks,  with  brilliant 
effect,  by  C.  J.  Lockood  [sic]  of  Wood's  Minstrels;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Maiden,  Wilt  Thou  Roam?  ";  [without 
"Words";]  Air:  When  I  saw  sweet  Nelly  home. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  214,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  sheet  no.  1117;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with 
THE  OLD  HOUSE  AT  HOME  and  STRIKE  THE  HARP 
GENTLY  on  verso.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  Music  by  P.B.  Isaacs;  music  obtained  from  Firth  Son 
&  Co.;  sung  by  C.J.  Lockwood  of  Wood's  Minstrels;  sheet 
no.  1230. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22.4  x  15.2  cm. 

2583.  WHEN  THE  SWALLOWS  HOMEWARD  FLY. -When 
the  swallows  homeward  fly  (3  vs.) 

a.  Adv:   Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ.  Magnus 

(1).   21  X  13  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.2  x  12.6  cm. 

2584.  WHEN  THERE'S  LOVE  AT  HOME.  A  SONG  BY  THE 
FIRESIDE. -r/jere's  beauty  all  around  (3  vs.) 


Sheet  no.  587;  Words  by  permission  of  Oliver  Ditson 
&  Co.  (1),  where  music  may  be  obtained;  publ.  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   24  x  14.7  cm. 

2585.  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  DRAFT  IS  OVERl-Deares^ 
William,  they  will  draft  you  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

a.  Sold  by  P.  Jesse;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.5  x  15.5  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  862;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  13  cm. 

e.  By  P.  Jesse;  sheet  no.  1146;  Air:   When  this  Cruel  War 
is  over. 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23.5  x  13.8  cm. 

2586.  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER. -Dearest  love, 
do  you  remember  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  obtained  at  Lee  &  Walker's;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   23.1  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border.   24  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  Words  by  Cha's  Carroll  Sawyer;  music  by  Henry 
Tucker;  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thompson;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   25  x  15  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]   [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.2  x  I6  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  23  x 
14  cm. 

f.  Published  by  James  D.  Gay,  the  celebrated  Army  Song 
Publisher,  formerly  of  the  Ringgold  Artillery  of  Reading, 
Pa. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  border  with  battle  scene, 
Zouave,  ships,  monument  with  flag,  and  figure  of  Liberty 
in  red,  engraved  by  E.  Rogers.  27.5  x  19.5  cm. 

g.  Music  obtained  at  Lee  &  Walker's;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:   Catalogue  of  Songs  furnished. 

Double-line  border.   17.5  x  9.5  cm. 

h.  Cop:   1862,  J.  Magee. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  double-line  border  with  two 
flags  and  motto  "Liberty  and  Union  Forever"  in  red  and 
blue;  bust  of  Liberty  in  red  and  blue.  20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

i.    Adv:  Magnus'  Ornamental  and  Glorious  Union  Packet. 
Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  99,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
21  X  13.2  cm. 

j.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  110,  col.   20  x  12. 4  cm. 

k.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  135,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20  X  12  cm.  (cropped?) 

1.    Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  124,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

m.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  125,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (t). 
20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

n.    [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  126,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

o.  Sheet  no.  781;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 


175 


p.   Sheet  no.  1092;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  oupids  border.   22.5  x  14  cm. 

q.   [As  above;  with  BRUCE 'S  ADDRESS  TO  HIS  ARMY  on 
recto.]   24.3  x  14.7  cm. 

WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER  NO.  2,  see 
PARODY  ON  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER. 

2587.  WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER.  NO.  3. -Dearest 
Sal,  do  you  remember  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  sheet  no.  840;  pubL  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  15.5  cm. 

2588.  WHEN  THIS  DREADFUL  WAR  IS  ENDED.-TWzeK 
this  dreadful  war  is  ended  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  858;  copyright  owned  by  Horace  Waters; 
music  obtained  of  O.  Ditson  &  Co.;   sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.2  x  14.7  cm. 

2589.  WHEN  TWILIGHT  DEWS  ARE  FALLING. -Wten  twi- 
light dews  are  falling  soft  (2  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  lyre  border,  col.   25  x  16  cm. 

WHEN  WE  DWELL  ON  THE  LIPS,  see  THE  KISS. 

2590.  WHEN  YOU  AND  I  WERE  SOLDIER  BOYS.-O,  the 
stormy  times  we  knew  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Music  obtained  at  Oliver  Ditson  &  Go's  (1);  publ. 
Johnson  (2).   18  x  9.7  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Johnson  will  send  the  music  of 
this  song  for  35  cents.   20.3  x  11.6  cm. 

2591.  WHEN  YOU  AND  I  WERE  YOVUG.-Why  art  thou 
weeping,  love,  to-night  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  and  Music  by  J.  Ford;  cop:    1864,  J.  Ford, 
EDPa.;  W.  R.  Smith,  Agt.  Music  &  Musical  Instruments. 
Multi-line  border.  24.6  x  15.4  cm. 

2592.  WHERE  ARE  THE  FRIENDS  OF  MY  YOUTH? - 
Where  are  the  friends  of  my  youth  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.5  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  THE  NEW  RED,  WHITE,  AND 
BLUE  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2593.  WHERE  ARE  THE  HOPES  I  CHERISHED. -Wzere 
are  now  the  hopes  I  cherished  (2  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   24.8  x  15.9  cm. 

WHERE  IS  HOME,  see  ON!  ON!  ERIN!  ON! 

2594.  WHERE  IS  MY  LOYEB.? —  Where  is  my  lover?   can 
any  one  tell  (3  vs.) 

Pnbl.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  24  x  16  cm. 

2595.  WHERE  LIBERTY  DWELLS,  THERE  IS  MY 
COUNTRY.— Wzere  Liberty  dwells  is  m,y  country  (5  vs. 
and  chor.) 

a.   Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.   24.2  x  14.7  cm. 


b.  Music  had  at  Horace  Waters  (1);  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 

corners.   23  x  14  cm. 

c.  Revised  and  Published  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.   21.5  x  12.5  cm. 

2596.  WHERE  THE  BRIGHT  WAVES  ARE  DASHING. - 
Where  the  bright  waves  are  dashing  (3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border,  col.;  cop:    1860,  H.  De 
Marsan,  SDN.Y.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

2597.  WHERE  THE  LIGHTS  SO  CHEERILY. -W^zere  the 
lights  so  cheerily  o'er  youth  and  beauty  glow  (2  vs.) 
Tune.— Tic  tac  goes  the  Mill. 

As  sung  by  the  Columbian  Quartette;  publ.  Johnson  (2). 
A-J  border.   23.3  x  15  cm. 

2598.  WHERE  WAS  MOSES  WHEN  THE    LIGHT  WENT 
OUT?  —When  but  a  child  I  icsed  to  go  to  bed  at  eight  each 
night  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  18;  music  published  by  E.  H.  Harding;  publ. 
Wehman  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  15.2  cm. 

WHERE  WILL  I  GO  WHEN  DIS  WAR  BREAKS  DIS 
COUNTRY  UP,  see  YOUNG  EPH'S  LAMENT. 

2599.  WHERE'S  THAT  BACK  VAYT-Boys,  our  back  pay 
is  a  coming  (4  vs.) 

By  J.  Ward  Childs,  53d.  Massachusett's  Reg. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.8  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.  24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2600.  THE  WHIG  CHIEF. -^  song  for  the  chief  the  brave 
whig  chief  (5  vs.  and  chors.)  Tune— The  Brave  Old  Oak. 

A  prize  song  written  by  J.   H.  Warland;  headed: 
"Whig  Songs";  publ.  J.  Torr  (2);  [with  PHILADELPHDV 
RIOTS  on  recto.]   22.5  x  12.2  cm. 

2601.  WHILE  THERE'S  LIFE,  THERE'S  YiOVE.-Never 
lose  heart,  where'er  thou  art  (2  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  Mr.  John  Collins,  the  celebrated  Irish 
Comedian  and  Vocalist,  in  Brougham's  play  of  the:  Duke's 
Motto,  at  Niblo's  Garden,  N.Y. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  24.2  x  16.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Notice  of  publication  of  "Monthly 
Singer's  Journal,"  signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso. 
23.5  X  16  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  93,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  1177;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

2602.  WHISKEY,  YOU'RE  A  VILLYAN.-Ofe.'  Whiskey 
you're  a  villyan,  you  led  me  astray  (4  vs.) 

Written  and  sung  by  Mr.  Frank  Di-ew;  cop:    1865,  J. 
Marsh,  EDPa.;  J.  Marsh,  Music  Publisher  (2). 
A-J  border.   20  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

2603.  THE  WHISTLING  TBIET —When  Pat  came  o'er  the 
hills  his  colleen  fair  to  see  (6  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  975;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24.7  x  15. 5  cm. 


176 


-White  cat,  black 


2604.  WHITE  CAT  AND  BLACK  CAT.- 
cat,  any  cat  at  all  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.5  cm. 


2605.  THE  WHITE  GHOST.-One  evening  I  wandered  for 
xvild  recreation  (4  vs.)  Air— "Flaming  O'Flannigans." 

Print.  Andrews;  [with  "Notice.   To  the  Theatre  Goers 
and  the  Public  in  General,"  advertising  "Monthly  Singers' 
Journal,"  signed  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on  verso.] 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.6  cm, 

2606.  THE  WHITE  HOUSE.— S^omM  you  ever  take  a  ramble, 
and  go  to  Washington  (5  vs.)  Air:   Root,  hog,  or  die! 

By  G.R.  Edeson;  [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.  25.2  x  16  cm. 

2607.  WHITE  STAR  DIVISION. -Sfar,  the  brightest  gem  of 
fame  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— Sword  of  Bunker  Hill. 

Composed  by  a  Member  of  Knapp's  Penn'a  Battery. 
Double-line  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

2608.  WHITE  STARS !—0/ i/ze  Second  Division  my  rhymes 
do  sing  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Johnny  fill  up  the  bowl." 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  Captain  F.  Louis  Gimber, 
Commanding  109th  Reg't,  P.V.   By  W.H.P.;  print.  Johnson 
(2). 

Double-line  border.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

2609.  WHO  CAN  FIND  US  NOVJ?-Oh!  don't  you  hear  de 
Captain  say  (4  vs.  with  second  lines  chors.  and  main  chor.) 

By  D.D.  Emmet  of  Bryants'  Minstrels;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  olovni  border.   26  x  16  cm. 

2610.  WHO  IS  A  PATRIOT!- tWzo  is  a  patriot  firm  and  true 
(4  vs.) 

Print.  A.  H.  Senseman  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   21  x  12.5  cm. 

2611.  WHO  SHALL  BE  FAIREST?-W7w  shall  be  fairest 
(2  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  I6  cm. 

b.  A  New  Song  by  Mr.  Sims  Reeves;  sheet  no.  984;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  eupids  border.  24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

2612.  WHO  STOLE  THE  DOHKEYl -Kind  friends,  just 
listen  to  my  song  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Written  and  Sung  by  Charley  Vivian;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  I6  cm. 

2613.  WHO  STOLE  THE  HAM?-^^  had  a  ham,  'twas  in 
the  bunkroom.  hanging  (2  vs.,  solo  and  chor.)  Air:   Virginia 
Rosebud. 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  With  "or  Lament  of  a  Boarder"  following  title;  sheet 
no.  615;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  15.6  cm. 

2614.  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  CONSCRIPT  NOW!-o;!,  / 
am  afraid  and  weary  (3  vs.  and  chors.)  Air.— Who  will 
care  for  Mother  now. 

By  the  Dock  St.  Bard;  cop:   Guyer  &  Schaefer;  Sole 
Agency,  231  Dock  Street,  Philadelphia;  adv:   Get  the  Song, 


"The  Exempts.";  with  Charles  Bender's  imprint  added  on 
side. 

T.  o.  border.   21.5  x  13  cm. 

2615.  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  MICKY  NOW?   A  PARODY 
ON  "WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW?  "-Arrah! 
Molly  darlin' ,  I  am.  drafted  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Eugene  T.  Johnston;  with  narrative  preceding  text, 
beginning:  "Amongst  the  many  heroic  fellows  who  drew  a 
prize  in  the  U.S.  lottery,  was  a  distinguished  Frenchman 

a.  [Without  author's  name;]  with  colon  in  title;  publ.  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   25  x  15  cm. 

c.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  [publ.] 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  227,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.3  X  12.5  cm. 

e.  Sheet  no.  870;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   19.3  x  12.2  cm. 

f.  Adv:   Send  for  Price  List  of  Stephens'  Colored  Album 
Drolleries;  [publ.]  Wm.  A.  Stephens. 

Letter  paper;  Irishman  with  shillelagh  saying  "How 
are  ye's  boys?",  col.  23.3  x  14  cm. 

g.  Sheet  no.  1166;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   22.6  x  13.7  cm. 

2616.  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW?— Mzji  am  I 
so  weak  and  weary  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Words  by  Chas.  Carroll  Sawyer;   with  narrative  pre- 
ceding text,  beginning:   "During  one  of  our  late  battles 

a.  Music  by  C.  F.  Thompson;  adv:   See  the  Answer  to 
this  Song,  "Kind  Friends  are  Near  Her";  [without  question 
mark  after  title;]  publ.  Auner. 

A-J  border.   23.6  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  narrative;]  publ.  Auner  (5). 
A-J  border.  23.3  x  15. 1  cm. 

c.  Music  by  Chas.  F.  Thompson;  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thomp- 
son; publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  Adv:  Soldiers  can  receive  14  of  our  beautifully  illus- 
trated Ballads  by  addressing  G.  P.  Hardwick  (1);  cop: 
1864,  G.  P.  Hardwick,  D.C. 

Letter  paper;  orange  ink;  double-line  border  with 
ornamental  corners;  figure  of  Liberty  with  shield.  20.2  x 
12.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  text  and  figure  in  green  ink;  cop.,  border 
and  title  in  red.   18  x  11.5  cm. 

f.  [Without  question  mark  after  title;]   music  by  C.  F. 
Thompson;  adv:   See  the  Answer  to  this  Song,  "Kind 
Friends  are  Near  Her";  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor. 

A-J  border.  22  x  13  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  but  without  2nd  adv.,  and  with  question 
mark  after  title.] 

A-J  border.   20  x  12  cm. 

h.   Varying:   "Words  and  music  by  Chas.  Carroll  Sawyer"; 
[without  question  mark  after  title;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv: 
Cards,  Circulars.  Bill-Heads,  etc. 
T.  o.  border.   24  x  15  cm. 


177 


i.    Varying:   "Words  and  music  by  Chas.  Carroll  Sawyer"; 
adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  193,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

j.    [As  above;)  but  with  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

k.    [As  above;]  text  in  black  ink.   20.4  x  13.4  cm. 

1.    [As  above;  without  adv;]  bronze  ink,  single-line  border. 
20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

m.  Music  by  Chas.  F.  Thompson;  had  of  Sawyer  &  Thomp- 
son; sheet  no.  1096;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  14  cm. 

2617.  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  NIGGERS  NOW?  A  PARODY 
ON:  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  MOTHER  NOW? -List  to  me, 
plantation  niggers  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

With  narrative  preceding  text,  beginning:   "During  Gen. 
Grant's  Southern  campaign,  an  extinguished  American 
citizen  wid  de  African  scent  .  .  .";  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.5  x  16.2  cm. 

2618.  WHO  WILL  CARE  FOR  OLD  ABE  NOW?   A  PARODY. 
—Why's  old  Abe  so  sad  and  weary  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  J.  M.;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.5  x  16.4  cm. 


2625.  WHY  AWA'  SO  LANG  AT  NICHT.-Jo/zn,  Anderson, 
my  Jo,  John  (4  vs.)  Air.— John,  Anderson,  My  Jo. 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border,  col.   24.9  x  16.4 
cm. 

2626.  WHY  DID  SHE  LEAVE  UlUT -Why  did  she  leave 
him.?   They  grew  up  together  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  816. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.  22.8  x  15.2  cm. 

2627.  WHY  DO  I  WEEP  FOR  TKEE? -Why  do  I  weep  for 
thee  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  974;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 

2628.  WHY  DO  SUMMER  ROSES  ¥ADE1-Why  do  summer 
roses  fade  (3  vs.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  [publ.]   De 
Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.  24.2  x  17  cm. 

2629.  WHY  HAVE  MY  LOVED  ONES  GONZ? -Why  have 
my  loved  ones  gone  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Stephen  C.  Forster  [sic];  music  published  by  Horace 
Waters  (1);  sheet  no.  946;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  25  x  15.5  cm. 


2619.  WHOLE  HOG  OR  NO^'E. -Just  gib  me  your  attention 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Harry  Fox,  the  favorite  banjoist,  at  Hitch- 
cock's National  Concert-Hall,  172  Canal  Street;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   25.6  x  15.5  cm. 

2620.  WHOLE  HOG  OR  NONE.-Afozt;  white  folks  listen, 
will  you  all  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

[Publ.]   Louis  Bonsai;  adv:  All  Kinds  of  Books  Bound. 
T.  o.  border.   20  x  11.7  cm. 

2621.  WHOLE  HOG  OR  NONE.  NO.  2.-Come,  give  me 
your  attention  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  punctuation  in  title;]   sheet  no.  1014;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2622.  WHO'LL  HAVE  WE  NOW? -Now,  all  you,  dear  young 
ladies  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Whack  row  de  dow. 

By  John  C.  Cross;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.  25.4  x  16.5  cm. 

2623.  WHOM  WILL  THE  SHOE  FIT  OR,  THE  MAIDEN'S 
VOW.— A  fair  little  Maid  was  working  one  day  (3  vs.  and 
chors.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5).   19.7  x  11  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  723;  adv:  Wanamaker  &  Brown  Oak  Hall 
Clothing. 

T.  o.  border.   19.3  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

2624.  WHOOP  DE  DOODLE  DO.— Simon  had  a  son  born 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  nightly  with  thunders  of  Applause,  by  Dan 
Emmit,  at  White's  Melodeon,  53  Bowery,  N.Y.;  print. 
Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  23  x  13.8  cm. 


2630.  WIDE  AWAKE  JORDAN. -O^z.'  the  wide  awakes  and 
white  hats,  am  getting  all  the  go  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  By  Wm.  C.  Marion;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  Notice  of  publication  of  "Monthly 
Singer's  Journal",  signed  by  Mrs.  Pauline  Lieder,  on 
verso.   24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (3);  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill  Heads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border.   21.6  x  14.7  cm. 

2631.  THE  WIDE-AWAKES. -O,  what  is  all  this,  noise 
about  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  By  O.P.Q.;  Air:  Washing  Day;  publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  clown  border,  col.;  cop:   1860,  H.  De 

Marsan,  SDN.Y.   23.5  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  20.6  X  12  cm. 

2632.  WIDE-AWAKES.   THE  IRREPRESSIBLE'S  CAM- 
PAIGN SONG.— We'll  give  you  now  our  campaign  song 
(15  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Dixey's  Land. 

By  John  W.  Dawson;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 
De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border,  col.;  cop:    1860, 
H.  De  Marsan,  SDN.Y.   25  x  16  em. 

2633.  WIDOW  IN  A  COTTAGE  BY  THE  SEA.-Just  one 
year  ago  to-day,  love  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1051;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.9  cm. 

2634.  WIDOW  MAC\iS£Y..  — Widow  Machree,  'tis  no  wonder 
you  frown  (5  vs.) 

Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   24.3  x  15.2  cm. 

2635.  WIDOW  MALONE.— Dtrfye  hear  of  the  widow  Malone 
(11  vs.) 

[Publ.]  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  Yankee  pedlar  border.  24  x  16  cm. 


178 


2636.  WIDOW  MULROONY'S  BALL.-Listen  a  while,  and 
I'll  sing  you  a  ditty  (10  vs.)  Air:   Bryan  O'Lynn. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  24.2  x  i6.2  cm. 

b.  By  Eugene  Johnston;  sheet  no.  1076;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2637.  WIDOW  WIDDLE.   OR  A  THOUSAND  POUNDS  A 
YEAR.—/  once  was  dressy,  volatile,  and  rich  as  any  Jew 
(10  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (1). 

T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  296;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  23.6  x  15.3  cm. 

2638.  THE  WIDOW'S  LAST  PRAYER. -O/z.'  Mother  dear, 
leave  off  crying  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25.3  x  17  cm. 

THE  WIFE  I  LEFT  BEHIND  ME,  see  THE  GIRL  I 
LEFT  BEHIND  ME. 

2639.  WIFE  OF  MY  BOSOM. -Wz/e  of  my  bosom,  the  mid- 
night hangs  o'er  me  (3  vs.)  Air— Kathleen  Mavourneen. 

Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  171,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   19.4  x  11.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  adv.] 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  235,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.2  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped?) 

c.  Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  238, 
col.  20.5  X  12.5  cm. 

d.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  242,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.5  x  12  cm. 

2640.  THE  WIFE'S  DREAM. -Praj;  tell  me,  Mary,  how  it 
is,  that  you  can  look  so  gay  (8  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  25  x  16.2  cm. 

2641.  THE  WIFE'S  LAMENT.  A  NEW  TEMPERANCE 
SONG— A/j;  Connor  was  loving,  gentle  and  kind  (5  vs.  and 
2  chors.)  Air:   Dear  Irish  Boy. 

By  Archibald  Scott;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   24  x 
16  cm. 

2642.  THE  WILD  ASHE  DEER.— AM;aj)  and  away  we  bound 
o'er  the  mountains  (3  vs.) 

Revised  and  printed  expressly  for  the  Public  Schools; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border;  buck  attacked  by  dogs.   22.5  x  14.8  cm. 

2643.  THE  WILD  IRISH  BOY. -Farewell  to  the  dear  land  I 
leave  far  behind  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1105;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.  24  x  15  cm. 

2644.  WILD  IRISHMAN.  NO  2. -When  first  I  arrived  in 
America's  town  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Wm.  O'Neal,  at  the  American  Concert  Hall, 
444  Broadway;  sheet  no.  748. 

a.   Publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15  cm. 


b.   Publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   23.3  x  15.1  cm. 

2645.  WILL  FRIENDSHIP  BUY  US  BREAD. -Mo^/zer.'  she 
spoke  of  friendship;  what  did  the  lady  m.ean  (4  vs.) 

By  Wm.  Shires;  with  short  narrative  preceding  text, 
beginning:   "Suggested  on  learning  a  family  was  in  a  state 
of  starvation  .  .  .";  print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  14.5  cm. 

2646.  WILL  NOBODY  MARRY  UET -High  ho!  for  a  hus- 
band! high  ho  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  213a,  col,;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

2647.  WILL  THEY  WEEP  FOR  ME  AT  HOME?-WJW  they 
weep  for  me  at  hom,e  (3  vs.)  Air:   Do  they  think  of  me  at 
home? 

By  Walter  Warren. 

a.  [Without  author's  name;]  Sung  by  Miss  Annie  Rush, 
the  charming  Vocalist,  at  the  Kossuth  Exchange,  Seventh 
Street,  below  Market;  publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.   22.2  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.   22.2  x  14.2 
cm. 

d.  Sheet  no.  850;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   22.3  x  16  cm. 

e.  [Without  question  mark  in  title;]  varying:   "Composed 
by  Walter  Warren  expressly  for  Miss  Annie  Rush  and  sung 
by  her  at  the  Kossuth  Exchange,  7th.  St.  bel.  Market"; 
publ.  Walter  Warren  (2);  adv:   Pike's  Vegetable  Tooth 
Ache  Drops. 

T.  o.  border;  Union  soldier  and  woman  with  two  chil- 
dren.  23  X  12  cm. 

f.  Sheet  no.  1129;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24  x  13.7  cm. 

2648.  WILL  WATCH.  — 'Twas  one  morn,  when  the  wind 
from  the  northward  blew  keenly  (5  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  664;  publ.  Wrigley  (1), 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border.  24  x  14.2  cm. 

2649.  WILL  YOU  COME  TO  MY  MOUNTAIN  HOME?-WiU 
you  come  to  my  mountain  home,  love  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  the  Fayetta  Glee  Club;  publ.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.   [twice]. 
T.  o.  border.   24.5  x  12.5  cm. 

2650.  WILL  YOU  LOVE  ME  THEN  AS  NOW.-Kom  have 
told  m.e  that  you  love  m.e  (3  vs.) 

Published  by  S.  Gordon  (3). 

a.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  231,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  single-line  border;  hdpc. 

Magnus  247b,  col.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]   hdpc.  Magnus  247c,  col.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

d.  Publ.  Magnus  (1). 

Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  bronze  ink;  hdpc. 
Magnus  251,  col.   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 


2651.   WILLUM  OF  THE  FERRY. 
stream  there  liv'd  a  maid  (4  vs.) 


-Near  Clyde's  gay 


179 


Sheet  no.  203;  publ.  Wrigley  (1);  [with  DOWN  BY  THE 
RIVERSIDE  I  STRAY  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

2652.  WILLIE  AND  I.~We  love  to  go  to  Sabbath  School,  - 
Willie  and  I  (4  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "Children's  Invitation";  adv:    The  following 
Hymns  can  be  had  at  Johnson's  (2). 
T.  o.  border.  23.8  x  16.3  cm. 

2653.  WILLIE  HAS  GONE  TO  THE  WAR.-Tfee  blue  bird 
is  singing  its  lay  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Sung  by  R.  Simpson;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25.5  x  16.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]   [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.  22  x  14  cm. 

c.  Words  by  George  Cooper;  music  by  Stephen  C.  Foster; 
advs:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  and  500  Illustrated  Ballads 
[publ.]  Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  66,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus.   21  x  13.2  cm. 

d.  [As  above;  without  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs.] 
Letter  paper;  single-line  border;  hdpc.  Magnus  108, 

col.   19.5  x  11.5  cm. 

e.  Words  by  George  Cooper;  music  by  Stephen  C.  Foster; 
music  published  by  Wm.  A.  Pond  &  Co.;  sheet  no.  882; 
sold  by  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20  x  ii  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]   sheet  no.  1172;  [imprint  cropped.] 
Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   20.5  x  12.7  cm. 

2654.  WILLIE  WE  HAVE  MISSED  YOV.—Ok,  Willie,  is  it 
you,  dear,  safe,  safe  at  home  (3  vs.) 

By  the  highly  popular  author  Stephen  C.  Foster;  music 
obtained  of  Firth  Pond  &  Co.  (1). 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs,  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  138,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.5  cm. 

c.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  217,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

d.  With  comma  and  exclamation  point  in  title;  [without 
author's  name  and  "music  obtained  of  .  .  ."] 

T.  o.  border;  two  clasped  hands.   22.8  x  15  cm. 

2655.  WILLIE'S  ON  THE  DARK  BLUE  SEA. -My  Willie's 
on  the  dark  blue  sea  (5  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   20.4  x  11.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  homed  imp  border.   24.2  x  16  cm. 

2656.  WILLIE'S  WELCOME  HOME.   ANSWER  TO  WILLIE, 
WE  HAVE  MISSED  YOU. -Fes,  Annie  dear,  my  lov'd  one 
(3  vs.) 

Words  by  A.  Fleetwood;  music  by  A.  Von  Smit;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.2  x  15.8  cm. 

2657.  WINSOME  WINNIE. -H^ere  the  sun,  when  daylight's 
closing  (3  vs.) 


As  sung  by  Bryants'  Minstrels;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (1). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border,  col.   24.6  x  15.8  cm. 

2658.  WITCHING  DINAH  CROW. -ATow,  darkies,  I  will  tell 
you  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   22.8  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  Title;  "Unlucky  Dinah  Crow";  publ.  Peckham  (1). 
T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  15.5  cm. 

2659.  WITH  A  HELMET  ON  HIS  BROW.-Wiife  a  helmet  on 
his  brow  (2  vs.) 

A-J  border;  eagle  with  thunder  bolts.   20.3  x  14.2  cm. 
(cropped) 

2660.  WITH  ALL  MY  SOUL  THEN  LET  US  VAKl.-Witk 
all  my  soul  then  let  us  part  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Take  Back  Those  Gems";  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   20.9  x  12,1  cm. 

2661.  WOMAN'S  LOVE.— WTzew  man  is  waxing  frail,  and 
his  hand  is  thin  and  weak  (7  vs.) 

a.  2nd  song:   "Man's  Love";  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   23.6  x  15.8  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  341;  publ.  Wrigley  [address  imperfectly 
printed]. 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.4  x  15.1  cm. 

2662.  WOMEN  AND  WINE. -Lei  Sons  of  Slaughter  try 
their  skill  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  epigram  "Glee"  at  end  of  song;  publ.  De  Marsan 
(2). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   23.9  x  16  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  981;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.2  x  15.8  cm. 

2663.  WONDER  OF  THE  AGE.— I'd  often  heard  when  quite 
a  boy  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  1006;  written  and  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

2664.  THE  WONDERFUL  IRISHMAN. -Tfeere  was  a  lady 
lived  at  Leith,  a  lady  very  stylish,  man  (6  vs.) 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.   24.6  x  16.2  cm. 

b.  With  short  lines;  sheet  no.  640;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

2665.  WON'T  WE  BE  A  HAPPY  PEOPLE  WHEN  THIS 
WAR  IS  OVER.  — H'e'n  gladly  hail  the  happy  day  (3  vs.  and 
chor.) 

a.  With  2  exclamation  points  in  title;  words  by  A.W. 
Livingston;  music  by  Philip  Phillips;  John  Church,  Music 
Publisher;  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23.8  x  15. 1  cm. 

b.  [Without  apostrophe  in  "Won't";  but  with  words  and 
music  as  above;]  publ.  Johnson  (2);  [sold  by]  Johnson  & 
Cartlitch.   18.1  x  IQ.e  cm. 

c.  Title  as  above.   18.7  x  10.6  cm. 

2666.  WON'T  YOU  VOLUNTEER. -Come,  boys,  come, 
girls,  wont  you  volunteer  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Johnson  (2).   19.1  x  11.7  cm. 


180 


2667.  THE  WOODPECKER.—/  knew  by  the  smoke,  that  so 
gracefully  curl'd  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

2nd  song:   "Colleen  Bawn";  [publ.j.De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   24.5  x  15.9  cm. 

WOODPECKER,  see  also  COLLEEN  BAWN 

2668.  THE  WOOD -ROBIN.  — Steji,  sweet  enchanter  of  the 
grove  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  662;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border,  col.   24.5  x  15.7  cm. 

2669.  A  WORD  FOR  THE  UOVR.-The  firmament  breaks 
up.  In  black  eclipse  (27  lines) 

By  John  G.  Whittier,  Amesbury,  16th  day  of  1st  month, 
1861.   ;2.2  X  8.4  cm. 

2670.  WORK,  BOYS,  WORK.-/'m  not  a  weaUhy  man,  but 
I've  hit  upon  apian  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air;   Prisoner's  Hope. 

Sung  by  Harry  Richmond;  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 
De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.3  x  15.5  cm. 


2671.  THE  WORLD  IS  TOPSY  TURVY.-Tfee  world  is  topsy 
turvy  as  ev'ry  one  knows  (5  vs.  and  chors.) 

As  sung  by  E.  F.  Dixey,  Esq.;  cop:    1864,  Sep.  Winner, 
EDPa.;  Sep.  Winner's  Music  Store  (3);  publ.  Auner  (5). 
T.  o.  border.   20.1  x  11.8  cm.  (cropped) 

2672.  WOULD  I  WERE  A  BOY  AGAIN. -O,  would  I  were  a 
boy  again  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "Would  I  Were  A  Girl  Again". 

a.  Print.  Andrews. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]  sheet  no.  100;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.  25.3  x  16.4  cm. 

2673.  WOULD  I  WERE  WITH  TYIEE-Would  I  were  with 
thee,  every  day  and  hour  (4  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (4). 

A-J  border.  23.3  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5).   20.2  x  11.9  cm. 

2674.  THE  WOUNDED  SOLDIER.-Z'wz  lying  wounded  here 
(13  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  760;  sold  by  Partridge  (2). 
T.  o.  border.   20.4  x  12.2  cm. 


means  of  subsistence  .  .  .";  [signed]  C.  W.  Davids;  adv: 
Price  Ten  Cents. 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.   25.3  x  20.6  cm. 

2677.  WRITE  A  LETTER  TO  MY  MOTHER!— itaise  me  in 
your  arms,  my  brother  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  by  E.  Bowers;  music  by  P.  B.  Isaacs;  Music 
obtained  at  S.  T.  Gordon's  (1);  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23.2  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  14.2  X  8.9  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  [Without  exclamation  point  in  title,  and  comma  in  first 
line;]  as  sung  by  Mr.  D.  S.  Wambold;  publ.  Boyd;  advs: 

10.000  Songs  for  sale,  Boyd's  Circulating  Library,  and 
2,000  Plays  for  Sale. 

T.  o.  border;  flags,  shield  with  heart  and  star,  and 
title  on  scroU.   21.4  x  13.2  cm. 

d.  Title  as  above;  words  by  E.  Bowers;  music  by  P.  B. 
Isaacs;  music  obtained  of  S.  T.  Gordon  (1);  with  preface 
to  song:  "An  Officer,  captured  at  the  battle  of  Bull-Run, 
relates  the  following  incident  .  .  .";  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   25.4  x  16.3  cm. 

2678.  WRITE  ME  A  LETTER  FROM  HOME. -Lonely  I  sit 
m.e  and  weep  (2  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Words  and  music  by  Will  S.  Hays;  Music  obtained  of 
J.  L.  Peters;  2nd  song:   "Be  Kind  To  Darling  Sister  Nell"; 
publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.1  x  15.5  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1052;  publ.  Partridge  (2). 

Triple-line  border,  with  ornamental  corners.   22.4  x 

14.1  cm. 

WRITE  TO  ME,  see  THE  LETTER. 

2679.  WRITTEN  FOR  REBECCA,  A  SLAVE  CHILD  FROM 
NEW  ORLEANS.— Orzce  on  a  sunny  summer's  day  (40  lines) 

21.5  X  13.5  cm. 

2680.  THE  YALLER  GAL  THAT  WINKED  AT  MZ'.-Your 
attention  I  ask  for  a  while  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  As  sung  by  Ashcroft;  publ.  Boyd  (2);  advs:    10,000 
Songs  for  sale,  Boyd's  Novel  Exchange,  and  2,000  Plays 
for  sale. 

T.  o.  border.   20.7  x  11.5  cm. 

b.  [Without  "The"  in  title;]  sheet  no.  1057;  written  by 
Harry  Bloodgood;  music  at  Olive  [sic]  Ditson's  &  Co.; 
publ.  Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.3  x  14.4  cm. 


2675.  A  WOUNDED  SOLDIER  TO  HIS  COMRADES. -W^e'Z/ 
never  go  back  on  McClellan,  Boys  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  Auner;  [signed]  A.  F.  H. 

Multi-line  border.  23.2  x  14.7  cm. 


2681.   THE  YANKEE  BOY.-^  Yankee  Boy  is  trim  and  tall 
(5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:   Yankee  Doodle. 

By  Isadore  Leopold;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  flag  border  with  center  star,  col.   25.5  x 
17  cm. 


2676.   THE  WOUNDED  SOLDIER'S  APPE Ah.-Kind  friends, 
a  soldier,  brave  and  true  (12  vs.) 

The  undersigned,  a  brave  soldier  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac,  asks  the  aid  of  the  people  to  enable  him  to  sup- 
port a  wife  and  five  children,  who  have  no  other  means  of 
subsistence  .  .  . 

a.  Headed:    "Price  Ten  Cents";  [signed]  David  Gingry, 
Jr.;   Philadelphia  "Press"  Job  Print. 

Double-line  border.   23.9  x  15  cm. 

b.  With  variant  in  preface  to  song  "...  to  support  an 
aged  widowed  mother  and  himself,  as  they  have  no  other 


2682.  YANKEE  BOYS,  SO  HANDY,  0\-It  always  has  been 
told  (5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border;  three  eagles.  22.8  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  By  Stoopofero;  publ.  Auner  (3). 
A-J  border.   23.2  x  14.4  cm. 

c.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   22.9  x  14.5  cm. 

d.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   25  x  17. 1  cm. 


181 


e.  [Without  comma  after  "Boys";]  Tune.— Yankee  Doodle 
Dandy;  adv:   Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads,  etc.;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   24.5  x  15.5  cm. 

f.  [As  above;  but  without  Tune;]  by  Stoopofero. 
A-J  border.   23.8  x  13.5  cm. 

g.  [Without  comma  after  "Boys";]   sheet  no.  520;  publ. 
Partridge  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.5  x  15.1  cm. 

h.   Title  as  above;  by  Stoopofero;  sheet  no.  892;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   25  x  15.5  cm. 

2682.  THE  YANKEE  CLOCK  FRANKLIN  ENGINE  CO.  NO. 
3. —Come  and  listen  all  you  Mohawk  boys  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 
Tune— Mary  Blane. 

By  A  Jumper  Boy;  print.  Andrews. 
T.  o.  border.   23.4  x  14  cm, 

2683.  YANK-KEE-DOM!  OR  THE  TIMES. -There's  talk 
of  war  with  John  and  Sam  (6  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— "Times 
and  Fashion." 

Adv:   You  will  save  25  per  cent;  print.  Johnson  (3). 
T.  o.  border.   20.2  x  12.7  cm. 

2684.  YANKEE  DOODhE.- Father  and  I  went  doim  to  camp 
(15  vs.,  2nd  verse  beginning:   "And  there  we  see  a  thou- 
sand men",  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (2). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.   23.5  x  15.4  cm. 

b.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  horned  imp  border.   25.5  x  16.7  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Yanke  [sic]  Doodle". 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  217,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  12.6  cm. 

d.  With  comma  after  "Doodle";  sheet  no.  740;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  moon  border.   24.5  x  15. 5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;  imprint  blank.]   24  x  15.4  cm. 

2685.  YANKEE  OOOD'LY.- Father  and  I  went  down  to  camp 
(11  vs.,  2nd  verse  beginning:   "And  there  was  Captain 
Washington,"  and  chor.) 

a.  T.  o.  border.   24.2  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  With  4  vs.  and  chor.;  long  lines;  2nd  song:   "Yankee 
Doodle,  No.  2";  publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.   24.4  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  "Original"  before  title;  print.  Johnson  (2); 
adv:  Cards,  Bill  Heads,  Circulars,  etc.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

d.  With  title  as  above;  publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof. 
Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor.  20.1  x  12.7  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  With  4  vs.  and  chor.;  long  lines;  2nd  song:   "Yankee 
Doodle,  No.  2";  publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  23  x  14.6  cm. 

2686.  YANKEE  DOODLE.  [NO.  2. \- Ye  gallant  sons  of 
Liberty  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

Print.  Andrews. 

Andrews  ivy  border.  21.7  x  11.4  cm. 

2687.  YANKEE  DOODLE.  NO.  ^.-Yankee  Doodle!  long 
ago  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  clown  border.   24.8  x  16.8  cm. 


2688.  YANKEE  DOODLE  UNCLE  SAM.-/'m  Yankee-doodle 
Uncle  Sam.  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— Bag  of  Nails. 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor,  also  by  D.  McConhay. 

a.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room 
Monitor.   24.4  x  15.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  with  MY  OWN  NATIVE  LAND  on  recto.] 
21.4  X  12.5  cm. 

2689.  THE  YANKEE  GlRl^S. -Not  England's  daughters 
rosy  cheek' d  (4  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  610;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border,  col.  24.4  x  15.5  cm. 

2690.  YANKEE  LAND.—/  wish  I  was  in  Yankee  land 
(3  vs.) 

Publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  musical  instruments  border,  col.   25.7  x 
16.8  cm. 

2691.  A  YANKEE  MAN-OF  ^AR.-Down  by  yonder  valley, 
I  carelessly  did  stray  (5  vs.) 

As  sung  by  G.  W.  Gill. 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  eagle  border.   23.9  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  but  without  hyphen  in  title;]  De  Marsan 
ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower  comers.  25.2  x 
14.4  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  De  Marsan  trapper  border.   22  x  14.4  cm. 

d.  [Without  name  of  singer;]  with  two  hyphens  in  title. 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  127,  col.;  [publ.] 

Magnus  (1).   20.4  x  13. 1  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  hdpc.  Magnus  128,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1). 
20.4  X  12.6  cm. 

2692.  YANKEE  MAN  OF  WAR.  A  COMPANION  TO  THE 
"BOLD  PRIVATEER."— /i  was  doum  in  yonder  meadow  I 
carelessly  did  stray  (6  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (2). 

A-J  border.   20.8  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5);  [with  MR.  &  MRS.  SNIBBS  on  recto.] 
A-J  border;  sailing  ship.  22  x  14  cm. 

c.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:  Cards,  Circulars,  Bill-Heads, 
etc. 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners;  sailing  ship 
with  motto:   "Don't  Give  Up  The  Ship".   24.3  x  14.5  cm. 

2693.  A  YANKEE  MAN  OF  WAR.  NO.  2. -As  /  walked  out, 
one  evening,  down  by  yon  shady  grove  (4  vs.) 

a.  Composed  by  M.  Hogan;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.  21.3  x  14.9  cm. 

b.  Written  by  M.  Hogan;  sheet  no.  1049;  publ.  Wrigley  (1); 
[with  THE  LOW  BACK'D  CAR  on  recto.] 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

2694.  A  YANKEE  SHIP  ANDA  [sic]  YANKEE  CREW-A 
Yankee  ship,  and  a  Yankee  crew  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  394;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   24.3  x  16.3  cm. 

2695.  YANKEE  VOLUNTEER.-/  thought  I'd  better  come 
to  toum  (5  vs.) 

a.   Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border.  20.9  x  12.6  cm. 


182 


b.  Adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]  Magnus  (2). 
Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  138,  col.;  publ. 

Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  2nd  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;  hdpc. 
Magnus  82,  bronze  ink.   19.8  x  12.8  cm. 

2696.  YANKEE  VOLUNTEER.  — Ze  Daughters  of  America 
(5  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   24.1  x  14.6  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  Mad'Ue  Viola,  at  the  New  Grotto  Concert 
Hall,  N.  W.  Corner  Fifth  and  Chestnut;  publ.  Warren  (3). 

T.  o.  border.   21  x  11.5  cm. 

2697.  THE  YANKEE  VOLUNTEERS. -Come,  all  ye  true 
Americans  that  love  the  Stripes  and  Stars  (7  vs.)  Air— 'Tis 
my  delight  on  a  shiny  night. 

Sheet  no.  505;  as  sung  by  Private  Ephralm  Peabody,  on 
the  night  after  the  march  through  Baltimore;  sold  by  Par- 
tridge (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.3  x  12.3  cm. 

2698.  YANKEES  ARE  COMING.—/  harken'd  in  the  East,  and 
I  harken'd  in  the  West  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Jordan. 

T.  o.  border.   20.7  x  12.8  cm.  (cropped) 

2699.  [YE  LABORING  MILLIONS  WHOSE  COURAGE  IS 
KNOWN]  — Fe  laboring  millions  whose  courage  is  knoum 
(4  vs.)  Air— Caerphilly  March. 

Headed:   "U.S.M.O.  Series";  with  answer  of  Gen.  Scott: 
"Sir,  for  fifty  years  I  have  devoted  my  life  and  my  ener- 
gies to  the  flag  .  .  .";  "Original.   The  following  patriotic 
sentiments  were  thrown  into  verse  by  a  lady  of  Maryland, 
on  the  call  of  a  Town  Meeting  of  the  Union  Workingmen  of 
Elkton,  Cecil  County,  Maryland;"  publ.  Cassin  &  Fincher. 

T.  o.  border.   24.4  x  13.3  cm. 

2700.  YE  SONS  OF  THE  HOKTW.-Attend  to  me,  soldiers 
and  sailors  and  others  (3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air:  Old  Ireland 
forever. 

By  John  Ross  Dix;  cop;    1864,  Charles  Magnus,  SDN.Y.; 
adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  162,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.8  cm. 

2701.  THE  YELLOW  HAIRED  BOY  16  MONTHS  OLD.-Be- 
hold  him  now  creeping  on  the  carpeted  floor  (5  vs.  and 
chors.)  Air.— Viliken's  And  Dinah. 

Sheet  no.  417;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  horned  imp  border,  col.  23  x  15.4  cm. 

2702.  THE  YELLOW  ROSE  OF  TEXAS,. -There's  a  yellow 
rose  in  Texas  that  I  am  going  to  see  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Music  obtained  of  Firth,  Pond  &  Co.  (1);  publ.  De 
Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.  23.7  x  15.7  cm. 

2703.  YELLOW  TOM  CAT,  PARODY  ON  "BELL 
BRANDON,  "—Afear  a  window  that  looked  out  upon  the 
woodshed  (3  vs.) 

Headed:   "Zieber's  Popular  Editions";  Wholesale 
Agents.   H.  K.  Logan,  T.  M.  Scroggy,  W.  A.  Peet,  .G. 
Boshart;  by  John  L.  Zieber;  publ.  Zieber;  adv:   Buy  "The 
Fire  Feller",  the  most  comic  Song  out. 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  1.5.4  cm. 

2704.  YES,  I  WOULD  THE  WAR  WERE  OVER.  ANSWER 
TO  "WHEN  THIS  CRUEL  WAR  IS  OVER."-yes,  /  would 
the  war  were  over  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 


Words  and  music  by  Alice  Hawthorne  [Septimus 
Winner];  cop:    1863,  Winner  &  Co.,  EDPa.;  music  publ.  by 
Winner  &  Co.  (3). 

a.  With  title  in  caps;  publ.  Auner  (4). 
T.  o.  border.   20.8  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  With  title  in  upper  and  lower  case;  and  comma  after 
"Over";  publ.  Auner  (4). 

T.  o.  border.   23.8  x  13.9  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Yes,  I  Would";  publ.  Auner  (4). 
A-J  border.  23.7  x  14.8  cm. 

d.  [Without  period  after  "Over",  and  without  cop.]   17.1 
X  10.8  cm.  (cropped) 

e.  [Without  cop.;]  adv:   Prof.  Brooks'  Ball  Room  Monitor; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.  24.5  x  14.9  cm. 

f.  [As  above;]  but  with  different  adv:  See  Johnson's  New 
Catalogue  of  Songs.  23.7  x  14.9  cm. 

g.  Publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   22.7  x  14.3  cm. 

h.    [Without  music  publ.] 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  215,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).  20.3  x  12.6  cm. 

i.    [As  above;]  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  150,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

2705.  YES,  LET  ME  LIKE  A  SOLDIER  FALL.- res,  let 
me  like  a  soldier  fall  (2  vs.) 

2nd  song:  "We  stand  here  United";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   23.2  x  13.8  cm. 

2706.  YES,  WE  MISS  THEE  AT  HOME. -We  miss  thee  at 
home  -  yes,  we  miss  thee  (3  vs.) 

a.  Reply  to  "Do  they  miss  me  at  home;"  publ.  Auner  (2). 
A-J  border.  24.5  x  15.3  cm. 

b.  Answer  to  Do  They  Miss  Me  at  Home;  [publ.]  De 
Marsan  (1). 

De  Marsan  kissing  cupids  border.   26.2  x  16.4  cm. 

2707.  YOU  WOULD  NOT  LEAVE  YOUR  NORAH.-Foa 
would  not  leave  your  Norah  (3  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  84;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  military  cupid  border.   24.3  x  16. 4  cm. 

YOU'LL  REMEMBER  ME,  see  DO  THEY  THINK  OF 
ME  AT  HOME. 

2708.  YOUNG  AMERICA  AND  OULD  IRELAND. -7<'s  a 
soger  I  am,  and  I'm.  wearing  the  green  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Darling  Ould  Stick." 

As  sung  by  the  great  Comic  Vocalist,  Tony  Pastor. 

a.  Varying:   "As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor";  publ.  De  Marsan 
(3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   24.7  x  14.7  cm. 

b.  Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  216,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).    19.2  x  12  cm. 

c.  Sheet  no.  1164. 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 


183 


2709.  THE  YOUNG  CONSCRIPT  AND  HIS  LADY. -I  have 
come,  my  dearest  Rosa  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— Who  will 
Care  for  Motiier  Now? 

By  A.  Anderson,  Philad'a.,  Oct.  1863;  cop:   A.  Ander- 
son, EDPa.,  1863. 

a.  Adv:   Address  of  the  Author.   A.  Anderson. 
A-J  border.   20  x  12.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Varying:   "Phila.";  with  3  vs.;  adv:  A.  Anderson. 
T.  o.  border.    24.5  x  14.7  cm. 

2710.  THE  YOUNG  DUTCH  -& AKB'EB..- White  folks ,  listen 
unto  m.e  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  military  cupid  border.  25  x  16.7  cm. 

b.  Sheet  no.  1156;  originally  sung  by  Nelse  Seymour; 
publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   23.7  x  15.5  cm. 

2711.  YOUNG  EPH'S  LAMENT. -O/z.'  where  will  I  go  when 
dis  war  breaks  dis  country  up  (3  vs.) 

a.  Title:   "Where  will  I  go  when  dis  War  breaks  dis 
Country  up";  publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23  x  14.5  cm. 

b.  As  sung  by  J.  H.  Taylor,  the  Ethiopian  Banjoist;  [publ.] 
De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   22.5  x  14.2  cm. 

c.  With4vs.;   [publ.]   De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  trapper  border.   25.3  x  16  cm. 

d.  Adv:   Johnson  has  600  different  kinds  of  songs;  publ. 
Johnson  (2). 

A-J  border.   23.5  x  15.5  cm. 

e.  Title:   "Where  will  I  go  When  dis  War  breaks  dis 
Country  up";  adv:   Ball  Room  Monitor,  by  Prof.  C.  Brooks; 
publ.  Johnson  (2). 

T.  o.  border.   20.6  x  13  cm. 

f.  With  4  vs.;  adv:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.] 
Magnus  (2). 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  196,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.3  x  12.7  cm. 

g.  [As  above.] 

Letter  paper;  hdpc.  Magnus  244a,  col.   20.5  x  12.5  cm. 

h.   Sung  by  Add  Weaver,  at  444  Broadway  N.Y.;  sheet  no. 
1184;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24  x  15.5  cm. 

2712.  YOUNG  GAL  FROM  NEW-JERS-A.-/?z  1860,  I  used 
to  go  to  sea  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

As  sung  by  Charley  Fox. 

a.  [Publ.]   De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  Ethiopian  border.   23.7  x  14  cm. 

b.  [Without  comma  in  first  line;]   sheet  no.  817;  publ. 
Wrigley  (1). 

Wrigley  Ethiopian  border.   22  x  13  cm. 

2713.  THE  YOUNG  INVINCIBLE.-/  sing  of  a  Nincumpoop 
so  galUant  and  gay  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune.— Sailier  Boy. 

By  a  Member  of  the  Minute  Men's  Glee  Club;  publ. 
Johnson  (2);  adv:   Political  Songs,  Badges,  etc.   24  x  12  cm. 

2714.  YOUNG  MAN  FROM  THE  COUNTRY.-/'m  a  young 
man  from  the  country  (6  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Tony  Pastor;  [publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  trapper  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 


THE  YOUNG  PATRIOT'S  ANSWER,  see  THE  NATION'S 
LAST  CALL. 

2715.  YOUNG  RECRUIT. -See.'  these  ribbons  gayly 
streaming  (3  vs.) 

a.  Publ.  Auner  (3). 

A-J  border;  yellow  paper.   23  x  14.8  cm. 

b.  Publ.  Auner  (5). 

A-J  border.   23.3  x  14.5  cm. 

c.  With  "The"  in  title;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 
De  Marsan  eagle  border.   25.6  x  16.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (4). 

De  Marsan  fountain  border.   24.5  x  16  cm. 

e.  Publ.  Johnson  (2);  adv:   Send  for  a  Catalogue  of  over 
600  Songs. 

Double-line  border.  21  x  12  cm. 

f.  Advs:   500  Illustrated  Ballads  [publ.]   Magnus  (2),  and 
Ten  illustrated  Songs. 

Letter  paper;  blue  ink;  hdpc.  Magnus  138,  col.;  publ. 
Magnus  (1).   20.5  x  12.6  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  without  adv:   Ten  illustrated  Songs;]  hdpc. 
Magnus  213a,  col.;  publ.  Magnus  (1).   20  x  12.5  cm. 

h.   With  "The"  in  title;  sheet  no.  828;  sold  by  Partridge 
(2);  [with  I  WANT  TO  GO  HOME  on  recto.] 
T.  o.  border.   21  x  12.6  cm. 

i.    With  "The"  in  title;  as  sung  by  Miss  Melinda  Nagle, 
at  the  Metropolitan  Concert  Hall,  Chestnut  Street,  below 
Seventh;  publ.  Warren  (2);  adv:   Warren's  assortment  of 
Songs  is  the  largest  (by  800)  of  any  other  Publisher  in  the 
city. 

T.  o.  border;  two  small  figures  of  Union  Soldiers. 
22.5  X  12  cm. 

j.    With  "The"  in  title;  sheet  no.  989;  publ.  Wrigley  (1). 
Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.4  x  14.7  cm. 

2716.  THE  YOUNG  "WmOW.-Now  all  you  young  gents  in 
want  of  a  wife  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  1595;  music  at  J.D.  Peters;  2nd  song:   "Katy 
Dean";  publ.  Wrigley  (3). 

Wrigley  kissing  cupids  border.   24.5  x  15.4  cm. 

2717.  YOUR  BLESSING  DEAREST  MOTHER,  OR  THE 
SOLDIER'S  YK'SS.V^Y.IA..  — Your  blessing  Dear  Mother,  ere 
I  fall  asleep  (2  vs.) 

Sheet  no.  588;  words  by  Permission  of  Oliver  Ditson, 
&  Co.  (1),  of  whom  music  can  be  obtained;  publ.  Partridge 
(2). 

T.  o.  border.   23.6  x  15  cm. 

2718.  YOUR  COUNTRY'S  CALL  TO  ARMS:-Maj)  the  girl 
you  love  best  (2  vs.  and  chors.)  Air— Babylon  is  fallen. 

To  be  sung  with  a  will,  by  all  who  can;  Composed  for 
the  occasion  by  the  Captain;  copyright  secured. 
Double-line  border.   20.7  x  11.5  cm. 

2719.  YOU'VE  BEEN  A  FRIEND  TO  ME.-My  bark  of  life 
was  tossing  down  (3  vs.  and  chor.) 

Sheet  no.  85;  music  sent  by  Wehman;  publ.  Wehman. 
T.  o.  border.   24.1  x  15.1  cm. 

2720.  ZARVONA.  — Tfee  morning  sun  a  blessing  brings 
(13  vs.  printed  on  both  sides  of  sheet) 

[By  Mrs.  G.  A.  K.  McLeod.] 
Letter  paper;  lavender  ink;  t.  o.  border.  20.3  x 
11.5  cm. 


184 


2721,    ZION'S  SOLDIER.- We  are  the  soldiers  of  the  cross  2722.   THE  ZOUAVE  BOiYS.—Zoiuzves  sly,  shut  one  eye 

(15  vs.)  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air.  — "Nelly  Bly." 

Composed  by  Rev.  John  A.  Williams.  For  Sale  at  Doyle's. 

Double-line  border.   24.5  x  12.2  cm.  T.  o.  border;  flag.   24  x  14  cm. 


185 


Confederate  Songs 


Cl.  ACROSTIC  [ON  B.  F.  BVTLEB.]. -Brutal  by  nature  -  a 
coward  and  knave  (8  lines) 

Baltimore,  March  14,  1863. 

a.  15.7  X  10.5  cm. 

b.  Yellow  paper.   11  x  8.3  cm. 

C2.  ADDRESS  TO  HER  MARYLAND  LOVER,  BY  A  VIR- 
GINIAN GlRl^.—Fly  to  the  South,  come  fly  with  me  (5  vs.) 
Air— "Fly  to  the  Desert." 
[Signed]   M.F.Q. 

a.  Printed  on  double-sheet;  title  on  first  page  headed: 
"A  Southern  Song";  Richmond,  1861;  text  on  third  page. 
15.2  X  10  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  with  embossed  border  on  first  page. 

16.1  X  9.9  cm. 

c.  [As  above,  without  embossed  border;]  with  flag  in 
red  and  blue  on  first  page.  15.4  x  10  cm. 

d.  Printed  on  double-sheet;  first  page  headed  "Privately 
Printed";  Baltimore,  1862;  text  on  second  and  third  pages; 
1st  song  dated  Richmond,  May  3,  1861;  2nd  song:   "Reply", 
dated  Baltimore,  May  28,  1861. 

Red  ink;  solid  border  in  red;  flag  in  red  and  blue  on 
first  page;  seal  above  each  text.  20.2  x  12.5  cm. 

C3.  THE  ALABAMA  COTTAGE.  A  HOMELY  SCENE. - 
The  Alabam.ian  sat  by  the  chim.ney  side  (10  vs.) 

Blue  paper;  t.  o.  border;  farm  scene.   24.5  x  12  cm. 

C4.  ALL  SPICE;  OR,  SPICE  FOR  ALL.  — The  people  endure 
all  (3  vs.) 

a.  [Signed]   Cola;  Baltimore,  March  7,  1862. 

Title  within  double-line  border;  double-line  border. 

22.2  X  6.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.   22.2  x  6.3  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Our  Opinion;  A  Hit  At  These  Times;"  with 
four  added  verses;  [signed]  "Le  Diable  Baiteux,"  [N.  G. 
Ridgeley,]  Baltimore,  April  1,  1862. 

Double-line  border;  man  pasting  up  sign  with  title. 
28  X  5.8  cm. 

C5.  ALLS  WELL,  COME  TO  THE  RESCUE. -Oree  night  of 
late  I  chanced  to  stray   (8  vs.) 

Headed:   "Song." 

T.  o.  border.   36  x  11.4  cm. 

C6.   THE  AMERICAN  REBELSI-fleftefe.'  tis  a  holy  name 
(8  vs.) 

Headed:    "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  clasped  hands.   30.1  x  14.2  cm. 

C7.   THE  AMERICAN  STAR.— Come,  strike  the  boU 
anthem.,  the  war  dogs  are  howling  (4  vs.)  Air— Humors  of 
Glen. 

[Publ.]  Louis  Bonsai;  adv:  All  Kinds  of  Books  Bound. 

T.  o.  border.  20.7  x  12.3  cm. 

C8.  AN  APPEAL  FOR  MARYLAND. -0/aH  the  gems  that 
gild  the  wreath  (6  vs . ) 


[Signed]   B;  Baltimore,  January  20th,  1862. 
Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.  19  x 
10  cm. 

C9.  APPEAL  TO  THE  SOVTH.-Southerns!  since  we  boast 
that  nam.e  (7  vs.) 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  wharf  scene  with  box  bearing  imprint 
"Edes  Print."   24.5  x  11.5  cm. 

AN  APPEAL  TO  THE  SOUTH,  see  HARK!    O'ER  THE 
SOUTHERN  HILLS. 

CIO.    ARE  WE  FREE?— ^re  we  free?   go  ask  the  question 
(6  vs.) 

a.  [Signed]  J[ames  R.  Brewer];  Maryland,  1861. 
Red  Ink;  double-line  border.  20.5  x  12.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  but  title:  "Maryland  in  Chains."  27.8  x 
9.9  cm. 

Cll.  ATTY^TKm.— Hearken,  friends  and  foes  now 
hearken  (6  vs.) 

[Signed]   B.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  16,  1861. 

T.  o.  border.    17  x  13.2  cm. 

C12.   "AUDAX  OMNL4  PERPETI  GENS  LINCOLNA  RUIT 
PER  VETITUM  NEFAS."— Come  pretty  Muse  give  me  your 
help  (8  vs.  uneven  length) 

[Signed]   B.;  with  footnote  at  bottom. 

T.  o.  border.   26.4  x  13.7  cm. 

C13.  AWAKE  IN  D^X^E.—Hear  ye  not  the  sound  of  battle 
(8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Dixie's  Land." 

[Signed]  H[enry]  T[hompson]  S[tanton]  Winchester, 
Va.,  Feb.  24,  1862. 

Green  paper;  double-line  border.   26  x  8.6  cm. 

C13A.  BALT1MOB.E.— Hail  queen  of  cities,  birthplace  of 
the  just  (5  vs.) 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border,  sailing  vessel  off  shore.  23.3  x  14.9  cm. 

C13B.   THE  BALTIMORE  GIRLS. -O/z  the  Girls  of  dear 
old  Baltimore  (4  vs.)  Tune— "Dearest  Mae." 

T.  o.  border;  Justice  and  Liberty  as  supporters  of 
blank  shield.  24.6  x  13.2  cm. 

C13C.   BALTIMORE  PRISONERS,  AT  FORT  LAFAYETTE! 
TRAITORS'  DOOM.— Oh!  Freedom's  fire's  burning 
bright  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Old  Grey  Goose." 

T.  o.  border;  landscape  with  buildings  and  smokestack. 
29.4  X  13.9  em. 

C14.  BATTLE  AT  BULLS  RUN.-Ofe  be  easy,  don't  you 
teaze  me  (8  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  11.4  cm.  (cropped) 

C15.   THE  BATTLE-CRY  OF  THE  SOUTH. -Broiters.' 
the  thunder  cloud  is  black  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

By  James  R.  Randall;  sub-headed  by  quotation  from 
Maccabees  I. 

T.  o.  border.   23  x  10.5  cm. 


186 


C16.   BATTLE  HYMN  OF  THE  VIRGINIA  SOLDIER!- 
Father  of  earth  and  heaven!  I  call  thy  name  (4  vs.) 

Pink  paper;  double-line  border.   20.5  x  9  cm.  (cropped) 

BATTLE  OF  LEESBURGH,  see  BULL'S  RUN. 

C17.   THE  BATTLE  OF  MANASSAS.— Now  proudly  lift,  oh, 
sunny  South  (17  vs.) 

By  Susan  Archer  Talley;  Richmond,  Aug.  3,  1861;  with 
two  "P's"  in  upper  corners. 

a.  Double-line  border.   31  x  24  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.   29  x  20  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.   31.3  x  23.2  cm. 

C18.   THE  BATTLE  OF  THE  STOVES-PIPES. -0;z  Mun- 
son's  heights  the  Rebel  banners  wave  (20  vs.) 

a.  With  MS.  note  "by  Nannie  Lemmon." 
Blue  paper;  t.  o.  border.  20  x  19.7  cm. 

b.  With  MS.  note  "5  cts.  privately  printed  only  150  copies 
published."  20.2  x  14.2  cm.  (cropped) 

C19.  BATTLE  SONG  OF  THE  "BLACK  HORSEMEN."— 
We  have  come  from  the  brave  Southwest  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Dixie." 

[Signed]  C,  Winchester,  Va.  Oct.,  1861;  with  footnote 
at  bottom. 

Double-line  border.   21.5  x  13  cm. 

C20.   THE  BATTLE  SONG  OF  THE  MARYLAND  LINE.— 
To  arms!  to  arms!  the  fight's  begun   (8  vs.) 

2nd  song:   "The  Flag". 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.    29.4  x  10.2  cm. 

C21.  BEAUREGARD.— Fias/zj?!^,  flashing  along  the  wires 
(8  vs.) 

Headed:  "Printed  for  Private  Circulation";  note, 
April  12th,  April  14th,  July  21st,  1861. 

a.  T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.   17.8  x  14  ciu. 

b.  Letter  paper;  red  ink;  t.  o.  [Bonsai]  border;  flag,  col. 
19.4  X  14.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  border  in  blue.  19.8  x  16  cm. 

C22.  BEAUREGARD  AT  MANASSAS . -./>/om;  glory  to  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  oh,  bless  and  praise  His  nam.e  (5  vs.) 

[By  Mary  Devereux  Clarke.]   15.7  x  8.5  cm.  (cropped) 

C23.  BEAUREGARD  AT  SHILOYL.-Now  glory  to  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  [2nd  line]  And  glory  the  reward  (12  vs.) 

Lines  found  on  the  dead  body  of  a  Confederate  soldier 
after  the  battle  of  Williamsburgh.   15.4  x  6  cm.  (cropped) 

C24.  BEN  M'CULLOUGH.-Ofe  have  you  heard  of  the  brave 
old  fellow  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Someting  [sic]  new 
comes  every  day." 

Headed:   "Song";  [by  John  Brady.] 

T.  o.  border;  gentleman  holding  top-hat.    27.4  x  15.5  cm. 

C25.  THE  BOLD  ENGINEER. -0  bully  George  B.  has  come 
out  of  the  West  (9  vs.)  Air — Young  Lockinvar. 
[Signed]   O.  H.  S.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  14th,  1861. 

a.  Double-line  border;  pink  paper;  elephant  with  slogans: 
"Oh  dear!  Oh  dear!  what  have  we  here."  and  "George  B. 
McClellan".   24.5  x  8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.  25  x  8.3  cm. 

c.  [As  above;  without  McClellan's  name  on  elephant.] 
27.2  X  9.6  cm. 


C26.   THE  BONNIE  BLUE  FLAG. -We  are  a  band  of 
brothers,  and  native  to  the  soil  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Harry  McCarthy;]  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border,  with  war  scenes  in  lower 
corners.   25  x  17.2  cm. 

C27.   THE  BROKER'S  "STAMP  ACT"  LAMENT.-fiac/z 
one  we  meet  upon  the  street  (3  vs.) 

July,  1862. 

Yellow  paper;  double-line  border.   19.5  x  10  cm. 

C28.  BULL'S  RUN.— CoJTze  gentle  muse  give  me  your  aid 
(6  vs.) 

a.  Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  hunter  with  hound.  24.7  x  11.4  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Quamdiu  tandem  abutere  patientiae  nostrae? 
Ad  quern  finem  sese  jactabit  Audacia?";  with  7  vs.  un- 
even length,  varying;  [signed)  B.;  Baltimore,  June  30, 
1861. 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  12  cm. 

C29.  BULL'S  RUN.— Says  Greely  to  Scott,  to  Richmond, 
why  not  (10  vs.)  Tune— "Wait  for  the  Wagon." 

a.  T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  19.5  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  Title:   "Bull  Run." 

Multi-line  border.  18.8  x  11.1  cm.  (cropped) 

c.  Title:  "Battle  of  Leesburgh!" 
T.  o.  border.  26.5  x  13.5  cm. 

C30.  BURN  THE  COITOW.-Burn  the  cotton!  bum  the 
cotton  (6  vs.) 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  15,  1862. 

a.  Double-line  border.  21  x  8.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  orange  paper.   21.7  x  9.3  cm. 

C.S.A.,  see  THE  SPIRIT  OF  1861. 

C31.   THE  C ALU— Maryland!  Maryland!  (3  vs.) 
[Signed]  A.  B.;  Balto.,  Oct.,  1862. 

a.  Double-line  border;  seal  of  Maryland.  21.1  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

C32.  CAMP  SONG  OF  THE  MARYLAND  LINE. -We're  the 
boys,  so  gay  and  happy  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Gay  and 
Happy." 

a.  As  Sung  by  the  Baltimore  Boys  m  Richmond. 
T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  13  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Maryland  Southern  Volunteer's  Song." 
Double  t.  o.  border.  22.6  x  15  cm. 

C33.  CHIEF  JUSTICE  TANEY. -ifaii.'  thou  noble  hearted 
lawyer  (7  vs.)  Air— "The  Days  of  absence." 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  gentleman  holding  top-hat.  28.1  x  15.8  cm. 

C34.  CHIVALROUS  C.S.A!-/'H  sing  you  a  song  of  the 
South' s  sunny  clime  (4  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Vive  la 
Compagnie!" 

[Signed]   B.;  Baltimore,  Sept.  21,  1361. 

T.  o.  border.   25.5  x  13.2  cm. 

C35.  THE  CONFEDERATE  FLAG. -Bright  banner  of  free- 
dom, with  pride  I  unfold  thee  (4  vs.) 

(By  Susan  Blanchard  Elder.) 

Yellow  paper.   20.2  x  12.5  cm. 


187 


C36.  THE  CONFEDERATE  FLAG  RED,  WHITE  &  BLUE. 
—On  the  hanks  of  the  Potomac,  there's  an  army  so  grand 
(8  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

Composed  and  sung  by  J.  S.  Prevatt,  Co.  E.  6th  Ga. 
Reg. 

a.  T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.   25.6  x  11.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.  26  x  12  cm. 

C37.   THE  CONFEDERATE  SOLDIER'S  WIFE  PARTING 
FROM  HER  HUSBAND!-Here  is  thy  trusty  blade  (4  vs. 
uneven  length) 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper;  small  figures  of 
soldiers.   18.5  x  9.5  cm. 

C37A.   THE  CONFEDERATE  STATES. -Fawfeees  may  sing 
of  their  rank  pork  and  beans  (5  vs.) 
T.  o.  border.  19.6  x  11.5  cm. 

C38.  CONGRESSMAN  ELY.— -4s  I  rode  down  to  Manassas 
one  day  (7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Hi  ho  Dobbin." 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border.   30.5  x  17  cm. 

COTTON  IS  KING,  see  KING  COTTON. 

C39.  COUNTRY,  HOME  AND  LEBERTY-FreedoJn  calls 
you]  Quick,  be  ready  (5  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  peach-colored  paper.   19  x  9  cm. 

C40.   "DA  VIS!"— GtiJe  tis  one  chance,  t'is  all  we  ask  (6  vs.) 
By  Quien  Sabe?;  Baltimore,  Feb.  10,  1862. 
Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.   27  x 

13  cm. 

C41.  DEAR  LIBERTY  OR  MARYLAND  WILL  BE  FREE.- 
Farewell,  dear  Liberty ,  farewell  for  awhile  (5  vs.  and 
chor.)  Tune.— Carry  me  back  to  Old  Virginny. 

By  Miss  R.  L.,  a  Daughter  of  Dixie. 

T.  o.  border.   20  x  9.2  cm. 

C42.  THE  DEBT  OF  MARYLAND. -iJemewfter,  -  men  of 
Maryland  (5  vs.) 

a.  [Signed]   H[elen  Sumner];  Baltimore,  October,  16,  1861. 
Double-line  border;  arms  of  Maryland  [Bonsai].   25  x 

11.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  green  paper.   21.5  x  8.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  title:  "Remember  and  Repay"; 
white  paper.   26.5  x  10  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.   22.9  x  9  cm. 

e.  Title:   "The  Debt". 
Double-line  border.   17.3  x  10. 3  cm. 

f.  Title:   "Our  Debt";  Baltimore,  October  16,  1861. 
Double-line  border.   18.8  x  8.4  cm. 

g.  [As  above;  without  border.]  23.3  x  12  cm. 

C43.  DEDICATED  TO  THE  BALTIMORE  LIGHT  ARTIL- 
LERY, CSA— The  Maryland  Boys  are  coming  (5  vs.  and 
chor.) 

By  Captain  Alexander. 

a.  Yellow  paper;  double-line  border;  arms  of  Maryland 
[Bonsai].   17.7  x  8.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.   17.7  x  8.7  cm. 

C44.  THE  DESPOT'S  SOHG\-With  a  beard  that  was  fiUhy 
and  red  (5  vs.) 


[Signed]  "Ole  Seoesh."  [Francis  O.  Ticknor];  Balti- 
more, March,  15,  1862. 

Double-line  border;  elephant  with  slogan  "I  Carry 
Along!"  26.7  x  11.2  cm. 

C45.   DISGRACE  &  SHAME-/faito.'  what's  the  matter 
(7  vs.)  Air— "The  Campbells  are  coming." 
T.  o.  border.  21.5  x  16.2  cm. 

C46.  DDC'S  MANIFESTO— OTJce  on  a  time  in  Baltimore 
(7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— "Dearest  Mae." 

[Signed]   B.;  Baltimore,  September  11th,  1861. 

a.  Double-line  border;  man  in  a  barrel.  23  x  7.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.   22.2  x  7.4  cm. 

C47.  DODGE'S  POLICE.— Come  all  ye  Southern  lassies 
(7  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Wait  for  the  Wagon". 

Headed :   ' '  Song ' ' . 

T.  o.  border;  schoolroom  scene.   30.5  x  12.7  cm. 

C48.  DOWN  TRODDEN  UP^Y^K^D.— Down-trodden, 
despised  see  brave  Maryland  lie  (6  vs.) 

a.  With  hyphen  in  title;  Air— "Tom  Bowling";  [signed] 
B.;  Baltimore,  Nov.  18,  1861;  3  vs.  only. 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border;  blue  paper;  arms  of  Maryland. 
20  X  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  white  paper.  18.2  x  10.4  cm. 

c.  Headed:  "Privately  printed";  third  edition  revised; 
[signed]  N.G.R.;  Baltimore,  March  4,  1862;  with  MS.  note 
giving  author's  name  as  Dr.  N.G.  Ridgeley. 

Gold  ink;  t.  o.  [Bonsai]  border;  arms  of  Maryland. 
22  X  15.5  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  rust-brown  ink;  t.  o.  [Bonsai],  border; 
scales  of  Justice  in  cloud.  24.5  x  17  cm. 

C49.   THE  DYING  CONFEDERATE'S  LAST  WORDS-i3ear 
comrades  on  m.y  brow  the  hand  of  death  is  cast  (6  vs.) 

[Signed]  Maryland;  with  MS.  attribution  to  L.  Katzen- 
burger,  Bait. 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.   19  x  9  cm. 

C50.   THE  EXILED  SOLDIER'S  ADIEU  TO  MARYLAND.- 
Adieu  my  home!  Adieu  dear  Maryland  (3  vs.)  Air- 
"Bertrand's  Adieu  to  France." 

Camp  near  Manassas,  July  5,  1861;  [signed]  X;  with 
MS.  note  "Printed  in  Lee's  Army". 

Double-line  border;  arms  of  Maryland.  24.5  x  10  cm. 

C50A.   THE  EXODUS.- Ho.'  bright  eyed  maidens  of  the 
South,  your  happy  voices  raise  (18  vs.) 

With  text  preceded  by  quotations,  [signed]  Old  Soldier; 
4  pp.   18.9  X  12.3  cm. 

C51.   FIAT  JUSTITIA. —  T^ere  is  no  day,  however  darkly 
clouded  (44  lines) 

a.  Dedicated  to  the  Maryland  Prisoners  at  Fort  Warren 
by  a  Female  Rebel;  Baltimore,  Jan.  1862. 

Double-line  border.  19  x  10  cm. 

b.  Title:  "God  will  Repay";  privately  printed;  ten  four- 
line  verses;  [signed]  H[elen  Sumner]  Rebel;  Baltimore, 
1862. 

Double-line  border;  red  ink;  scales  of  Justice  in 
cloud.  21.9  X  8.8  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  but  with  title:   "Right  must  Prevail". 
21.9  X  9  cm. 


188 


C52.   "FISHING"  IN  TROUBLED  WATERS. -/«  a  dingy 
room  of  a  mansion  old,  a  solemn  "council"  met  (18  vs.) 
32  X  9.5  cm.  (cropped) 

THE  FLAG,  see  THE  BATTLE  SONG  OF  THE 
MARYLAND  LINE. 

C53.  THE  FLAG  OF  SECESSION.— O/z,  say  can't  you  see 
by  the  dawn's  early  light  (4  vs.)  Tune— "Star  Spangled 
Banner." 

[By  Frank  Pinkney.J 

T.  o.  border.    22.6  x  15.7  cm. 

C54.  FORT  SUMPTER.  A  SOUTHERN  SONG. -Come  now 
and  gather  round  me  (6  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— Dearest  May. 

By  Dr.  Barnstable,  B.C.H.G. 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.  20.5  x  10.7  cm.  [with  MS.  note 
"The  first  Song  printed  in  Bait.  21  April  1861".] 

C54A.  A  FRAGMENT  .—Refreshed  in  wonted  might  (38 
lines) 

Dotted-line  border.  24.6  x  15.2  cm. 

FREEDOM'S  CALL,  see  SOUTHRONS  TO  ARMS! 

C55.  THE  GALLANT  COLONEL.- T/zere  lived  a  man  in 
Brooklin  town  (11  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  Confederate  flag.  30.2  x  13.3  cm. 

C55A.  GAY  AND  HAPPY.— T/ze  Southern  Boys  are  gay 
and  happy  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  Justice  with  sword  and  scales,  ship  in 
background.  29.7  x  14.1  cm. 

C56.  GEN.  BEAUREGARD.— W7ze«  war  clouds  gathered 
about  our  land  (7  vs.) 

[By  John  Brady.] 

T.  o.  border.  20  x  10.5  cm. 

C57.  GEN.  JOHNSTON.— BetoW  the  brave  son  of  the  good 
"Old Dominion"  (5  vs.)  Air— "American  Star." 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper;  exploding  cannon  ball. 
19.5  X  11.5  cm. 

C57A.  GEN.  SCOTT  A-SLEEP.— O.'  they're  all  dreaming, 
dream.,  dream.,  dreaming  (6  vs.)  Air-"Were  a  Nodding." 
T.  o.  border.  21.3  x  14  cm. 

C57B.  GENERAL  BEAUREGARD.-Geraerai  G.T.  Beau- 
regard (4  vs.)  Air  — "Scots  wha  ha." 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  cavalryman  with  trumpet.  15.9  x  30.1 
cm. 

C58.  GENERAL  BUTLER.  — Bwiier  and  I  went  out  from 
camp  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "Yankee  Doodle. 
Headed:  "Song." 

a.  T.  o.  border;  house  front.  25.7  x  11.5  cm. 

b.  T.  o.  border;  wharf  scene  with  box  bearing  imprint 
"Edes  Print."  28.6  x  15. 4  cm. 

C59.  GENERAL  'LEY..— There  is  a  man  in  Old  Virginny 
(3  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Oh!  carry  me  back  to  old 
Virginny." 

a.  T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.   20  x  11.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  21.2  x  13.2  cm. 


C60.   THE  GEORGIA  VOLUNTEER.-/  leave  my  home  and 
thee,  dear  (4  vs.  and  chor.) 
Print.  J.  Green. 

a.  Double-line  border;  pink  paper.   18  <  8.8  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  brown  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

C61.   GOD  AND  LIBERTY !-/«  the  name  of  God!  Amen 
(4  vs.) 

a.  With  MS.  note,  "Written  by  Phillip  Barton  Keys 
sister,  daughter  of  the  Author  of  'The  Star  Spangled 
Banner!'  " 

Blue  ink;  double-line  border;  bust  of  Washington. 
26.5  X  9  cm. 

b.  [As  above,  without  MS.  note;]  with  title;  "The  South- 
ern Cross".  26.5  x  8.8  cm. 

GOD  BE  OUR  TRUST,  see  OUR  HOPE. 

C62.   GOD  BLESS  THE  SOUTH.- Wow  to  heaven  our 
prayer  ascending  (4  vs.)  Air— "God  speed  the  right." 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  buff  paper;  bull.  23  x  11.5  cm. 

C63.  GOD  HELP  KENTUCKY!  AN  ANTHEM.- Lord /rom 
thy  heavenly  throne  (4  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  blue  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

GOD  WILL  REPAY,  see  FIAT  JUSTITLA. 

C64.  GOOD  NEWS  FROM  DIXIE. -ffozo  the  South' s  great 
heart  rejoices  (7  vs.  and  chor.) 

Blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  Liberty  holding  flag,  and  sol- 
dier on  guard  in  front  of  flag  and  tents,  in  red  and  blue. 
29.2  X  14.1  cm. 

C65.   GOV.  YOCKS.— Mister  Hicks,  full  of  tricks  (9  vs.; 
Air— "Money  Musk." 

T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.    20.6  x  14,9  cm. 

C66.  GRAVES  FOR  THE  INVADERS.  A  FRAGMENT.- 
Graves  for  the  invaders!  graves  (9  vs.) 
Savannah,  Ga.,  1863. 

a.  Double-line  border;  Justice  with  sword  and  scales, 
col.  24.3  X  6.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.  24.4  x  6.8  cm. 

C67.   GREAT  BIG  BETHEL  FIGHT.  AWFUL  CALAMITY. - 
I'll  tell  you  of  a  tale  that  lately  befel  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 
Air— "Dixie." 

T.  o.  border.   26.5  x  14.2  cm. 

C68.  GREAT  CRY  AND  LITLLE  (sic)  WOOL;  OR,  THE 
LEADING  BLACK  REPUBLICANS  DESCRIBED  IN  VERSE. 
—  Oh  dearest  Muse  your  help  I  ask  (10  vs.,  uneven  length.) 

a.  By  Barnstable;  Baltimore,  July  2,  1861. 
Caricature  of  Lincoln  on  throne  surrounded  by  con- 
temporary leading  Republicans.  23.8  -^  16.1  cm. 

b.  Title:   "Great  Cry  But  Little  Wool";  Baltimore,  July 
2,  1861. 

Caricature  of  Lincoln  on  throne  surrounded  by  con- 
temporary leading  Republicans.  25.1  x  20  cm. 

C69.  THE  GUERILLAS.   A  SOUTHERN  WAR  SONG.- 
Awake  and  to  Iwrse,  my  brothers  (18  vs.) 
[By  Severn  Teackle  Wallis.] 


189 


a.  Double-line  border.   24.8  x  7  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  comma  after  "Guerillas";  equal  number  of  lines 
in  9  vs.;  composed  in  the  Yankee  Bastille;  Fort  Lafayette, 
1862. 

T.  o.  border;  yellow  paper.  24.8  x  7.1  cm. 

C70.   HAIL!  TO  THE  SOUTH.- Another  star  arisen, 
another  flag  unfurled  (6  vs.) 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  soldier  on  horse  blowing  trumpet.  29.9 
X  15.2  cm. 

C71.   HARK!  O'ER  THE  SOUTHERN  VOULS.-Harkl  o'er 
the  Southern  hills  I  hear  (11  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  Title:   "An  Appeal  To  The  South";  by  "A  Daughter  of 
Dixie";  [signed]  H.;  Baltimore,  Jan.  24th,  1862;  with 
footnote:  "The  last  battle  of  the  first  Revolution  was 
fought  at  Yorktown,  Va.,  in  1781,  and  gained  by  the  'im- 
mortal Washington,  the  Old  Dominion's  peerless  son'!" 

Double-line  border;  exploding  cannon  ball.  30.1  x 
8.6  cm. 

b.  With  two  extra  verses  and  chor.;  variants  in  wording 
of  other  verses;  By  a  Southern  Lady;  with  footnote:   "The 
last  great  battle  of  the  first  revolution  was  gained  in  1781, 
at  Yorktown,  which  may  be  said  to  have  ended  the  revo- 
lutionary fight";  Norfolk,  Jan.  24th,  1862;  [signed]  H. 

Double-line  border;  bust  of  Jefferson  Davis.  21.7  x 
13.2  cm. 

C72.   HARK!  THE  SUMMONS.- i?arfe.'  in  the  South  the 
thund'ring  drum  (5  vs.) 

[Signed]  B.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  9th,  1861;  2nd  song: 
"Southern  Sentiments". 

a.  Double-line  border;  soldier  on  horse  blowing  trumpet. 
30.6  X  9.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.  30.6  x  9.2  cm. 

C73.  HICKSIE.— £is  a  mighty  bad  way  dey's  got  ole  Hicks 
in  (9  vs.  and  chor.) 

T.  o.  border  with  ornamental  corners;  eagle  on  shield. 
20.6  X  10.9  cm. 

HOMESPUN  PLAID,  see  SOUTHERN  GIRL. 

C74.   HURRAH  FOR  UlXW.\  —  SoiUhrons ,  hear  your 
Country  call  you  (8  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Albert  Pike.] 

Double-line  border;  man  with  flag  on  which  is  printed 
"Excelsior".   30.5  x  15.4  cm. 

C75.   HURRAH  FOR  JEFF.  DAVIS .-  Hurrah  for  Jeff . 
Davis,  Hurrah  (3  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Air— "Hurrah  for  the 
Bonnets  o'  Blue." 

By  a  Lady  Rebel-written  after  the  battle  of  Bull  Run. 

T.  o.  border.   16.2  x  11.4  cm. 

C76.   HURRAH  FOR  JEFF.  DAVIS.-OMr  Country  now 
calls,  we'll  up  and  away  (6  vs.  and  2  chors.)  Tune:  -Gum 
Tree  Canoe. 

T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.  22.7  x  ii.6  cm. 

C77.   IF  YOU  BELONG  TO  DIXIE'S  LAND.- To  bring  you 
this  good  news  I've  come  (6  vs.  and  chors.)  Tune:— 
"Gideon's  Band." 

T.  o.  border.  24.6  x  9.2  cm. 

C78.  AN  IMPROMPTU.-Tfee  South,  the  South,  the 
glorious  South  (5  vs.) 


By  Dr.  Barnstable,  B.C.H.G.;  with  footnote:  "Dixie 
has  already  been  adopted  as  a  National  Air  by  the  South- 
ern Confederacy." 

T.  o.  border.  24.4  x  15.4  cm. 

C79.  IS  THERE  NOBODY  HURT- Hark!  the  cries  of 
widowed  mothers  (7  vs.)  Air— "Cocachelunk." 

T.  o.  border.   19.8  x  13.1  cm.  [see  also  C143A] 

C80.  IT  IS  v.— They  come,  they  com.e  -  a  motley  crew 
(3  vs.) 

Double  line  border;  pink  paper;  scales  of  Justice  in 
cloud.  17.4  X  8.6  cm. 

C80A.  JACKSON'S  REQUIEM.— That  noted  burglar  Ells- 
worth (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Dearest  Mae." 

[Signed]  B. 

T.  o.  border;  Fortune  pouring  out  gold.  28  x  15.7  cm. 

C80B.  JEFF.  DAVIS  IN  THE  WHITE  HOUSE. -ye  North- 
ern m.en  in  Washington  (5  vs.)  Air— "Ye  Parliaments  of 
Old  England. 

T.  o.  border;  house  front.  31.2  x  15.2  cm. 

081.  JOHN  BELL  OF  TENNESSEE.- T/zere  is  a  man  of 
noble  heart  (b  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Auld  Lang  Syne." 

T.  o.  border;  bell  on  pulling  mechanism.   21.7  x  15 
cm. 

C82.  JOHN  BROWN'S  ENTRANCE  INTO  HELL. -Come 
gentle  muse  and  touch  a  strain  (20  vs.) 

Bait.,  March,  1863;  print.  C.T.A. 

Yellow  paper.  16.7  x  10.8  cm. 

C83.   [JOHN  HARROLSON.J-Jo/zn  Harrolson,  John 
Harrolson,  you  are  a  funny  creature  (6  vs.) 

With  explanation:   "During  the  late  war,  gunpowder 
being  very  scarce  in  the  Confederacy.  .  .  .";  with  Selma 
Journal  version  and  added  Northern  verses.   18  x  12.1  cm. 

C84.  JOHN  MERRYMAN— Joto  Merryman,  the  Mary- 
lander  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Old  Dan  Tucker. 

a.  T.  o.  border;  buff  paper.  19.8  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.   20.6  x  12.8  cm. 

C85.  KENTUCKIANS,  TO  ARMS!  !  [-Kentuckians,  rise 
(6  vs.) 

Louisville,  Ky.,  1861. 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.   18.3  x  8.7  cm. 

C86.  KING  COTTON.— ^n  hail  to  the  great  king  (10  vs.) 
[Signed]  N.G.R[idgeley];   Baltimore,  Jan.   1,  1862. 

a.  T.  o.  border.  25.5  x  9.2  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  light  pink  paper.  25.7  x  9.4  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Cotton  Is  King". 
T.  o.  border.  25.5  x  9  cm. 

d.  [As  above;]  tan  paper.  25.3  x  8.9  cm. 

C87.  KING  COTTON. -OM  Cotton  is  King,  boys,  ha!  ha! 
(4  vs.  and  chor.) 
11.5  X  6  cm. 

C88.   LAND  OF  THE  SOUTH  !-Lanrf  of  the  South!  Land 
of  the  South!  (3  vs.)  Air— "Happy  Land." 

T.  o.  border;  Hercules  killing  the  Hydra.   29.8  x  14.6 


190 


C89.  THE  LAST  RACE  OF  THE  RAIL-SPLITTER.- Wfen 
Zerxes  and  when  Cyrus  led  (8  vs.  and  8  chors.) 

With  footnote:   "It  will  not  be  forgotten  that  Lincoln, 
after  his  election,  on  his  way  to  Washington,  heard  at 
Harrisburg,  that  a  plan  was  laid  to  run  the  cars  off,  and 
kill  him.  .  ." 

Double-line  border;  negro  running  with  pack  over  his 
shoulder.  21.5  x  13.2  cm. 

LIBERTY  OR  DEATH,  see  SOUTHERN  SONG  OF 
LIBERTY. 


C99.  THE  MARCH  OF  THE  MARYLAND  ME^.— There's 
many  a  son  of  old  Maryland's  soil  (4  vs.  and  chors.) 
T.  o.  border.   23.9  x  11.3  cm. 

MARYLAND,  see  MARYLAND,  MY  MARYLAND. 

ClOO.  MARYLAND.  A  FRAGMENT .— Refreshed  in  wonted 
might  (38  lines) 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.   18.4  x  8.7  cm. 

ClOl.   MARYLAND  IN  CHAINS,  see  ARE  WE  FREE? 


C90.   LINCOLN  ON  A  RAIL.— Come  all  you  felloTvs  that 
love  a  joke  (6  vs.  and  6  chors.)  Tune— "Sitting  on  a  Rail." 

Headed:   "Song." 

T.  o.  border.    29.6  x  15.5  cm. 

C91.   LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  LIEUT.  GEN.  T.J. 
JACKSON  C.S.A.—Cold  is  his  brow,  and  the  dew  of  the 
evening  (7  vs.) 

With  quotation:   "He  was-but  words  are  wanting  to  say 
what.  .  ." 

Mourning  border,  blue  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

C92.   LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  MAJOR  GEN.  E.  VAN 
DORN,  C.S.A.—  The  bold  and  noble  Earle  Van  Dorn  (6  vs.) 

With  quotation:  "Vile  envy,  with  a  serpent's  eye". 

Mourning  border;  green  paper.   18.2  x  8.8  cm. 

C93.   LINES  ON  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  CONFEDERATE 
GEN.  ALBERT  SIDNEY  JOHNSTON,  OF  KY.  WHO  FELL 
AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  "SHILOH,"  MISS.,  SUNDAY, 
APRIL  6,  1662.— Thou  are  gone  to  thy  rest  (5  vs.) 
T.  o.  border.  26.8  x  12.5  cm. 

C94.  LINES  ON  THE  PROCLAMATION  ISSUED  BY  THE 
TYRANT  LINCOLN,  APRIL  FIRST,  1863. -W'e  have  read 
the  tyrant's  order  (8  vs.) 

By  a  Rebel;  with  quotation:  "Are  there  no  stones  in 
heaven  but  what  serve  for  the  thunder-precious  villain?" 

Double-line  border.   20.9  x  11.7  cm. 


C95.   LINES  SACRED  TO  THE  MEMORY  OF  CAPT. 
HENRY  C.  GORRELL  OF  GREENSBORO'  N.C.,  OF  THE 
SECOND  NORTH  CAROLINA  REGIMENT,  WHO  FELL  IN 
AN  ATTACK  WHICH  HE  LED  AGAINST  THE  FEDERAL 
BATTERIES  AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  FAIR  OAKS,  JUNE 
14,  1862.— TTzey  laid  him  away  in  the  cold  dam.p  ground 
(3  vs.) 

"May  he  rest  in  peace";  By  a  Friend  of  the  Cause. 

Mourning  border;  yellow  paper.   18.2  x  8.8  cm. 

C96.   LITTLE  SOGERS.— WTzai's  the  matter  little  sogers 
(7  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.    23.2  x  14. 8  cm. 

C97.   THE  LONE  STAR  CAMP  SOUG.-Our  Rifles  are 
ready,  and  ready  are  we  (3  vs.) 

As  sung  by  Joe  Cook,  the  American  Comedian;  Copy 
right  secured;  publ.  Warner;  with  MS.  note,  "Pub.  19th 
April  1861,  Exceedingly  rare.  The  only  Southern  Song 
published  in  Balti'  with  printed  name  attached." 

T.  o.  border;  star.  17.2  x  13.2  cm. 

C98.   LOUISIANA.  A  PATRIOTIC  ODE.— Louisiana!  dear 
Pelican  mother  arise  (5  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  eagle  with  shield  and  arrows. 
18.2  X  8.7  cm. 


C102.  MARYLAND  IN  CHAINS. -O/z  vain  is  the  splendor 
of  blue-curtained  skies  (7  vs.) 

By  Mrs.  D.K.  Whitaker,  of  South  Carolina;  Richmond 
Examiner,  May  14,  1861. 

Double-line  border.  26.7  x  11  cm. 

C103.  MARYLAND  IN  FETTERS!-Hom;  beautiful  in  tears 
(4  vs.) 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  Justice  with  sword  and  scales,  ship  in 
background.  27.7  x  13.7  cm. 

C104.  THE  MARYLAND  MARTYRS.- T/zeji  bore  them  to 
a  gloomy  cell  (6  vs.) 

a.  Double-line  border.   18.9  x  9.9  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  tan  paper.   19.8  x  10.7  cm. 

C105.   MARYLAND,  MY  HOME.-Come  listen  while  I  sing 
to  you  (11  vs.) 

Double-line  border.  27.7  x  6.4  cm. 

C106.  MARYLAND,  MY  HOUE.- Sweet  Maryland,  thy 
groves  are  green  (3  vs.) 

[Sold  by]  Louis  Bonsai;  adv:  Books  Re-Bound  and 
Blanks  [sic]  Books  made  to  Order. 

T.  o.  border.  22.6  x  14.9  cm. 

C107.  MARYLAND,  MY  MARYLAND.-Tfce  despot's  heel 
is  on  thy  shore  (8  vs.) 

a.  With  5th  verse  beginning:  "Could  Washington  to  us 
appear." 

T.  o.  border.  28.1  x  11.8  cm. 

b.  With  5th  verse  beginning:  "Dear  Mother!  burst  the 
tyrant's  chain;"  title:  "Maryland";  Air  — "My  Nor- 
mandy!" 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border;  title  and  figure  of  Justice  with 
sword  and  scales,  ship  in  background,  within  laurel 
wreath,  in  red.   25  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  with  MS.  note  "Published  July  14th,  1861- 
very  rare." 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.  28.1  x  10.4  cm.  (cropped) 

d.  [Title  and  5th  verse  as  above;]  By  James  R.  Randall, 
of  Baltimore,  Md.;  with  e.xtra  verse. 

Red  ink;  double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Mary- 
land. 37  x  12.5  cm. 

e.  [As  above;]  green  paper.  35x9  cm. 

f.  Title:  "My  Maryland";  with  extra  verse;  written  by 
J.B.  Randall  at  Pointe-Coupee,  Louisiana,  April  26th, 
1861;  publ.  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  comic  heads  border.  25.1  x  16.2  cm. 

CI 08.  MARYLAND  SOUTHERN  VOLUNTEER'S  SONG, 
see  CAMP  SONG  OF  THE  MARYLAND  LINE. 


191 


C109.  MARYLAND  ZOUAVES  OWN.-H'e  are  bound  all 
hands  for  the  land  of  Cotton  (3  vs.  and  chors.) 

Respectfully  dedicated  to  the  First  Regiment  Mary- 
land Zouaves,  by  their  Friend,  G.W.  Alexander,  Adjutant 
of  the  Regiment. 

a.  Double  t.  o.  [Bonsai]  border;  yellow  paper.  18.1  x 
10.1  cm.  (cropped) 

b.  With  mottos  at  top  and  bottom:  "Liberty!  Equality! 
Fraternity!"  and  "One  For  All!  And  All  For  One!",  and 
at  each  side:  "Headquarters,  Richmond,  Virginia". 

22  X  14.3  cm. 

Clio.  MARYLAND'S  APPEAL.-0/z,  Maryland  enslaved, 
opprest  (3  vs.)  Air— "The  Harp  that  once  thro'  Tara's 
Halls." 

[By  Helen  Sumner.] 

T.  o.  border.   21.3  x  15.2  cm. 

cm.  MARYLAND'S  LAMENT  FOR  JACKSON.- Gowe 
from  us  -  gone  from  us  (7  vs.) 

By  Baltimora;  June,  1863. 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.   23.2  x  8.8  cm. 

C112.  THE  MARYLANDER  AT  MANASSAS.  A  FACT.- 
"Dusty  and  weary  I  laid  me  down  (33  two-line  vs.) 

Baltimore,  Dec.  16,  1861;  [signed]  N.G.R[idgeley]. 

Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.  35  x 
8.8  cm. 

C113.   THE  MARYLANDER'S  GOOD  BYE.-Adzew.'  Adieu] 
dear  Maryland  (4  vs.)  Air— "The  White  Rose." 

[Signed]  B. 

T.  o.  border;  two  hands  clasped.  24.6  x  14.2  cm. 

C114.  MAYOR  BROWN.— Gainer  round  all  friends  and 
neighbors  (11  vs.)  Air— "Rosseau's  Dream." 
T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.    21.2  x  14.9  cm. 

C115.  MUNSON'S  HILL!-0;z  call  us  hard  names,  call  us 
mere  tools  (4  vs.)  Air— "Call  Me  Pet  Names." 

Headed:   "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  hunter  with  hound.   28.2  x  13.8  cm. 

C116.  MY  GOD!  WHAT  IS  ALL  THIS  FOR?-"0;z  my  God! 
what  vengeful  madness  (6  vs.)  Air— Rosseau's  Dream. 

The  above  is  the  dying  words  of  a  Federal  Soldier  on 
the  Battle  field  of  Manassas,  1861. 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.  18.8  x  9.6  cm. 

MY  MARYLAND,  see  MARYLAND. 

THE  NATIONAL  PRAYER  FOR  "HUMILLATION 
DAY,"  see  PRAYER  FOR  MARYLAND. 

C117.   NIGGERS  IN  CONVENTION.   SUMNER'S  SPEECH.- 
Welcom.e  m.y  bredren  here  you  is  (3  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

C118.   NORTH  CAROLINA.   A  CALL  TO  ARMS.- Ke  sows 
of  Carolina!  awake  from  your  dreaming  (G  vs.) 

[By  Lovala  W.  Rogers;]  print.  Thompson  &  Co.;  1861. 

Scales  of  Justice  in  cloud.   18.3  x  8.5  cm. 

C119.  O,  LOVELY  DIXIE'S  LAND.-O,  lovely  Dixie's 
land  {11  vs.) 

Baltimore,  April,  1861;  [signed]  M.V. 

a.  Double-line  border.  25  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  21.2  x  8.7  cm. 

c.  [As  above;]  green  paper.  22.1  x  9.3  cm. 


C120.  ODE  ON  THE  MEETING  OF  THE  SOUTHERN 
CONGRESS.— 7/affc  not  the  morning  dawned  with  added 
light  (4  vs.) 

By  H.  Timrod.   26.6  x  17.7  cm. 

C121.  OH!  ABRAHAM,  RESIGN \- The  days  are  growing 
shorter  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  a  New  Contributor. 

Green  glazed  paper.  17.3  x  7.5  cm. 

C122.  OH,  I'M  A  GOOD  OLD  REBEL. -O/z,  I'm  a  good  old 
Rebel  (6  vs.) 

Publ.  Wm.  &  Geo.  Davie s. 

T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.  28.8  x  14.1  cm. 

C123.  OH  JEFF!  WHY  DON'T  YOU  COME? -Jeff  Davis 
are  you  coming?  we'll  be  glad  to  see  you  here  (6  vs.) 
Air— "Willie  we  have  missed  you." 

a.  T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.  23  x  13.3  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  blue  paper.  24.9  x  15.7  cm. 

C124.  OLD  ABE  LINCOLN!-M>i  name  it  is  Abe  Lincoln 
(5  vs.) 

Headed:   "Song:"  [by  John  Brady.] 

T.  o.  border;  soldier  on  horse  blowing  trumpet,  and 
a  gentleman  with  top  hat  in  hand.  29.7  x  15.5  cm. 

C125.  OLD  ABE'S  'LKWENT .— J eff  Davis  is  coming.  Oh! 
dear.  Oh!  dear  (6  vs.)  Tune— "The  Campbells  are 
Coming." 

a.  T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.  19.7  x  11.7  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  23.1  x  15.3  cm. 

THE  OLD  JJNE'S  APPEAL,  see  A  VOICE  FROM  THE 
OLD  MARYLAND  LINE. 

C125A.  OLD  VIRGINIA  NEVER  DIE.-0;z  be  easy,  don't 
you  teaze  m.e  (8  vs.) 

T.  o.  border.  21.6  x  14. 7  cm. 

C125B.   [THE  OLD  YEAR'S  OUT.]-Tfee  old  year's  out, 
and  the  new  has  begun  (62  lines) 
28.2  X  11.7  cm. 

OUR  DEBT,  see  THE  DEBT  OF  MARYLAND. 

C126.  OUR  HOPE.— God  save  our  Southern  land  (4  vs.) 

a.  Third  Edition;  Privately  Printed;  [signed]  Le  Diable 
Baiteux  [N.G.  Ridgeley]. 

Double-line  border;  anchor.   18.4  x  6.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.   17.7  x  5.8  cm. 

c.  Title:  "God  Be  Our  Trust!";  Air— "Heav'n  is  our 
Home";  long  lines.   19.4  x  12.5  cm. 

C127.  OUR  'LEFT.— From  dawn  to  dark  they  stood  {1  vs.) 
Dedicated  to  the  Maryland  Hero,  Gen.  Arnold  Elzey, 

C.S.A.;  [signed]  "Ole  Secesh"  [Francis  O.  Ticknor]; 

Baltimore,  Oct.  20,  1861. 

Double-line  border;  green  paper.   19  x  8.6  cm. 

C128.  OUR  MARSHAL  KANE-Come  and  listen  to  my 
story  (9  vs.)  Air— "Roseas  Dream." 
T.  o.  border.    21.3  x  14  cm. 

C129.  OUR  OPINION.- "O/z.'  mammy  have  you  heard  the 
news  (20  vs.) 

a.   Double-line  border;  hand  holding  card  with  title. 
38.7  X  8.8  cm. 


192 


b.  Title:  "A  Southern  Scene". 

Double-line  border;  farm  scene.  42  x  n  cm. 

OUR  OPINION:  A  HIT  AT  THESE  TIMES,  see  ALL 
SPICE:   OR,  SPICE  FOR  ALL. 

C130.  OUR  SOUTHERN  DEAU.— Mourn  for  our  glorious 
dead  (3  vs.) 

[Signed]  A.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  6,  1862.   17.9  x  10.2  cm. 

C129A.   OUR  RIGHTS.— Tfce  Stars  and  Stripes,  Oh  lovely 
cloth  (8  vs.) 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  hunter  with  dog.  29.1  x  14.7  cm. 

C130.   OUR  SOUTHERN  HEAD. -Mourn  for  our  glorious 
dead  (3  vs.) 

[Signed]  A.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  6,  1862. 

Tan  paper.  17.9  x  10.2  cm. 

C130A.  PEACE.  WRITTEN  BY  A  FOOL. -Peace  on  earth, 
good  will  to  men  (6  vs.)  Air— "The  American  Boy." 
T.  o.  border;  pink  paper.  21.2  x  15.1  cm. 

C130B.  PICAYUNE  BUT LER. -OW  Fmss  and  Feathers, 
as  we  knew  before  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Tune— "All  on  Hob- 
bies." 

T.  o.  border;  Hercules  fighting  the  Hydra,  with  legend 
"All  Old  Picayune  Butler  is  Fighting  Snakes."  23.3  x 
15.1  cm. 

C130C.    POOR  OLD  LINCOLN.-/  hear  the  noise  of  battle 
(4  vs.)  Air— "I  have  no  Mother  now." 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  a  gentleman  with  top-hat  in  his  hand. 
28  X  13.3  cm. 

C131.   PRAYER  FOR  MARYLAND.-Frow  Lincoln  and 
Hick's  (6  vs.) 

a.  The  National  Prayer,  slightly  altered  from  the  orig- 
inal of  Bishop  Whittingham,  to  suit  the  present  highly 
favored  condition  of  the  people  of  Maryland. 

Rust -brown  paper.  11.5  x  6.5  cm. 

b.  Title:  "The  National  Prayer,  for  'Humiliation  Day,' 
slightly  altered  from  the  original  supplication...;"  Balti- 
more, Sept.  26,  1861. 

T.  o.  border.  26  x  14.3  cm. 

C132.  A  PRAYER  TO  BE  SAID  BY  ALL  GOOD  CITIZENS 
ON  THE  DAY  OF  FASTING  &  PRAYER;  ORDERED  BY 
ABRAHAM  LINCOLN.— J«  thy  Name,  oh  Lord,  we  pray 
thee  that  thou  will  (14  lines)  Subheaded:  "The  Prayer". 
T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  10.5  cm. 

C132A.  THE  PRESIDENT'S  CHAIR.-Ke  Southrons  arouse, 
and  do  battle,  nor  yield  (3  vs.)  Air— "Star  Spangled  Ban- 
ner." 

T.  o.  border.  24.  9  x  13.6  cm. 

"QUAMDIU  TANDEM  ABUTERE  PATIENTIAE 
NOSTRAE?"  see  BULL'S  RUN. 

C133.   RALLY  AROUND  THE  STARS  AND  B ASS  \-  Rally 
round  your  country's  flag  ye  freem.en  of  the  South  (6  vs.) 

By  Robert  Lamb  -  51st  Georgia  Vols. 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.   18.2  x  8.7  cm. 

C134.   RALLY  ROUND  THE  STANDARD  BOYS.-Mj)  heart 
is  in  the  South  boys,  my  heart  is  not  here  (5  vs.) 
T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.   23.8  x  14.4  cm. 


C135.  THE  REBEL'S  RETORT.— TeH  us  not  we  will  make 
blunders  (7  vs.;  Air— "Cocachelunk." 

Headed:  "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  farm  house  with  millwheel.   26.8  x  15.3 
cm. 

C135A.  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  CONFEDER- 
ACY.—ijecog^wjze  us,  recognize  us  (6  vs.)  Air— "Rosseaus 
Dream." 

Headed:  "Song." 

T.  o.  border;  wharf  scene  with  box  bearing  imprint 
"Edes  Print."  28  x  15.2  cm. 

REMEMBER  AND  REPAY,  see  THE  DEBT  OF  MARY- 
LAND. 

REPLY,  see  ADDRESS  TO  HER  MARYLAND  LOVER, 
BY  A  VIRGINLAN  GIRL. 

C136.   REPLY  TO  THE  VIRGINIAN  GIRL'S  ADDRESS  TO 
HER  MARYLAND  LOVER.-  Farewell  to  submission 
(6  vs.) 

a.  Printed  on  double-sheet;  title  on  first  page  headed 
"A  Southern  Song";  Baltimore,  1861;  text  on  third  page; 
[signed]  O.H.S. 

First  page  in  red  ink;  flag  in  red  and  blue.  15.7  x 
10.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;  without  flag.]   15.1  x  10.3  cm. 

C137.   REPLY  TO  THE  "VOLUNTEER  ZOUAVE. "-We 
have  seen  the  complaint  of  the  red-legged  Zou  Zou  (63 
lines) 

[By  Fannie  A.  Harwood.] 

17  X  16  cm.  (cropped) 

C138.  THE  RETREAT  OF  THE  GRAND  ARMY  FROM 
BULL  RUN.— Way  down  in  Virginia  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— 
"Sweet  Evelina." 

By  Ernest  Cliftan;  Baltimore,  Md. 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.  21  x  8.7  cm. 

C139.   THE  RETREAT  OF  THE  SIXTY  THOUSAND 
LINCOLN  TROOPS.  —T'was  a  clear  and  a  beautiful  day 
(7  vs.) 

Headed:  "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  gentleman  with  top  hat.  28.3  x  15.3  cm. 

RIGHT  MUST  PREVAIL,  see  FIAT  JUSTITIA. 

C140.   THE  SAUCY  LITTLE  TURTLE. -Down  on 
Mississippi  River  {5  vs.)  Air— "Coming  through  the  Rye." 
Headed:  "Song". 

a.  T.  o.  border;  sailing  ship.  25.5  x  10.5  cm. 

b.  T.  o.  border;  crab  and  turtle.  26.4  x  13  cm. 

C141.   THE  SERENADE  OF  THE  300,000  FEDERAL 
GHOSTS,  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED  TO  OLD  BLACK 
ABE.— i^rom  the  battle-field  afar,  where  the  wounded  and 
the  dying  (6  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  green  paper.   16.5  x  10  cm.  (cropped) 

C142.  SHERMAN'S  BUMMERS.   PARODY  ON  THE 
"KNICKERBOCKER  LINE.  "-Come  listen  to  my  good  old 
song  (10  vs.  and  2  chors.) 

By  H.  H.  C,  6th  Mo.  V.  V.  I.;  respectfully  dedicated 
to  the  Bummers  of  Sherman's  Army. 

Double-line  border.  46  x  11  cm. 


193 


C143.  SIC  SEMPER— Enthroned  in  obloquy,  Abe  Lincoln 
sits  (9  vs.  uneven  length) 

By  a  Virginian. 

T.  o.  border.  21.7  x  14.4  cm. 

C143A.   SOMEBODY  HURT!-/forfe.'  the  cries  of  widowed 
mothers  (7  vs.)  Air— "Cocachelunk."  [see  also  C79] 
T.  o.  border.  20.6  x  13.3  cm. 

C144.  SONG.— FoM  Rebels  come  along  and  listen  to  my 
song  (10  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Happy  Land  of  Canaan." 

a.  Yellow  paper.  25.5  x  11.2  cm. 

b.  "Tune"  in  place  of  "Air";  with  "Rebels"  in  first 
line  in  quotation  marks. 

Blue  paper.   19.3  x  8.5  cm.  (cropped) 

SONG,  see  also  under  subtitles. 

C145.  SONG  OF  THE  BALTIMORE  REBELS. -iei  us  join 
the  army,  let  us  join  the  army  (5  vs.  and  chor.)  Air- 
"Wait  for  the  Wagon." 

T.  o.  border.    18.8  x  13.7  cm. 

C146.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  DRUM.-Ofe,  the  drum  it 
rattles  so  loud  (6  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.  18.5  x  8.7  cm. 

C147.  THE  SONG  OF  THE  EXILE. -O/j,  here  I  am  in  the 
land  of  cotton  (9  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Dixie." 

[Signed]  B.;  Martinsburg,  Va.,  Dec.  10,  1861. 

Double-line  border.  29.3  x  12.5  cm. 

C147A.  SONG  OF  THE  "MARYLAND  LINE"  AT  RICH- 
MOND.—We've  left  Qur  homes  in  Maryland  (3  vs.  and  2 
chors.) 

By  Big  Sergeant. 

T.  o.  border.  20.5  x  11.8  cm. 

C148.  SONG  OF  THE  PRIVATEER.— Away  o'er  the 
boundless  sea  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

By  Quien  Sabe?;  Baltimore,  Oct.  10,  1861. 

Double-line  border;  sailing  ship.  23.5  x  12  cm. 

C149.  THE  SOUTH.- The  South  I  wonder  every  heart 
(5  vs.) 

Double-line  border;  farm  scene.  20  x  10.7  cm. 

C150.  THE  SOUTH  AND  NORTH.- T/ze  Southrons  and  the 
Northers,  Oh  (10  vs.  and  chor.) 
19.5  X  6.5  cm. 

C151.  SOUTH  CAROLINA.  A  PATRIOTIC  OT)E.-Land  of 
the  Palmetto  tree  (4  vs.) 

Charleston,  S.  C,  1861. 

Blue  ink;  double-line  border;  bust  of  Washington. 
18.2  X  8.8  cm. 

C152.  SOUTHERN  BATTLE  SO^G.— Come  gallant  sons  of 
noble  sires  (6  vs.) 

[Signed]  C,  Bait.,  Md.,  Oct.,  1862;  with  MS.  note 
identifying  author  as  James  Cahill. 

Double-line  border;  pink  paper.  20  x  8.7  cm. 

C153.  THE  SOUTHERN  CROSS.— O/z.f  say;   can  you  see, 
through  the  gloom  and  the  storm  (4  vs.) 
[By  Henry  St.  George  Tucker.] 

a.  [Publ.]  De  Marsan  (3). 

De  Marsan  ship  border.  25.7  x  16  cm. 

b.  Air— "Star  Spangled  Banner." 

T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.   18.5  x  12.5  cm. 


THE  SOUTHERN  CROSS,  see  also  GOD  AND  LIBERTY. 

C154.   SOUTHERN  GIRL  AND  PARODY. -O/z,  yes,  I  am  a 
Southern  girl  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

[By  Carrie  Bell  Sinclair;]  2nd  song:  "Homespun  Plaid". 

T.  o.  border.  27  x  18  cm. 

C155.  THE  SOUTHERN  MATRON  TO  HER  SON.-/  weep, 
as  I  leave  you,  with  bitter  em,otion  (3  vs.)  Air— "Oh  No, 
My  Love,  No." 

T.  o.  border.   16.3  x  11.5  cm. 

C156.  THE  SOUTHERN  MEN.— Fo«  can  never  win  them 
back  (5  vs.) 

By  a  Southern  Lady  [Catherine  M.  Warfield]. 

Red  ink;  double-line  border.  21.5  x  8.5  cm. 

C157.   SOUTHERN  PRISONER.   GIVES  HIS  THANKS  TO 
THE  BALTIMORE  LADIES.-/  left  Winchester  Court- 
house, all  in  the  month  of  May  (10  vs.)  Air— "American 
Boy." 

T.  o.  border.  25  x  10.5  cm.  (cropped) 

A  SOUTHERN  SCENE,  see  OUR  OPINION. 

C158.  SOUTHERN  SENTIMENTS.— T/ze  Northern  hordes 
invasion  threat  (4  vs.)  Air.— "Let  haughty  Gaul  invasion 
threat." 

[Signed)  B.;  Baltimore,  Oct.  6th,  1861. 

Double-line  border.   13.4  x  7  cm.  (cropped) 

SOUTHERN  SENTIMENTS,  see  also  HARK!  THE 
SUMMONS. 

C159.  SOUTHERN  SONG  OF  LIBERTY.— 0«.'  on!  to  the 
just  and  glorious  strife  (7  vs.) 

a.  Double-line  border.  19.5  x  12.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  tan  paper.   17.3  x  9  cm. 

c.  Title:   "Liberty  or  Death". 
Double-line  border.   17.3  x  9  cm.  (cropped) 

C160.  THE  SOUTHERN  WAGON. -Come  all  ye  sons  of 
freedom,  and  join  our  Southern  band  (6  vs.  and  chor.) 

a.  With  title  on  three  lines. 
T.  o.  border.  21  x  11.5  cm. 

b.  With  title  on  one  line  in  caps;  two  chors. 
T.  o.  border.  23.7  x  16.2  cm. 

c.  With  title  on  one  line  in  upper  and  lower  case;  two 
chors. 

T.  o.  border.  22.8  x  15.1  cm. 

d.  Air— "Wait  for  the  Wagon". 

Blue  paper;  woman  playing  piano;  guard;  printed  on 
verso  of  a  receipt  for  the  purchase  of  a  Negro  Slave. 
17.5  X  9.5  cm. 

C161.  A  SOUTHERN  WAR  SONG'-^rise  ye  Southern 
heroes ,  and  gird  your  armor  on  (7  vs.) 

By  P.  H. 

Embossed  floral  border.   16  x  10.3  cm. 

C162.  THE  SOUTHERN  WAR  SONG.-  We  shall  win!  we 
shall  win!  for  our  cause  it  is  just  (6  vs.)  Air— "I'm 
Afloat." 

T.  o.  border.   19.5  x  12  cm. 

C163.  SOUTHERN  YANKEE  -DOOT)l.E.- The  gallant  Major 
Anderson  (8  vs.  and  4  chors.)  Tune— "Yankee  Doodle." 


194 


a.  Blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  Liberty  with  flag,  and  two  flags 
in  red  and  blue.   30.6  x  16  cm. 

b.  Blue  ink;  t.  o.  border;  Confederate  flag  in  red  and 
blue,  and  mounted  trumpeter  in  red.  34.7  x  13.2  cm. 

C163A.   SOUTHERN  YANKEE  DOODLE  — Yankee  Doodle 
loas  the  boy  (10  vs.) 
31  X  13.9  cm. 

C164.  THE  SOUTHRONS  ARE  COMING.- r/ze  Southrons 
are  coming,  heigho!  heigho  (6  vs.)  Air— "The  Camels  are 
Coming." 

T.  o.  border.  17  x  ii  cm. 

C165.   SOUTHRONS  TO  A.BMS\-Southrons  to  arms  (5  vs.) 
Air— "God  Save  the  South." 

(Signed)  Z;  Baltimore,  June  1,  1862. 

a.  Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.   17.7  x  5.8  cm. 

b.  Title:  "Freedom's  Call." 
Double-line  border.  21  x  7.8  cm. 

0166.  THE  SPIRIT  OF  1861.- Arise,  Confederates!  hear 
your  country's  call  (3  vs.  uneven  length) 

2nd  song:  "C.S.A." 

Double-line  border;  yellow  paper.   18  x  8.7  cm. 
(cropped) 

C167.  THE  STARS  AND  BARS.— O/z.'  say  do  you  see  now 
so  vauntingly  borne  (4  vs.)  [Air— "Star  Spangled  Banner."] 

Headed:  "Rebel  Poetry". 

Double-line  border  with  ornamental  comers.  20.6  x 

11.8  cm. 

0168.  "STONEWALL"  -Weep  for  the  mighty  dead  (6  vs.) 
With  two-line  quotation  below  title. 

Mourning  border.  20.2  x  16.4  cm. 

0169.  STONEWALL  JACKSON,  A  SENTINEL.- Twas  in, 
the  dying  of  the  day  (5  vs.) 

With  one-line  quotation  below  title. 
T.  o.  [Bonsai]  border.  18.5  x  io.6  cm. 

C170.  STONEWALL  JACKSON'S  WAY.— Come,  stack  arms, 
men!  Pile  on  the  rails  (6  vs.) 

[By  J.W.  Palmer;]  Found  on  a  Confederate  Sergeant 
of  Jackson's  Brigade,  taken  at  Winchester,  Va.;  Martins- 
burg,  Sept.  13th,  1862. 

a.  Double-line  border.  25.2  x  12  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  tan  paper.   22.9  x  9.6  cm. 

C171.  SUNNY  SOUTH! -To  arms,  to  arms,  and  old  Abe 
shall  see  (4  vs.  uneven  length) 

Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border;  figure  of  Justice  with  ship  in  background. 

27.9  X  16.3  cm. 

C172.  TENNESSE  (sic)!  FIRE  AWAY \- Black  Republican 
bandits  (5  vs.) 

Double-line  border.   18.2  x  8.8  cm. 


Headed:   "Song". 

T.  o.  border.   28.4  x  11.3  cm.  (cropped; 

C175.  THERE  IS  LIFE  IN  OLD  MARYLAND  YET. -Again 
a  smothered  voice  speaks  out  (7  vs.) 

[Signed]  Cola;  Baltimore,  March,  25,  1862. 

Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  seal  of  Maryland.  29  x 
9  cm. 

C176.   THERE'S  LIFE  IN  THE  OLD  LAND  YETi-Sy  blue 
Patapsco's  billowy  dash  (5  vs.) 

By  Jas.  R.  Randall,  of  Baltimore,  author  of  "Mary- 
land, My  Maryland." 

a.  Double-line  border;  yellow  paper;  figure  of  Justice 
with  sword  and  scales.  23.7  x  8.6  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.   25.6  x  10.2  cm. 

C177.  THERE'S  LIFE  IN  THE  OLD  LAND  YET. -There's 
life  in  the  land  that  gave  Carroll  his  birth  (6  vs.) 

[Signed]  J[ohn]  B[radyJ;  Baltimore,  March  25,  1862. 

a.  Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  seal  of  Maryland.  23.5 
X  10.2  cm. 

b.  Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.  28  x 
10.6  cm. 

C178.  THERE  IS  LIFE  IN  THE  OLD  LAND  YET. -Though 
the  soil  of  old  Maryland  echoes  the  tread  (4  vs.) 
[By  Frank  Key  Howard.] 

a.  T.  o.  border;  wharf  scene  with  box  bearing  imprint 
"Edes  Print."  22.5  x  10.2  cm. 

b.  Confederate  flag.  22.7  x  10.5  cm. 

C179.   THERE'S  "NO  BODY"  HURT !!— T/zere  lives  a  man 
at  Washington  (5  vs.) 

T.  o.  border;  man  holding  sign  with  title.  22  x  14.8  cm. 

C180.   TO  SAUERWEIN.— T/ze  Union  men  have  left  the 
floor  (3  vs.)  Air.  — "My  Maryland." 

By  a  Member  of  the  Baltimore  Corn  Exchange;  Balti- 
more, June,  1862;  with  MS.  note,  "25  copies  printed 
only."  16.5  x  6.5  cm. 

C181.  TO  THE  BALTIMORE  POET,  THOMAS  H. 
M— RR-S,  AUTHOR  OF  "HOW  THEY  ACT  IN  BALTI- 
MORE."—So  Tomhas  turned  a  poet,  what  a  dear  (4  vs.) 

[Signed]  Mephistophiles  K.  G.  S.;  Baltimore,  June  10, 
1862. 

a.  Wavy-line  border  with  ornamental  corners.   17.6  x 
8.5  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  pink  paper.  17.8  x  8.6  cm. 


C182.  TO  THE  MARYLAND  SONS  OF  REVOLUTIONARY 
SIRES!— Ke  sons  of  Sires ,  of  manly  deeds,  who  died  for 
love  of  right  (24  lines)  Tune.— Old  Lang  Syne. 

Dedicated  to  Miss  M.  H— . 

Double-line  border.   18.5  x  11  cm. 


C173.  TEXAN  RANGESS.— They  come!  They  come!  see 
their  bayonets  bright  (4  vs.) 

Publ.  M.  Morgan,  1861. 

T.  o.  border;  star;  pink  paper.  17.7  x  9.3  cm. 

C174.  THEM  SAUCY  MASKED  BATTERIES.- TAe  Yankee 
soldiers  went  down  South  (6  vs.  uneven  length)  Air— 
"Bobbin  Around." 


C183.   A  COAST  [sic]  TO  VIRGINIA. -A  toast  to  Virginia. 
God  bless  her  (3  vs.)  Tune:.— "Red,  White  and  Blue." 
T.  o.  border.   14.5  x  8  cm.  (cropped) 


C184.   THE  TYRANT'S  CAP.- 
fettered  now  (5  vs.) 

Blue  paper.  15.5  x  7.7  cm 


The  galling  chain  has 


195 


C185.  UNCLE  ABE,  OR  A  HIT  AT  THE  TIMES. -/«  the 
town  of  Chicago  as  you  know  very  well  (8  vs.  and  chors.) 
Air— "Villikins  and  his  Dinah." 
T.  o.  border.   24.6  x  14.9  cm. 

C186.  THE  VERY  LATEST  FROM  BUTLER.-Some 
General  love  the  battle's  roar  (2  vs.) 

a.  Double-line  border;  man  pasting  up  a  sign  with  title. 
21.5  X  10.1  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  20.6  x  9.1  cm. 

C187.  YIRGWIA.— Three  cheers  for  Virginia,  the  heme. 
[sicj  of  the  free  (5  vs.  and  chor.) 

Tan  paper;  seal  of  Virginia.   16.4  x  9  cm. 

C188.  VIRGINIA'S  JEWELS.— "T/zese  are  my  Jewels," 
said  a  Roman  dame  (2  vs.) 
[By  Rebecca  Powell.] 

a.  White  paper;  seal  of  Virginia.  21.3  x  14  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  tan  paper.   16.7  x  8.5  cm.  (cropped) 

C189.  THE  VIRGINIA'S  KNOCKING  AROUND.- 'Twas  on 
a  windy  night  in  March  (14  vs.) 

[Signed]  M;  Baltimore,  March  30,  1862. 

Double-line  border.  36.3  x  8.7  cm. 

C190.  A  VOICE  FROM  THE  OLD  MARYLAND  LINE.- 
The  Old  Line's  foot  is  on  thy  shore  (12  vs.)  Air.— "Mary- 
land My  Maryland." 

[Signed]  N.  G.  R[idgeley];  Baltimore,  Oct.  27th,  1861; 
Written  under  the  influence  of  the  excitement  prevalent 
in  Baltimore,  when  the  news  was  received  that  the  Con- 


federates had  crossed  the  Potomac  at  Port  Tobacco,  and 
cut  Gen.  Sickle's  brigade  to  pieces. 

a.  Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.  38  x 
8.7  cm. 

b.  Title  cropped;  "The  Old  Line's  Appeal"  written  in  MS. 

Double-line  border;  [Bonsai]  flag  of  Maryland.  38.5 
x  8  cm. 

C191.  WELCOME  "JEFF"  TO  BALTIMORE.— /«  charms 
now  we  slumber,  and  insults  in  number  (3  vs.  and  3  chors.) 
Air— "Annie  of  the  Vale." 

Double-line  border;  blue  paper;  Baltimore  monument. 
18.8  X  9.8  cm. 

C192.  WE'LL  BE  FREE  IN  MARYLAND.- T/ze  boys  down 
South  in  Dixie's  land  (8  vs.  and  chor.)  Air— "Gideon's 
Band." 

Composed  by  Robert  E.  Holtz,  Jan.  30,  1862. 

a.  T.  o.  border;  blue  paper;  Justice  with  scales  and 
sword,  ship  in  background.  27.6  x  10.4  cm. 

b.  [As  above;]  yellow  paper.  30.8  x  13  cm. 

C193.  WILLIAM  PRICE.  — Fowr  sharp  Treason  Bill,  Wm. 
Price,  Wm.  Price  (16  vs.)  Air— "John  Todd." 

[By  James  Hodges;]  with  footnote  on  subject:  "Mem- 
ber of  the  Maryland  'State  Senate  and  author  of  the  in- 
famous 'Treason  Bill'." 

Double-line  border.  34.8  x  8.8  cm. 

C194.  YANKEE  VANDALS.— Tfee  Northern  Abolition 
vandals  (12  vs.  and  chor.)  Air.— "Gay  and  Happy." 
T.  o.  border.  35.2  x  9.2  cm. 


196 


Index  of  Printers  and  Publishers  of  Sheets  and  Music 


A'Beckett,  T.,  1866a,  b,  c 

Abel,  P.  E.,  63 

Adams,  A.  Lemuel,  228  N.  Third  St.,  Phila.,  2174 

American  Steam  Press,  725a 

American  Tract  Society,  1561 

Amore,  E.  J.,  1704 

Anderson,  458  Seventh  St.,  Wash.,  1551 

Anderson,  A.,  420  S.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  55,  94,  108,  347,  635, 

722,  1474a,  1782,  1916,  2152a,  2189a,  2211,  2313,  2578, 

2709 
Andre,  G.,  &  Co.,  1104  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  774,  1749b,  1776, 

2208,  2209 
Andrews,  J.,  38  Chatham  St.,  N.Y.,  see  seriatim 
Astley,  R.,  76  Purchase  St.,  New  Bedford,  see  seriatim 
Auner,  J.  W.,  (1)  10th  &  Race  Sts.,  (2)  8th  &  Market  Sts., 

(3)  110  N.  10th  St.,  (4)  45  N.  9th  St.,  (5)  N.W.  cor.  11th  & 

Market  Sts.,  (6)  5  N.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  see  seriatim 
Auner  &  Johnson,  12  S.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  see  seriatim 
Baker  &  Godwin,  (1)  Cor.  Nassau  &  Spruce  Sts.,  (2)  Tribune 

Bldg.,  Printing-House  Sq.,  N.Y.,  264,  2241d 
Baker,  W.  C,  2268 

Ballantyne,  7th  St.  North  of  D,  Wash.,  1551 
Bardsley,  J.,  S.E.  cor.  3rd  &  Market  Sts.,  Phila.,  560 
Beck  and  Lawton,  7th  &  Chestnut  Sts.,  Phila.,  2229 
Beckel,  J.  C,  Germantown,  Pa.,  753,  1642 
Bender,  Charles,  N.E.  cor.  5th  &  Chestnut  Sts.,  Phila.,  2614 
Bennett,  Robert,  1574  Bowery,  N.Y.,  950a,  1069a,  2130a 
Bennett  and  Carroll,  177  Bowery,  N.Y.,  503,  651d 
Bennett  Bros.,  1278a 
Berry,  763 

Berry  &  Gordon,  297  Broadway,  N.Y.,  628,  1631a,  b,  1721 
Biessenher,  D.  H.,  503 
Blume,  Frederick,  (1)  208  Bowery,  (2)  1125  Broadway  and 

208  Bowery,  (3)  65  Chatham  St.,  (4)  54  Chatham  St.,  N.Y., 

74b,  722a,  860,  1076,  1114,  1172b,  c,  1174c,  d,  1508, 

1745a,  b,  2261,  2268,  2323a,  2334,  2368a,  d,  e,  f,  g,  2247a, 

b,  c,  i,  j,  k,  2481b,  c,  2580 
Bohn,  C,  Washington,  D.C.  &  Fortress  Monroe,  832b 
Boner  &  Co.,  W.  H.,  1102  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  279 
Bonsai,  Louis,  Baltimore  &  Frederick  Sts.,  Baltimore,  Md., 

553b,  673,  2241e,  2510c,  2620,  482b,  C7,  C106 
Boshart,  G.,  N.E.  Cor.  3rd  &  Race  Sts.,  Phila.,  639,  880, 

27  03 
Boyd,  T.  C,  (1)  228  Montgomery  St.  corner  of  Pine,  (2)  304 

Montgomery  St.  corner  of  Pine,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  183, 

203,  513,  799c,  887b,  918,  936,  1025a,  1192a,  1202,  1231, 

1265a,  1457a,  1791a,  1860a,  1889,  2008a,  2063,  2Q83,  2392, 

2677c,  2680a. 
Boyle,  Cor.  2nd  and  Brown  Sts.,  Phila.,  1873 
Bradbury,  William  B.,  (1)  425  Broom  St.,  (2)  427  Broom  St., 

N.Y.,  2318,  2460 
Bradley,  Wm.  B.,  1960 

Bralnard,  S.  &  Co.,  203  Superior  St.,  Cleveland,  2103a,  2266 
Brinkerhoff,  R.,  112  William  St.,  N.Y.,  771 
Bruce's  Printing  House,  537  Sac,  [Utah?],  2446 
Bryant,  H.  W.,  28  Exchange  St.,  Portland,  763 
Bryson  &  Cooper,  2  North  6th  St.,  [Phila.],  2533 
Budworth,  J.  H.,  778b 
Burnton,  241  Hudson  St.,  N.Y.,  341 
Calhoun,  540  Market  St.,  San  Francisco,  234,  2579 
Carleton,  L.,  116  N.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  150 
Camcross,  J.  L.  &  Co.,  No.  6  North  Eighth  St.,  Phila.,  663 
Cassin  &  Fincher,  Phila.,  2699 


Childs,  G.  W.,  947 

Church,  John,  66  W.  4th  St.,  Cincinnati,  2665b 

Church,  John,  Jr.,  66  W.  4th  St.,  Cincinnati,  422a,  939a, 

1275 
Cohen,  L  S.,  912  Kearny  St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  401 
Cohen,  William,  912  Kearny  St.,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  234 
Colon  &  Adriance,  The  Arcade,  Phila.,  1875 
Conry,  T.  J.,  19  Seneca  St.,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  925b 
Cottrell,  G.  W.,  36  Cornhill,  Boston,  2241f 
Coulston,  W.  H.,  147  N.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  221c,  d,  668,  1771 
Crissy  &  Markley,  Goldsmiths  Hall,  Library  St.,  2186 
Crosland,  John  M.,  741 
Crummill.   McC.  &  Atkinson,  449  North  Third  St.,  Phila., 

842 
Daggett,  E.  A.,  New  York,  1557 
Daily  Chronicle,  Office  of  the,  456  Ninth  St.,  Washington, 

D.C,  1932 
Daly,  John  J.,  (1)  413Grand  St.,  (2)  419  Grand  St.,  N.Y., 

1007,  1418,  1485a,  b,  2139,  2236a,  b 
Davies,  William  &    George,  920  Main  St.,  Richmond,  C122 
DeMarsan,  Henry,  (1)  38  Chatham  St.,  (2)  38  &  60  Chatham 

St.,  (3)  54  Chatham  St.,  (4)  60  Chatham  St.,  N.Y.,  see 

seriatim 
Delestatius,  O.,  180  Race  St.,  Phila.,  2497b 
DeWitt,  Robert  M.,  13  Frankfort  St.,  N.Y.,  40a,  511 
Dick  &  Fitzgerald,  18  Anne  St.,  N.Y.,  665,  2213 
Dickeson  &  WagenseUer,  23  N.  6th  St.,  N.Y.,  266 
Dickson,  James,  3  Tryon  Rd.,  N.Y.,  2207 
Ditson,  C.H.,  &Co.,  711  Broadway,  N.Y.,  280a,  1500,  1842, 

2562a 
Ditson,  O.  &  Clapp,  C.  C,  Boston,  595 

Ditson,  Oliver  &  Co.,  (1)  271  Washington  St.,  (2)  277  Wash- 
ington St.,  (3)  115  Washington  St.,  Boston,  28,  896c,  1018, 

1069b,  1120b,  1299c,  1356a,  1412,  1463,  1500,  1601,  1721, 

1770,  2022a,  2134,  2137,  2143,  2215,  2297a,  b,  2488,  2560, 

2562b,  2574k,  1,  2588,  2590a,  2680b,  2717 
Dodworth,  C.  R.,  740a 

Dodworth,  H.  B.,  6  Astor  Place,  [N.Y.?],  1206 
Doyle,  Thomas  G.,  (1)  295  North  Gay  St.,  (2)  297  North  Gay 

St.,  Baltimore,  90f,  194,  213d,  562e,  654b,  c,  1092,  1172d, 

1174e,  1378e,  f,  1745c,  2161,  2414,  2722 
Du  Bree,  J.  W.,  1169  S.  11th  St.,  Phila.,  336,  459,  728b,  831e, 

893,  943,  1181,  1373,  1386,  1549,  1785a,  1999b,  2366, 

2404a,  2439,  2445 
Duross  Bros.,  Black  Horse  Alley,  Phila.,  312 
Endres,  Jacob,  52  Fourth  St.,  St.  Louis,  2008 
Endres,  Jacob  and  Compton,  52  Fourth  St.,  St.  Louis,  1663 
Ettla,  S.  H.,  S.E.  Cor.  2nd  &  Library  Sts.,  Harrisburg,  Pa., 

1953 
Fetherston,    F.  L.,  Daily  Evening  Bulletin,  413 
Firth,  Pond  &  Co.,(l)  547  Broadway,  (2)  Franklin  Square, 

N.Y.,  32a,  47a,  e,  57,  160a,  179,  204,  358b,  380,  396,  502a, 

510a,  559,  578,  593d,  852,  897,  898a,  968a,  995b,  c,  999a, 

c,  d,  1072,  1193,  1197,  1265,  1378c,  g,  1469,  1705,  1707b, 

1709b.  c,  d,  8.  1960c,  1992c.  2157,  2169,  2228d.  2306.  2338. 

2341b,  c,  d,  2419,  2524,  2529,  2628,  2654a,  b,  c,  2702 
Firth,  Son  &Co.,    563  Broadway,  N.Y.,  213,  329,  1018, 

1467a,  b,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  i,  j,  k,  1,  m,  n,  o,  p,  q,  s.  1653, 

1668,  2297b,  2328m,  2582a,  d 
Fisher,  A.,  Ill  South  Tenth  St.,  Phila.,  740a 
Fisher,  Stephen,  801 
Fisher,  W.  D.,  566  North  Second  St.  below  Germantown  Rd., 

Kensington,  2197 


197 


Ford,  J.,  Pa.,  2591 

Foster,  H.  T.,  Mass.,  1404 

Foster,  W.  T.,  2459 

Franklin  Job  Printing  Establishment,  6th  St.  bel.  Arch, 

Phila.,  1246 
Funston,  T.  G.,  1348  Ridge  Ave.,  Phila.,  2393 
Garrigues,  S.,  5  No.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  1019e 
Gay,  James  D.,  300  N.  20th  St.,  Phila.,  2,  83c,  91,  98a,  b, 
101a,  b,  106a,  198a,  455a,  h,  463,  494a,  651g,  h,  724,  748b, 
776c,  782b,  958,  998b,  1016e,  1139J,  k,  1,  1143c,  1163, 
1182d,  e,  1238c,  1454,  1633b,  1736d,  e,  f,  1972,  2019a, 
2099b,  2279b,  2290c,  2368b,  2455,  2457,  2458,  2515b, 
2574d,  2586f 
Gibson,  Edwin  J.,  774  S.  2nd  St.,  Phila.,  39d,  89a,  464,  1602, 

2279c 
Glover,  C.  W.,  1965 

Gordon,  S.  T.,  (1)  538  Broadway,  (2)  706  Broadway,  (3)  705 
Broadway,  N.Y.,  175,  205,  911,  916,  1199b,  c,  2290a,  b, 
d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  2549a,  b,  c,  d,  2650,  2677a,  d 
Gould  &  Berry,  297  Broadway,  N.Y.,  1255 
Grattan  &  Bro.,  62  Arch  St.,  Phila.,  2497b 
Great  Wray,  2304 
Green,  J.,  Savannah,  Georgia,  C60 
Greene,  A.  Crawford,  24  Westminster  St.,  Providence,  R.I., 

540b 
Grey,  M.,  609  &  613  Clay  St.,  [San  Francisco,  Cal.],  1202 
Gumpert,  G.,  Pa.,  1776a 

Guyer  &  Schaefer,  231  Dock  St.,  PhUa.,  586,  2614 
Haddock  &  Son,  618  Market  St.,  Phila.,  2097a 
Hall,  Wm.,  &  Son,  (1)  543  Broadway,  (2)  229  Broadway, 
(3)  239  Broadway,  N.Y.,  348,  432,  577,  607,  651c,  861, 
1180,  1686,  1706,  2399,  2581 
Harbach  &  Bro.,  36  N.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  1864 
Harding,  E.  H.,  229  Bowery,  N.Y.,  2598 
Hardwick,  Mrs.  George  P.,  100 

Hardwick,  George  P.,  (1)  B  St.  betw.  3rd  &  4th  Sts.,  (2) 
518  7th  St.,  Washington,  D.C.,  15,  97a,  100,  109,  196f, 
721,  923,  1319,  1733,  2095,  2147,  2454,  2616d,  e 
Harris,  George  S.,  S.E.  Cor.  4th  &Vine  Sts.,  Phila.,  88, 
89a,  277c,  297,  369,  370,  382,  505,  516,  543b,  582a,  720, 
1254b,  1350,  1734a,  1801,  1985,  2235c,  2238,  2408,  2507 
Hayward,  Wm.  H.,  Md.,  654i,  2442 
Heath,  Wynkoop  &  Co.,  63  Liberty  St.,  N.Y.,  2241k 
Hennings,  A.,  511  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  2515 
Herron,  James  P.,  2474 
Hess,  J.  M.,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  2547 
Hidley,  J.  H.,  519  Broadway,  Albany,  N.Y.,  1438 
Higgins,  H.  M.,  117  Randolph  St.,  Chicago,  196a,  196g, 

1309,  2162 
Holland,  A.,  17  Doane  St.,  [Boston],  2241f 
Howe,  W.  E.,  39  Merchants  Row,  Boston,  2537 
Howland,  William,  256 
Hull  &  Brother,  Louisville,  1316 
Jackson,  190  Houston  St.,  2397b 
Jesse,  P.,  183  Bowery  (cor.  of  Delancey  St.)  [N.Y.],  2585a, 

b,  c,  e 
Johnson,  J.  H.,  (1)  1241  Vine  St.,  (2)  7  N.  10th  St.,  (3)  5  N. 
10th  St.,  (4)  25  N.  10th  St.,  (5)  18  N.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  see 
seriatim 
Johnson  &  Co.,  18  N.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  see  seriatim 
Johnson  &  Cartlitch,  18  N.  10th  St.,  Phila.,  896a,  b,  1380, 

1745e,  2368c,  2481d 
Kehr,  H.  J.,  Frankford  Road  &  Master  St.,  Phila.,  815 
Kemp,  N.  P.  &  Graves  and  Young,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  1557 
Kendall's  Rotery  [sic]  Press,  8  Park  St.    Boston,  27 
Ketterlinus,  E.,  4th  and  Arch  Sts.,  Phila.,  2448a 
Kimball,  D.  &  Co.,  17  Market  Sq.,  Providence,  R.I.,  540b 
King  &  Baird,  (1)  607  Sansom  St.,  (2)  9  Sansom  St.,  Phila., 

298,  314,  419,  1794,  2233 
Kingsley,  William,  2448a 
Langenschwartz,  Max,  New  York,  783,  2148 


Ledger  Job  Printing  Office,  S.  W.  cor.  3rd  &  Chestnut  Sts., 

Phila.,  1774 
Lee  &  Walker,  722  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  84a,  c,  337,  492, 

551,  737,  898c,  974,  978a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  1,  1028,  1184,  1517, 

1611a,  1773,  1984,  2082,  2132,  2149a,  c,  2245,  2402, 

2586a, g 
Leisenring,  H.  G.,  224 lo 

Loag,  S.,  N.  E.  cor.  4th  &  Chest.  St.,  Phila.,  1981o 
Logan,  H.  K.,  516  N.  2nd  St.,  Phila.,  281,  639,  880,  2703 
Logan,  James,  Pa.,  468 
Lorence,  J.,  Pa.,  303 

McCaffrey,  Henry,  205  Baltimore  St.,  Baltimore,  1464 
McCalla,  J.  S.,  237  Dock  St.,  Phila.,  305,  308 
McCalla  &  Stavely,  237  Dock  St.,  Phila.,  310 
McLaughlin  Brothers,  112  S.  3rd  St.,  Salem,  260,  261,  262, 

263 
Magee,  J.,  316  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  97b,  552,  561c,  685, 

691,  748e,  1033,  1182f,  1342,  1746,  1767,  1956,  1984, 

2097c,  2120b,  2205,  2586h 
Magnus,  Charles,  (1)  12  Frankfort  St.,  N.Y.,  (2)  520  7th  St., 

Washington,  D.C.,  see  seriatim 
Maierhofer,  A.,  34  Ave.  A,  N.Y.,  1203 
Marsh,  J.,  (1)  1102  Chestnut  St.,  (2)  1029  Chestnut  St., 

Phila.,  175a,  c,  316,  509,  529,  610,  803,  1101,  1225, 

1466a,  b,  2012,  2099a,  2531,  2602 
Mason  &  Co.,  58  N.  6th  St.,  Phila.,  73,  292a,  1341,  1343, 

1349,  1640,  1958,  1996 
May,  Harry  S.,  S.  E.  cor.  3rd  &  Race  St.,  Phila.,  331,  991, 

1916 
Mayer,  Charles  F.,  212  Buttonwood  St.,  Phila.,  38 
Merriam,  Mrs.  C.  M.,  Pa.,  2428 

MerrUl,  H.  T.  &  Co.,  91  Washington  St.,  Chicago,  HI.,  1279 
Meyer,  Louis,  1323  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  2016 
Miller,  Jas.,  302 

Mitchell,  E.  L.,  24  Congress  St.,  Boston,  2124c 
Monroe,  Charley,  2423 
Montcrieff,  Kate,  Pa.,  1783 

Moody,  C.  C.  P.,  52  Washington  St.,  Boston,  2226 
Moreland,  J.  H.,  235  Essex  St.,  Salem,  29,  127,  837 
Morgan,  M.,  Galveston,  Texas,  C173 
Morriss,  Wm.  H.,  1025  Master  St.,  Phila.,  19 
Morse,  G.  &  M.,  256  Seneca  St.,  Buffalo,  2146a 
Murphy,  Mrs.,  780  S.  6th  St.  above  Catherine,  Phila.,  943, 

2439 
Muzzy,  A.  W.,  Panama,  New  York,  485 
Myers,  C,  52  N.  Sixth  St.,  Phila.,  2361f 
Myers,  C.  Clausen,  8th  &  Germantown  Ave.,  Phila.,  1135 
Myers,  H.,  105  Girard  Ave.,  Phila.,  6c 
National  Telegraphic  Office,  New  York,  1387 
Nesbitt  &  Co.,  66b 
Partridge,  Horace,  (1)  125  Hanover  St.,  (2)  27  Hanover  St., 

(3)  105  Hanover  St.,  (4)  105  Hanover  St.  and  54  Friend  St., 

(5)  127  Hanover  St.,  (6)  37  Hanover  St.,  Boston,  see 

seriatim 
Partridge,  Horace  &  Co.,  51  Hanover  St.,  Boston,  see 

seriatim 
Peacock,  Chambers  &  Co.,  413 
Peckham,  Joshua,  (1)  187  Essex  St.,  (2)  10  Lafayette  St., 

Salem,  Mass.,  217,  659,  837,  1693c,  2025c,  2658b 
Peet,  W.  A.,  N.  E.  cor.  12th  and  Spring  Garden  Sts.,  Phila., 

880,  2703 
Peirson,  389  South  2nd  St.,  Phila.,  1875 
Pell,  W.  W.,  Camden,  N.  J.,  2431 
Peters,  J.  D.,  Broadway,  [N.Y.],  2716 
Peters,  J.  L.,  (1)  198  Broadway,  (2)  200  Broadway,  N.Y., 

1281,  2520,  2678a 
Peters,  J.  L.  &  Bro.,  49  No.  5th  St.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  and 

Cinciimati,  Ohio,  2520 
Philadelphia  Wood  Engraver  Co.,  54  S.  4th  St.,  Phila.,  49 
Philip  &  Solomons,  Washington,  D.  C,  2405 
Polkinhorn,  Washington,  D.C.,  219 


198 


Pond,  Wm.  A.,  &  Co.,  547  Broadway,  N.Y.,  429,  572a, 
706b,  745,  882,  890a,  b,  912,  1017,  1100,  1123,  1194, 
1275,  1468,  1537,  1663, 1685,  1790a, 1848, 1960a,  b, 
2215c,  2257,  2310,  2483,  2653e,  f 

Price,  Philip,  404  Vine,  above  4th,  Phila.,  1820c 

Pupil's  Press,  Girard  College,  [Phila.],  1630 

Quipps  &  Co.,  [Phila.],  78,  1878,  2221 

Rafferty,  J.,  1822  Market  St.,  Phila.,  1602 

Randolph,  770  Broadway,  N.Y.,  2103q 

Rebellion  Record,  441  &  448  Broadway,  N.Y.,  1361,  1803, 
2241U 

Reed,  George  P.,  Boston,  784a,  b,  2049 

Richmond,  William  F.,  1903  Market  St.,  Phila.,  2201 

Ringwalt  &  Brown,  111  S.  4th  St.,  [Phila.?],  2428 

Robinson  &  Son,  24  S.  5th  St.,  [Phila.?],  295a 

Root  &  Cady,  (1)  67  Washington  St.,  (2)  95  Clark  St.,  Chi- 
cago, 90t,  212,  353,  418,  1172e,  f,  j,  1174g,  h,  i,  j,  11881, 
j,  k,  m,  1288,  1381,  1581,  1745a,  b,  c,  f,  g,  i,  2323,  2339, 
2368c,  2481 

Root  &  Co.,  45  Clark  St.,  Chicago,  1745d 

Rose  &  Co.,  5  So.  Calvert  St.,  875,  1604 

Russell,  G.  D.  &  Co.,  126  Tremont  St.,  Boston,  2522 

Russell  &  Patee,  61  Court  St.,  Boston,  1191,  1403,  1959k, 
2411 

Russell  &  Richardson,  291  Washington  St.,  Boston,  2032e 

Russell  &  Tolman,  291  Washington  St.,  Boston,  188b, 
2020a,  2231 

S.  F.  Printing  Co.,  412  Commercial  St.,  San  Francisco, 
401 

Sachse,  F.,  21031 

San  Francisco  News  Co.,  912  Kearny  St.,  San  Franciaco, 
1431,  2579 

Sandford,  221c,  d 

Sawyer  &  Thompson,  59  Fulton  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  56d,  k,  235, 
368,  961,  9781,  1472b,  c,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  i,  k,  1499,  2577, 
2586c,  d,  e,  1616c,  m 

Schmidt,  W.  J.,  278  Saratoga  St.,  cor.  Pine,  Phila.,  1104 

Scroggy,  Thomas  M.,  (1)  1229  Vine  St.,  (2)  443  Vine  St., 
(3)  1232  Vine  St.,  Phila.,  22,  41,  122,  169c,  171d,  218, 
239b,  2gl,  323,  392,  591,  639,  649c,  674,  697,746,  788, 
805b,  827,  880,  1014,  1021f,  1046,  1149,  1332b,  1480, 
1570c,  1654b,  1742,  1763,  1859,  1964,  2073,  2342b,  2557, 
2703 

Search,  Jacob  K.,  1147  S.  7th  St.,  Phila.,  6c,  d,  1736h,  2423 

Searle,  F.  A.,  118  Washington  St.,  Boston,  1759 

Seip,  A.  M.,  557  N.  6th  St.  bel.  Green,  Phila.,  2233 

Selma  Journal,  Selma,  Alabama,  C83 

Senseman,  A.  H.,  (1)  416  Callowhill  St.,  Phila.,  (2)  210  N. 
2nd  St.,  Phila.,  38,  82,  650,  1228,  1248c,  1273a,  1647, 
1799,  1806c,  1865,  1954,  1981n,  2227,  2242,  2506,  2610 

Shepherd,  Cor.  of  D  &  7th  Sts.,  Washington,  D.C.,  1551 

Simpson,  R.  F.,  260  N.  2nd  St.,  Phila.,  482 

Sinex,  T.,  619  Jayne  St.,  Phila.,  1554 

Slater,  Baltimore,  2442 

Smith,  W.  R.,  135  N.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  384,  742,  866,  914, 
1297,  1461,  1692,  1699,  1935,  2104,  2138,  2309,  2321, 
2371,  2591 

Spencer,  Wm.  V.,  94  Washington  St.,  Boston,  483b,  1087, 
1403,  1949k,  2121,  2124c,  2406,  2411 

Stayman  &  Brothers,  210  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  1734 

Stephens,  Wm.  A.,  400  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  748k,  7541, 
879e,  97 4d,  1608,  1891a,  1335c,  2385,  2615f 

Sterett,  B.  F.,  532  Clay  St.,  San  Francisco,  1431 


Stewart,  E.  F.,  150,  1771 

Strong,  T.  W.,  98  Nassau  St.,  N.Y.,  458,  2413,  2416 

Supervisory  Committee  for  Recruiting  Colored  Regiments, 
333c,  570,  1128,  1729,  2075b,  2194,  2196 

Swan,  S.  E.  cor.  2nd  &  Ches.  Sts.,  Phila.,  2452 

Taylor's  Stationery  Store,  460  N.  5th  St.,  633 

Thompson,  (1)  7th  &  Market  Sts.,  (2)  1105  Ridge  Ave., 
Phila.,  1019e,  2361g 

Thompson  &  Co.,  Raleigh,  No.  Carolina,  C118 

Tinney,  W.  A.,  338  7th  St.,  Washington,  D.C.,  36 

Tolman,  Henry  &  Co.,  291  Washington  St.,  Boston,  432, 
2547a,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h,  i,  k,  1,  m,  n 

Torr,  J.,  (1)  351  Callowhill  St.,  (2)  29  S.  3rd  St.,  Phila., 
318,  1107,  1875, 2600 

Toy,  John  D.,  1476 

Tremaine,  C.  M.,  481  Broadway,  N.Y.,  1109,  1925a 

Tripp,  Louis,  Louisville,  Ky.,  2487 

Trow,  J.  F.,  256 

Trumpler,  Chas.  W.  A.,  926  Chestnut  St.,  Phila.,  2087 

Turney,  E.,  N.  Y.,  771 

Union  Press,  10  Filbert  Ave.,  Phila.,  545 

Van  Duyn  &  Panormo,  108  Orange  St.,  Brooklyn,  2268 

Van  Ingen  &  Snyder,  2428 

Wade,  E.  H.,  197  Washington  St.,  Boston,  1085d 

Wanamaker,  Samuel  R.,  619  Federal  Street  abv.  6th,  Phila., 
2219g 

Warden,  D.  A.,  (1)  1138  Lombard  St.,  (2)  336  So.  17th  St., 
(3)  337  So.  17th  St.,  (4)  311  German  St.,  Phila.,  231,  278a, 
723,  1401a,  b,  2103c,  d,  2510b 

Warner,  cor.  of  Gay  &  Pratt  Sts.,  [Baltimore],  C97 

Warren,  Walter  W.,  (1)  5th  St.  ab.  Arch,  (2)  938  High  St., 
(3)  1017  Girard  Ave.,  (4)  1127  Market  St..  (5)  Spruce  ab. 
10th  St.,  (6)  115  N.  5th  St.,  (7)  718  Race  St..  Phila..  6c. 
d,  142,  254c,  342b,  693,  717h,  1094,  1125b,  1129h,  1130b, 
d,  1273b,  13781,  1557,  1676c,  1736h,  1740,  1804,  1854, 
2010,  2333,  2391,  2404b,  2423,  2429,  2435,  2552b,  2647e. 
2696b,  2715i 

Waters  [Walters],  Horace,  (1)  481  Broadway,  (2)  333  Broad- 
way, N.Y.,  135,  601,  761,  762,  776,  990a,  d,  1024,  1284, 
1285,  1557,  2089,  2168a,  2496b,  c,  k,  2588,  2595b,  2629 

Watkins,  Dick,  Olympic  Music  Hall,  Race  Street,  Philadel- 
phia, Pa.,  1546 

Wehman,  Henry  J.,  (1)  130  Park  Row,  (2)  962  De  Kalb  Ave., 
N.Y.,  410d,  2504,  2598,  2719 

Williams,  22  South  3rd  St.,  Phila.,  1606 

Willig,  George  Jr.,  Baltimore,  1479 

Winner,  Joseph  E.,  545  N.  8th  St.,  Phila.,  2575 

Winner,  Septimus,  and  Winner  &  Co.,  (1)  716  Spring  Garden 
St.,  (2)  531  N.  8th  St.,  (3)  933  Spring  Garden  St.,  (4)  929 
Chestnut  St.,  (5)  Market  St.  bel.  12th,  (6)  148  No.  8th  St., 
(7)  926  Spring  Garden  St.,  Phila.,  4,  115,  136a,  b,  342a, 
373,  469,  572,  754a,  b,  e,  879a,  e,  888a,  b,  d,  e,  f,  g,  h, 
1041,  1173,  1305,  1327,  1397a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  g,  h,  1409, 
1545,  1800,  1843,  1927a,  c,  d,  1977,  2295,  2332,  2542, 
2671,  2704 

Winner  &  Kerk,  110  North  8th  St.,  Phila.,  1195 

Wittig,  R.,  30  North  11th  St.,  Phila.,  275 

Woodworth,  D.  A.,  1  Spruce  St.,  Phila.,  2241v 

Wrigley,  J.,  (1)  27  Chatham  St.,  (2)  29  Chatham  St.,  (3)  61 
Chatham  St.,  N.Y.,  see  seriatim 

Young,  William  S.,  52  N.  6th  St.,  Phila.,  258 

Zieber,  John  L.,  Phila.,  277c,  281,  582b,  639a,  838b,  880, 
976c,  1126,  1505c,  1697,  2703 


199 


Index  of  Authors  and  Composers 


A,  C130 
A.,  B.,  519 
Abdill,  C.  L.,  803 

A'Becket,  Thomas,  1775,  1866,  1981 

Adams,  Sarah  F.,  1561 

African  M.  E.  Church  Hymn  Book, 
570 

Alexander,  Captain,  C43 

Alexander,  G.  W.,  C109 

Allen,  Elizabeth  Ann  Chase  Taylor 
Akers  [Florence  Percy],  2019 

Allen,  J.  J.,  1534 

Allen,  John,  2061 

Anderson,  A.,  55,  94,  105,  347,  382, 
516,  543,  635,  720,  722,  878,  993, 
1141,  1237,  1254,  1350,  1430,  1748, 
1852,  1916,  1985,  2152,  2188,  2189, 
2211,  2238,  2313,  2578,  2709 

Anderson,  G.  W.,  242,  1049,  1161, 
1458,  1524,  1855,  2277 

Anderson,  I.  P.,  316 

Anderson,  John,  457,  1298,  1414 

Andhison,  Alfred,  404 

Angelo,  H.,  192,  221,  2099,  2393, 
2438 

Anti-Secesh,  1312 

Archer,  Charles  E.,  1784 

Arkansas  Traveler,  521 

Ascherfeld,  Theodore,  2208 

Atherton,  Charles  E.,  1199 

Atherton,  E.,  2168 

Avery,  George  W.,  61 

B,  C8,  Cll,  C12,  C28,  C34,  C46,  C48, 
C72,  C147,  C158 

B,  A,  C31 

B,  D.M.,  870 

B,  J.,  726 

Bachmann,  A.,  1984 

Baker,  Dr.  A.  C,  1273 

Balfe,  42 

Balfe,  W.,  385 

Baltimora,  Clll 

Banks,  Harriet  E.,  1558 

Barnstable,  Dr.  B.,  C54,  C68,  C78 

Barrows,  Louise,  775 

Bayley,  F.  W.  N.,  872 

Bayly,  Th.  Haynes,  669 

Beckel,  J.  C,  150,  1642 

Beckel,  J.  L.,  753 

Beers,  Mrs.  Ethel  Lynn,  1880 

Beeth,  David  S.,  712 

Bellak,  James,  2533 

Bender,  Chas.,  2152 

Benjamin,  John,  1573 

Benkert,  Geo.  Felix,  2209 

Bennett,  Harry,  736 

Bennock,  Francis,  660 

Biglin,  P.  S.,  987 

Bingham,  Maurice,  341 

Birdseye,  Geo.,  950 

Bissell,  T.,  1290 

Blackman,  Leah,  9 

Bloodgood,  Harry,  2680 


Boggs,  G.  A.,  1125,  1575 

Boildieu,  Ad.,  579 

Boker,  George  H.,  1741,  2075,  2176 

Bombarger,  George,  1046 

Bosbyshell,  O.  C,  646 

Bourn,  Wm.  Oland,  2433 

Bowers,  E.,  213,  1467,  2677 

Boyd,  Kate  J.,  1658 

Boyers,  Adjt.,  2103 

Bradbury,  William  B.,  449,  890, 

1378,  2318,  2460 
Bradell,  P.,  Jr.,  840 
Brady,  John,  C54,  [C56],  C124,  C177 
Brady,  Mathew,  650 
Braham,  Davie,  565,  706 
Bray,  Walter,  275 
Brewer,  James  R.,  CIO 
Brewerton,  Douglass,  774 
Brick,  H.  C,  878 
Brickbat,  1486,  2276 
Brinley,  Lucas,  2332 
Brooks,  Professor  C,  1140,  2711 
Brougham,  644 
Brown,  J.  Byron  C,  1767 
Brown,  O.  B.,  1959 
Brownell,  H.  H.,  1128 
Bryant,  J.  Cullen,  2510 
Bryant,  Wm.  Cullen,  1628 
Buckley,  Fred.,  950,  1024,  1655,  2521 
Buckley,  William,  2462 
Burke,  Edward,  2317 
Burleigh,  Wm.  H.,  1557 
Burns,  Jabez,  2290 
Burns,  Robert,  215,  939,  1400 
Burr,  Wm.  Henry,  1557 
Burt,  R.  W.,  725 
Butcher,  Wm.  U.,  551 
C,  C19 

C,  E.  H.,  1864 
C,  E.  O.,  1589 
C,  H.  H.,  C142A 
C,  P.  J.,  1300 
C,  W.,  191 
C,  W.  P.,  1869 
Cahill,  James,  C152 
Caldwell,  R.  M.,  1254,  1782 
Caliban,  Mr.,  2293 
Cann,  Dr.  H.,  1474 
Canterbury,  H.  Webster,  1377 
Carey,  Prof.,  504 
Carleton,  Wm.,  1945 
Carpenter,  F.  B.,  1915 
Casserly,  1290 

Casten,  J.  Cross,  184,  1075,  1976 
Castle,  Harriet  L.,  150,  753 
Catlin,  E.  N.,  432 
Chapman,  John,  712 
Chenier,  Marie-Joseph  de,  282 
Cherrington,  W.  P.,  1404 
Childs,  J.  Ward,  388,  1402,  1519, 

2599 
Clark,  A.  B.,  1578 
Clark,  Chas.  A.,  1453,  2448 


Clark,  J.,  1442 

Clark,  James  D.,  1721 

Clark,  W.  H.,  1270 

Clarke,  Mary  Devereux,  C22 

Cleveland,  Emilie,  2261 

Clifford,  Ed.,  141 

ClLftan,  Ernest,  C138 

Clifton,  Harry,  596,  1103 

Coates,  Benjamin  Horner,  376 

Coates,  Elmer  Ruan,  115 

Coe,  Richard,  671 

Cola,  C4,  C175 

Coleman,  Mrs.  Thomas  M.,  2209 

CoUings,  Chas.,  1554 

Collins,  Charles  Jr.,  2233 

CoUins,  F.,  95,  107,  709,  758,  1131, 

1788 
Collins,  J.  H.,  2398 
Collins,  John,  556 
Comstock,  Andrew,  821 
Conrad,  W.  H.,  1321 
Cook,  Eliza,  1294 
Cooper,  George,  428,  1275,  1278, 

1468,  2399,  2653 
Core,  William  H.,  695,  2028 

Corporal ,  238 

Cosgrove,  Wm.,  941 

Cotton,  Ben,  2395 

Coulston,  T.  P.,  1771 

Cowenlock,  R.  Scott,  1013 

Cox,  John  S.,  2149 

Cox,  M.,  69 

Craig,  Tom,  333 

Crawford,  Mrs.,  742 

Creamer,  Jacob,  219 

Crofts,  Dr.,  714 

CromweU,  George  R.,  2419,  2529 

Crosby,  Fanny,  484,  2318 

Crosby,  L.  V.  H.,  1197,  1680 

Crosland,  John  M.,  741 

Crosland,  L.  C,  1797 

Cross,  John,  1951,  2390 

Cross,  John  Casten,  381,  448,  507, 

677,  773,  883,  1240,  1256,  1345, 

1427,  1428,  1470, 1473,  1688,  1787, 

2046,  2415,  2622 
Cross,  John  W.,  1187 
Cummins,  J.  J.,  1744,  1877 
Cunnington,  W.  P.,  509 
D.,  T.  G.,  647 
Daly,  John  J.,  1301 
Daly,  P.  M.,  1325 
Danks,  H.  P.,  2268 
Darling,  J.  N.,  803 
Davids,  C.  W.,  2676 
Davis,  Maria  L.,  228,  680 
Dawson,  Albert  F.,  210,  1593,  1595 
Dawson,  John  W.,  2632 
Deems,  J.  M.,  2405 
De  Geer,  P.,  529 
Delaney,  Alfred,  1517 
Densmore,  Wm.,  249 
De  Ville,  Henry,  102 


200 


De  Wolfe,  247,  336,  1097,  1223,  1272 
Dime,  Gustave,  2214,  2450 
Divine,  W.  H.,  2296 
Dix,  John  Ross,  188,  195,  450,  524, 

531,  874,  920,  921,  1034,  1037, 

1241,  1526,  1533,  1567,  1610,  1615, 

1622,  1802,  1828,  2151,  2156,  2312, 

2355,  2456,  2700 
Dock  St.  Bard,  586,  2614 
Dodworth,  C.  R.,  644 
Doherty,  John,  1784 
Doyle,  John  F.,  1134 
Drew,  Frank,  610,  2602 
Duffy,  Dr.,  2089 

Duganne,  A.  J.  H.,  65,  762,  2476 
Dumas,  Alex.,  1481 
Dumont,  Frank,  1104 
Dunne,  Wm.,  619 
Dyer,  J.,  2159 
Dyer,  John,  1955 
E^er,  Sidney,  806 
E.,  A.  B.,  1505 
E.,  J.,  827,  1938 
E.,  M.,  492 
Eagles,  Jno.,  2372 
Eames,  Eddie,  686 
Fames,  John  Casten,  617 
Eastburn,  384,  492,  866,  1297,  2310, 

2371 
Eastlack,  Francis  F.,  815,  2174 
Eckerson,  A.  B.,  592,  2128,  2326 
Edeson,  G.  R.,  2606 
Elder,  S.  G.,  132,  283 
Elder,  Susan  Blanchard,  C35 
Elliott,  Ebenezer,  267 
Emmett,  Daniel  D.,  882,  2257,  2609 
Emmett,  Toni,  4 
Emmit,  Dan,  220,  2624 
Engles,  George  H.,  1737 
English,  Frederick  S.,  44,  2489 
Evans,  Estwick,  36 
Everest,  C.,  2082 
F.,  Belle,  2459 
F.,  D.  S.,  2493 
F.,  J.  T.,  1959 

Fahie,  Geo.  A.  W.  Langford,  1888 
Falconer,  E.,  385 
Ease,  Henry,  1722 
Fay,  M.,  705 
Fee,  Michael,  2102 
Felix,  Don,  910 
Ferris,  William  P.,  490,  2001 
Field,  Professor,  1840 
Flanagan,  John,  471,  1055,  2002 
Fleetwood,  A.,  2656 
Forbes,  John,  246 
Ford,  Fred.,  1882 
Ford,  J.,  2591 
Foster,  Stephen  C,  205,  852,  990, 

1007,  2089,  2306,  2496,  2549,  2629, 

2653,  2654 
Fowle,  John  A.,  1971 
Fox,  C.  H.,  2336 
Fox,  Eddie,  275 
Fox,  Harry,  222 
Frank,  2434 
Frank,  M.  H.,  316 
Fritz,  Levi  J.,  1501 
Frozen  Water,  719 
Fry,  Joseph  R.,  579 
G.,  A.  L.,  2177 


G— ,  W.,  1660 

Gaddis,  M.  P.,  974 

Gannon,  T.,  474 

Gantz,  Chas.  Co.,  1786 

Gay,  James  D.,  100,  106,  198,  455, 

463,  724,  921,  1151,  1182,  1736, 

1972,  2003,  2457 
Gearighty,  P.,  1990,  2170 
Gebler,  Matt,  794,  1050 
Gerrish,  J.  E.,  2407 
Gerry,  Edson,  108 
Gibbons,  Charles,  1026 
Gibbons,  James  Sloane,  2510 
Gibler,  Moses,  142 
Gildersleeve,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  1488 
Gilmore,  Patrick  S.,  2574 
Gingry,  David  Jr.,  2676 
Glover,  742 
Glover,  Stephen,  2132 
Goodrich,  O.  A.,  2207 
Greenwood,  Harry,  1588 
Greenwood,  T.  J.,  Rev.,  2411 
Groschel,  J.  W.,  2261 
Gross,  William,  1249 
Gumpert,  G.,  552,  1033,  1776,  1984 
H,  C71 

H.,  A.  F.,  2675 
H.,  D.  C,  1004 
H.,  P.,  C161 
H.  W.,  1260 
Hack,  Henry  Jr.,  2427 
Hafford,  Jn.  L.,  337 
Hal,  1650 
Halcyon,  1651 
Hall,  Charlie,  426 
Hanford,  Wm.  H.,  1838 
Harnia,  Henry  Nelson,  339,  573,  2192 
Hardwick,  G.  P.  (Mrs.)  923,  925, 

2147 
Hardwick,  George  P.,  15,  100,  250, 

721,  924,  2095,  2100 
Hargitt,  Chas.  J.,  1013 
Harmon,  A.  W.,  1758 
Haroff,  W.  T.,  109 
H[arper],  J.  P.,  2421 
Harrigan,  Ed.,  706 
Harris,  A.,  385 
Hart,  C,  2521 

Hartford,  George  Bones,  1967 
Harwood,  Fanny  A.,  C137 
Haven,  C.  C,  1552,  1553,  2299 
Hawkins'  Zouaves,  283 
Hawthorne,  Alice  [Septimus  Winner], 

136,  898,  1173,  1277,  1305,  1545, 

1843,  2704 
Hayes,  John,  712 

Hays,  Will.  S.,  1664,  2266,  2520,  2678 
Hayward,  W.  H.,  654,  867,  875,  1092, 

1396,  2442 
Hedges,  Charles,  1445 
Heldrick,  Mrs.  R.  M.,  2467 
Hemans,  Felicia,  2144 
Henry,  C,  1686 
Henry,  John,  1973 
Higgins,  Mary  Josephine,  2344 
HiU,  R.,  103,  2417 
Hodges,  James,  C193 
Hofford,  M.  L.,  1773,  2012,  2402 
Hogan,  M.,  2693 
Holder,  E.  G.  B.,  118 
Holmes,  Billy,  888 


Holmes,  Jerry,  1968 

Holmes,  Oliver  Wendell,  66,  1632, 
2331 

Holt,  George  P.,  379,  2488 

Holtz,  Robert  E.,  C192 

Hood,  E.  P.,  535 

Hood,  Thomas,  2199 

Hotaling,  Sam.,  2155 

Howard,  Frank,  1279 

Howard,  Frank  Key,  C178 

Howard,  H.  J.,  1211 

Howard,  S.  C,  2480 

Howe,  Julia  Ward,  93 

Hudson,  A.  L.,  562 

Hughes,  John,  98 

Hunt,  G.  W.,  716 

Hurlock,  W.  S.,  668 

Hutchinson,  1294 

Hutchy,  125 

Hyatt,  Henry,  1278 

Hyatt,  T.  J.,  1934 

"Ibex",  2200 

Isaacs,  P.  B.,  2582,  2677 

Isaacs,  P.  R.,  213 

Isle,  Rouget  de  L',  1384 

J,  ClOl 

J.,  I.  V.  T.  v.,  237 

Jackson,  Stonewall,  1518 

Janvier,  Francis  de  Haes,  1792,  2405 

Jeffreys,  C,  1965 

Jersey,  585 

Jewell,  John  B.,  2323 

Johnson,  F.  B.,  2210 

Johnson,  Finley,  1327 

Johnston,  Eugene,  83,  189,  230,  248, 
391,  447,  512,  532,  597,  616,  653, 
922,  1006,  1114,  1217,  1577,  1713, 
1832,  1833,  1834,  1835,  1941,  1928, 
1949,  2106,  2286,  2464,  2490,  2559, 
2615,  2636 

Johnston,  Robert,  528,  656 

Jones,  Edward  C,  928 

Jones,  L.  A.,  1655 

Judson,  Edward  Zane  CarroU,  486 
1874,  2050,  2358 

Jumper  Boy,  2682 

Justice,  Wm.  B.,  1101 

K.,  D.,  2420 

K.,  P.,  704 

K.,  T.,  41 

K.,  T.  F.,  980 

Kean,  Thomas,  854 

Kearney,  Thomas  W.,  848 

Kelly,  Captain,  533 

Kelly,  Henry  B.,  2140 

Kelly,  P.,  2098 

Kemble,  S.  T.,  2345 

Kermode,  Tamar  Anne,  515 

Kern,  B.  F.,  2201 

Keys,  Phillip  Barton,  C61 

Kidder,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  1376,  2460 

Kiernan,  James,  208 

Kiernan,  Wm.,  951 

Kimball,  J.  B.,  780 

Kirby,  Ned,  708 

Kirbye,  Prof.,  767 

Kittredge,  Walter,  2297 

Knight,  J.  P.,  2022 

Koppitz,  Charles,  2103 

Korner,  2280 

L.,  B.  C,  1689 


201 


L.,  G.,  17 

L.,  J.  B.,  2368 

L.,  R.,  C41 

Ladd,  M.  B.,  958,  1095 

Lamb,  Robert,  C133 

Landon,  Mrs.  L.  E.,  1656 

Langenschwartz,  Max,  58,  733,  783,  2148 

Larkln,  John  P.,  251 

Laues,  Elder  Wm.,  1460 

Laycock,  Samuel,  2930 

Leavitt,  A.  J.,  847 

Leedom,  B.  J.,  1235 

Lefavour,  J.  S.,  526,  659 

Leopold,  Arthur,  1091,  2681 

Leslie,  Ernest,  2019 

Leslie,  Thomas,  1375 

Lewis,  Emanuel,  2198 

Leybourne,  G.,  1923 

Lingard,  William,  2483 

Livingston,  A.  W.,  2665 

Lockwood,  C.  T.,  511,  842 

Lockwood,  H.  A.,  842 

Lockwood,  L.  C.,  156,  1330 

Long,  Francis  C.,  133,  134,  730,  1002 

Long,  J.  D.,  1605 

Loper,  H.  E.,  1576 

Lovelock,  J.,  1344 

Lowe,  E.  Walter,  548,  2350 

Lowery,  Patrick,  91 

Lowry,  R.,  771 

Loyd,  T.,  1747 

Lubeck,  Hans,  1883 

Ludwig,  Otto  W.,  399 

Lue,  2014 

Lundy,  Rev.  J.  P.,  2361 

M,  C189 

M.,  C.,  738 

M.,  D.,  1213 

M.,  E.  F.,  787 

M.  E.  Jr.,  785 

M.,  J.,  2618 

McAviney,  P.,  2224 

McCann,  Arthur,  96,  819,  1063,  1991 

McCarthy,  Harry,  C26 

McCully,  H.  v.,  2432 

M'Cully,  James,  2409 

McFadden,  Arthur,  326 

McGowan,  Richard  J.,  2026 

McGuey,  J.,  902 

Mcllvaine,  John,  13 

MacKay,  Charles,  605,  2316 

MacKellar,  Thomas,  551 

MacKenzie,  John,  539,  584,  631 

McLay,  N.  S.,  2158 

M'Makin,  Andrew,  928 

McMenaman,  Wm.,  1649 

McQuaid,  J.,  2445 

Mahon,  John,  390,  2236 

Marlon,  William  C,  2440,  2630 

Mark,  J.  W.,  1756 

Marsh,  J.,  2531 

Martin,  J.  C,  2185 

Marto,  Louis  P.,  1362 

Maryland,  C49 

Mason,  Caroline  A.,  494 

Massett,  Stephen  C,  1790,  2581 

Matthison,  Arthur,  2562 

May,  Harry  S.,  331 

Meeser,  G.  F.,  1734 

Mephistophiles,  K.  G.  S.,  C181 


Merriam,  Mrs.  C.  M.,  2428 

Metzger,  Ambrosius,  1719 

Michael,  Charles,  1641 

Miller,  John,  732 

Miller,  Lindley,  2194 

Milliard,  Henry  A.,  652 

Million,  M.  J.,  147,  672,  1347,  2568,  2582 

Misfortunes  Bard,  839 

Mitchell,  Samuel  N.,  1942 

Moncrieff,  Kate,  935,  1783 

Moore,  John,  323 

Morford,  Henry,  496,  970 

Morris,  G.  P.,  47,  651,  1805,  2534 

Morris,  J.  P.,  723 

Morris,  Robert,  737,  1517 

Mosier,  Frank,  732 

Mullaly,  1301 

Munday,  Eugene  H.,  2321 

Murdoch,  James  E.,  939 

Murphy,  Wm.  H.,  325,  459,  943,  1789, 

2366,  2439 
Murray,  James  V.,  1863 
Muzio,  Senor,  1805 
Muzzy,  A.  W.,  485 
Myers,  T.,  2150 
Nagle,  Melinda,  1740 
Neagle,  Mrs.  Louis,  1769 
Nicholson,  James,  949 
Nickless,  Samuel,  332,  334 
Nicol,  R.  B.,  590 
Niles,  Hezekiah,  1201 
O'Conner,  J.  A.  C,  155 
O'Conner,  Miss  M.  A.,  1261 
O'Connor,  Mary  E.  C,  155 
O'Court,  Contempt,  1051 
Odiorne,  Jno.  W.,  1327 
O'Donnell,  Daniel  Kane,  928 
O'Donnell,  Michael,  2539 
Offenbach,  J.,  21,  2469 
Old  Napoleon,  919 
Old  Soldier,  C50A 
O'Neil,  Hugh,  343 
O'Regan,  Timothy  B.,  711,  1066,  1408, 

2069,  2113 
O'Reilly,  Henry,  1387 
O'Riley,  Michael,  1065 
"Our  Ned",  73,  292,  1343,  1349, 

1495,  1958,  1996,  2567 
P,  375 

P.,  J.,  393,  845 
P.,  W.  E.,  1031 
P.,  W.  H.,  159,  2608 
Pabor,  Willie  E.,  1979 
Palmer,  Harry  M.,  1067,  1700 
Palmer,  J.  W.,  C170 
Paramore,  Jos.,  342 
Parkhurst,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  762 
Pastor,  Tony,  138,  929,  1064,  1766, 

1842,  2181,  2307,  2478,  2663 
[Payne,  John  Howard],  895 
Pearson,  Harry,  973 
Peers,  Rebecca  F.,  1548 
Peirsol,  Wm.  H.,  769 
Pepper,  S.,  2101 
Perceville,  W.,  666 
Percy,  Fred,  760 
Perry,  George,  1624 
Peters,  J.  G.,  288 
Pettit,  Matilda,  466 
Phillips,  Philip,  2665 
Piggot,  Mrs.  Margaret,  1476 


Pike,  Albert,  C74 

[Pinkney,  Frank],  C53 

Pitts,  S.,  1281 

Poole,  J.  F.,  636,  1016,  1358,  1607, 

1791,  2182 
Powell,  Rebecca,  C188 
Pratt,  Charles  E.,  1942 
Prendergrast,  T.  B.,  202 
Prevatt,  J.  S.,  C36 
Price,  T.  T.,  2374 
Q.,  M.  F.,  C2 
Q.,  O.  P.,  2531 
Quien  Sabe,  C40,  C148 
Quinby,  J.  B.,  1205 
R.,  2509 

Randall,  James  [R],  C15,  C107,  C176 
Ravenal  de  la  Coste,  Marie,  2167 
Read,  T.  Buchanan,  473,  1264,  1642, 

2097 
Readel,  C.  H.,  2418 
Reeves,  Sims,  2611 
Rhoades,  Charlie,  918 
Rice,  Phil,  1155 
Richmond,  Harry,  1535 
R[idgeley],  N.  G.,  C4,  C48,  C86,  C112, 

C126,  C190 
Riley,  Edward,  2203 
Roberts,  George  M.,  2291 
Robinson,  James,  176 
Robinson,  Tom,  1824 
Robison,  Hugh,  234 
Roe,  Remsey,  812,  814 
Rogers,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  2^46 
Rogers,  Edward  S.,  300 
Rogers,  LovelaW.,  C118 
Root,  George  F.,  90,  1172,  1174,  1745, 

2323,  2368 
Ross,  J.  H.,  2321 
Ross,  Thomas,  1889 
Rossiter,  Ednor,  354,  974,  978,  1184 
Rothwell,  H.  B.,  2183 
Rouse,  Fred,  178,  915,  1760 
Rush,  Annie,  717 
Rusher,  Wattle,  1094,  2429 
Russell,  George  H.,  1372 
Russell,  Henry,  714,  2316 
Ryan,  Mick,  2430 
S.,  A.,  1591 
S.,  C.  S.,  2124 
S.,  J.  L.,  1207 
S.,  O.  H.,  C25,  C136 
S.,  W.  F.,  298 
S.,  W.  M.,  2473 
Sanford,  S.  S.,  1111 
Sarles,  Martin  Andreas,  936 
Saugherties  Bard,  130,  193,  444,  865, 

881,  887,  1137,  1492,  1894,  1919, 

2325,  2495 
Savage,  C.  A.,  97 
Sawyer,  Charles  Carrol,  235,  961, 

1472,  1499,  2577,  2586,  2616 
Saxe,  John  G.,  764 
Sayers  &  Heenan,  847 
Schiller,  278 
Schroeder,  Henry,  1668 
Scott,  A.,  76,  567,  1929,  2250,  2347 
Scott,  Archibald,  1196,  1590,  2378, 

2498,  2641 
Scott,  J.,  237 
Scroggy,  Th.  M.,  122 


202 


Sell,  Alfred  &  Son,  404 

Sertrew,  Saul,  1139 

Setley,  Henry  Albert,  99,  630 

Settle,  John  S.,  2184 

Seymour,  Jas.,  1206 

Sharkey,  P.,  683 

Shaw,  David  T.,  1981 

Shires,  William,  2645 

Shortfellow,  Prof.,  602,  2221 

Silent  Sam,  976 

Simmonds,  J.,  1024 

Simmons,  Lew,  603 

Sinclair,  Carrie  Bell,  C154 

Singer,  J.  Jr.,  544,  1027 

Sloman,  C,  144 

Small,  Wm.  F.,  1195 

Smith,  Dexter,  321,  2541 

Smith,  James,  2079,  2379 

Smith,  Jimmy,  746 

Smith,  John,  7,  955,  1326 

Smith,  Perry,  321 

Smith,  Robert,  2524 

Smith,  W.  Dexter,  432 

Smooth  Bore,  2454 

Snodgas,  Jr.,  2300 

Snyderskype,  366 

Spear,  Frank,  182,  206,  207,  406,  676, 
778,  829,  964,  1096,  1296,  1340, 
1528,  1596,  1933,  1943,  2573 

Spencer,  Anna  W.,  1793,  1944 

Spencer,  E.  Mordaunt,  2132 

Spencer,  James  B.,  2154 

Squizzle,  Don  Fitz,  2067 

St.  John,  C,  896 

St.  John,  T.  F.,  1794 

Stadler,  Emile,  341 

Stage,  Geo.  W.,  2085 

Stanton,  Henry  Thompson,  C13 

Steele,  J.  D.,  1556 

Steele,  Silas  S.,  63,  893,  1193,  2120, 
2205 

Stetser,  Joseph  N.,  894 

Stewart,  James  E.,  322,  1104 

Stockton,  T.  H.,  948,  1551 

Stoehr,  Lewis,  1304 

Stone,  1645 

Stout,  G.  L.,  565 

Stowe,  Phineas,  2537,  2538 

Stransky,  Morris,  1837 

Street,  Alfred  B.,  1803 

Streval,  C.  G.,  56 

Stoopofero,  2682 


(Sumner],  H[elenl,  C42,  C51,  CllO 
Sutherland,  Wm.,  68,  214,  342,  456, 

685,  2513,  2558 
Swain,  L.  A.,  1268 
Symns,  T.  K.,  2314 
T.,  W.,  1908 

Talley,  Susan  Archer,  C17 
Tanner,  G.  W.  W.,  2452 
Taylor,  Bayard,  728,  1937 
Taylor,  J.  H.,  197 
Thomas,  J.  R.,  47,  889,  1275,  1468 
Thomas,  Josiah  Lord,  671 
Thompson,  C.  F.,  2616 
Ticknor,  Francis  O.  [Ole  Secesh], 

C44,  C127 
Timrod,  H.,  C120 
Thompson,  F.  H.,  1376 
Tittermary,  J.,  1550 
Topsy, 1657 
Tovey,  R.  A.,  1974 
TrevaJ,  C.  Y.,  2136 
Tucker,  Henry,  235,  428,  429,  1100, 

1467,  1499,  2399,  2586 
Tucker,  Henry  St.  George,  C153 
Tully,  James,  756 
Turney,  E.,  771 
Unsworth,  1860 
Upham,  Louis  S.,  3,  1543 
Upham,  Nathan,  1263 
Upton,  Henry  O.,  29,  837 
v.,  J.  E.,  614 
v.,  M.,  C119 
Valleau,  John  M.,  1306 
Vivian,  Charlie,  2612 
Von  Smit,  Abraham,  2656 
Vosburgh,  C.  A.,  2290 
W.,  1399 
W.,  M.  1.,  5546 
W.,  P.  S.,  257 
W.,  W.  A.,  2576 
Wakefield,  James,  54 
Walden,  James,  1379 
Wallace,  William  Ross,  1475 
Wallis,  Severn  Teackle,  C69 
Walsh,  P.  J.,  1857 
Walter,  1291 
Walters,  B.  Frank,  354,  974,  978, 

1184 
Wandering  Willie ,  1331 
Warden,  David  A.,  231,  723,  728,  1401, 

1785,  1880,  2097,  2103,  2104,  2107, 

2152,  2510 


Warfield,  Catherine  M.,  C156 
Warland,  J.  H.,  2600 
Warren,  Annie  Irene,  1736 
Warren,  Walter,  254,  693,  986,  1130, 

1740,  1804,  2435,  2647 
Washburn,  Henry  S.,  2447 
Watson,  G.  W.,  1218 
Watson,  John,  2533 
Waugh,  Edwin,  364 
Webster,  Rev.  H.  D.  L.,  1309 
Weiland,  F.,  1734 
Wellman,  W.  F.,  2562 
Wetmore,  W.  J.,  911 
Wheelock,  O.,  1774,  2531 
Whitaker,  Mrs.  D.  K.,  C102 
Whitaker,  Frank,  1040 
White,  Charles,  1198 
Whittier,  John  G.,  2196,  2669 
Whiting,  Samuel,  1030 
Widdows,  F.,  380 
Willard,  Mrs.,  2022 
Willet,  Edward,  1768 
Williams,  Gus,  736 
Williams,  Jack,  392 
Williams,  John  A.,  2721 
Williamson,  D.  Brainard,  2149 
Willis,  Mrs.  N.,  2437 
Wilmarth,  F.,  896 
Wilmer,  L.  A.,  545 
Winans,  John,  172 
Winner,  Sep.,  754,  879,  888,  1545, 

1800  [see  also:   Hawthorne,  Alice] 
Winter,  Mrs.,  2491 
Wittig,  Rudolph,  1699 
Wolfe,  227 
Wolfsohn,  Carl,  774 
Wood,  Henry,  1071 
Wooley,  J.  H.,  1571,  2051 
Woolverton,  Thomas,  2229 
Work,  Henry  Clay,  74,  196,  799,  1188, 

1381,  2339,  2481 
Wren,  John  Y.,  2431 
Wright,  C.  G.,  1778 
Wurzel,  861 
Young  'Un,  2197 
Z.,  C165 
Zieber,  John  L.,  223,  281,  412,  639, 

748,  838,  1126,  1163,  1505,  1697, 

1699,  1780,  1859,  1873,  1884,  1892, 

2253,  2322,  2545,  2703 


203 


Index  of  Singers 


Abecco,  1457a 
"Adelphi  Glee,"  1439 
Anderson,  A.,  347,  2188a,  b 
Anderson,  George  W.,  655,  1429a, 

1524 
Andress,  E.  V.,  1736e 
Archer,  Charles  E.,  1784b 
Arlington,  W.,  829,  1005 
Ashcroft,  2680a 
Ashton,  Mr.,  2579 
Austin,  Garrie  C,  2139a,  b 
Ball,  Harry,  1575b 
Barry,  S.,  2216 

Berry,  Edward,  1167a,  b,  2116 
Berry,  S.,  1060 
Birch,  Billy,  2392 
Bishop,  Anna,  1790b 
Bohemian  Trio,  2042 
Bombarger,  George,  1046 
Boyce, J.  T.,  1897,  2068 
Bradell,  P.  Jr.,  840 
Bray,  Walter,  799c 
Bree,  Tommy,  1192a 
Briest,  J.  H.,  402a 
Brown,  Richard,  121 
Bryan,  T.,  1993 
Bryant,  Dan,  128,  221a,  11881,  j,  k,  m, 

2554 
Bryants  Minstrels,  118,  701b,  843a, 

1114,  1314, 1388,  1673, 1730,  2657 
Bryon,  H.,  2182a 
Buckley's-Band of  Minstrels,  666,  789, 

1289,  1672,  2521 
Buckley's  Serenaders,  321 
Budworth,  J.  H.,  167,  374,  676,  1594b, 

1703 
Budworth,  W.  S.,  207,  381c 
Budworth  &  Campbells  Woods  Min- 
strels, 1528b 
Bundworth,  J.  H.,  964 
Burgess,  Cool,  1345b 
Burkitt,  Thomas,  159a 
Butler,  Clara,  717h 
Camel,  C,  1681 
Camel's  Minstrels,  1114 
Campbell,  S.  C,  952a,  b,  c,  e,  1469 
Canterbury,  H.  Webster,  1377 
Canterbury  Minstrels,  563f 
Carleton,  Wm.,  1826,  1945 
Carncross,  J.  L.,  160b,  663,  1542a, 

1639,  2149c 
Carroll,  J.,  2554 
Cavanagh,  W.  B.,  1711 
Christy,  E.  P.,  Band  of  Minstrels, 

1701a,  c 
Christie's,  George,  Minstrels,  118, 

2480 
Clifton,  Harry,  596,  1103 
Collins,  651c,  940 
Collins,  Charles  E.,  2182b,  c,  d,  e,  f, 

g,  h,  i,  j 
Collins,  John,  2601 
Collins,  Sam,  411 


Columbian  Quartet,  2597 

Conlin,  J.  T.,  1429a 

Cook,  Joe,  C97 

Core,  Wm.  H.,  2028 

Cotton,  Ben,  360,  835b,  1120b,  c,  d 

Cotton,  Jim,  500c,  811b 

Crosland,  L.  C,  1797 

Cross,  J.  C,  2217b 

De  Faiber,  Ernestine,  437 

Denham,  Fanny,  2139a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  g 

Dettro,  1292 

Dixey,  221c,  d 

Dixey,  E.  F.,  482,  2671 

Doherty,  John,  1784a 

Donnelly,  Thomas  L.,  390 

Drew,  Frank,  610,  2602 

Dugane,  E.,  398a 

Duley,  John  H.,  2303 

Dunn,  James,  380 

Edeson,  George  R.,  243 

Eduardo,  Jim,  851 

Egan,  H.  W.,  1016a,  b,  c,  d,  g,  h,  i, 
j.k 

Emerson,  Billy,  422a 

Emmitt,  Dan,  1198,  2093 

English,  Joe,  1917 

Fayetta  Glee  Club,  2649 

Florence,  Mrs.,  1039c 

Florence,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  245 

Forbes,  John,  246 

Forrest,  Fanny,  675,  2404b 

Fox,  C.  H.,  2336 

Fox,  Charlie,  5c,  1352,  2712 

Fox,  Harry,  222,  2619 

Gannon,  P.  J.,  1505c 

Gardner,  Charlie,  906b,  2130b 

Garman,  1292 

Gay,  James  D.,  83b,  98a,  b,  198,  455a, 
776c,  1016e,  1139J ,  k,  1,  1143c, 
1163,  1182e,  1238c,  1736e,  1972a,  b, 
2019a,  2099b,  2279b,  2290c,  2455, 
2457,  2458,  2515,  2574d 

Gaylord,  Low,  2010 

Gaynor,  J.,  1600f,  2317 

Gebler,  Matt,  794,  1050,  1088,  1447, 
2305 

Germon,  Effie,  2103b,  e 

Gibler,  Moses,  142 

Gill,  G.  W.,  662,  2691a,  b,  c,  e 

Glendale,  G.  C,  960,  999b 

Glenny,  J.  H.,  2525,  2526 

Gould,  N.  W.,  2071a 

Great  Wray,  2304 

Greenwood,  H.,  1573a 

Greenwood,  Harry,  1588a 

Grotto  Minstrels,  254c,  1676c 

Harding,  E.  H.,  341 

Harrison,  W.,  42,  859 

Hart,  Bob,  16,  811a 

Haven,  E.,  74e 

Henri,  Mrs.  C,  1188c,  d,  e,  f 

Heron,  Fanny,  2533 

Hilton,  C,  1187b 


Hooley's  Minstrels,  1572a 

Horn,  Eph,  2482b 

The  Howard  Burlesque  Opera  Troupe, 
29,  526 

Howard,  G.  C.  [Mrs.],  1667 

Howard,  Cordelia,  1283 

Howard,  Rollin,  321,  431 

Howe,  J.  B.  [Mrs.],  2222 

Jenkins,  Charles,  583 

Jennins,  Wm.,  795 

Johnson,  J.  P.,  981 

Johnston,  2533 

Jones,  W.  O.  [Mrs.],  503 

Jubilei,  2533 

Kelly,  Mat,  513 

Kerns,  Frank,  930a,  2552b 

Kimball,  J.  B.,  780 

Kirkwood,  John,  1256 

Lane,  C.  J.,  2565 

Leavitt,  Andrew  J.,  718b,  847b 

Leslie,  F.,  2463a,  b 

Leybourne,  George,  969 

Lind,  Jenny,  1937 

Lingard  the  Great,  1712 

Lockwood,  C.  J.,  2582a,  d 

Long,  Sara,  1596c 

Lum,  Frank,  657,  796,  835a,  906a, 
1110 

Mabbott,  Joe,  2083 

Mandeville,  Agatha,  277 

Matthews,  Billy,  1094 

May,  Fred,  1765a 

McAllister,  Billy,  1428 

McConahy,  D.,  377,  2120a,  2688 

McGowan,  Dick,  781,  813,  1113,  2484 

McGowan,  Richard  J.,  2026a,  b 

McNally,  T.  F.,  756b 

Melville,  Charles,  163a,  841,  979, 
1078a,  2165a,  2570 

Melville,  E.  C,  1202 

Merrifield,  Jerry,  1208 

Milburn,  J.  H.,  1431 

Miller,  H.,  849a,  b,  d 

Mitchell,  Maggie,  1279 

Mohawk  Chorals  of  Cohoes,  732 

Monroe,  C,  17 9 Id 

Monroe,  Charley,  2423 

Moran,  Frank,  930c,  2551 

Morris,  BUly,  280b 

Morris  Brothers  Minstrels,  321 

Murphy,  Joseph,  731 

Myers,  T.,  1530b 

Nagel,  Melinda,  986g,  27151 

Nash,  Professor,  8 

O'Neal,  William,  2644 

The  Old  Folks,  1378m 

Osier,  1292 

Palmer,  J.  A.,  2371a 

Parker,  Dick,  1144 

Pastor,  Tony,  59,  138,  144,  424,  510b, 
648,  716,  907,  913,  929,  931,  959, 
983,  1064,  1070,  1077,  1233, 1406, 
1423,  1443,  1572,  1607,  1757,  1765, 


204 


1791b,  c,  e,  f,  g,  h,  1842,  1849b,  c, 
1891b,  1895,  1925b,  1969,  2015, 
2181a,  b,  c,  d,  g,  2219e,  f,  h,  2255, 
2307,  2308,  2443,  2444,  2478,  2587, 
2621,  2663,  2688,  2708,  2714 

Payne,  Little  Ada,  1736h 

Peabody,  Ephraim,  2697 

Pease,  Charles  H.,  952d,  990b 

Peel's  Campbell  Minstrels,  577 

Pell,  Billy,  2348 

Perciville,  160a 

Pettinglll,  C,  1599 

Phila.  Fire  Zouaves,  563d,  e 

Pierce,  Al,  850 

Poole,  J.  F.,  636a,  1358 

Prendergrast,  T.  B.,  435,  445a,  1105a, 
1355,  1462b,  1636b,  c 

Prevatt,  J.  S.,  C36 

"Professor",  1450 

Purdy,  S.  S.,  224,  1315 

Pyne,  L.,  385b 

Quayle,  Mr.,  2497b,  c,  d,  e 

Racey,  R.  H.,  1948a 

Ralph,  Dick,  1500 

Reed,  Dave,  1537,  1975 

Reeves,  Sims,  2569 

Rhoades,  Charles,  183,  918 

Rice,  Dan,  217 

Rice,  Phil,  1155 

Richmond,  Harry,  1119,  1535,  2670 

Riley,  Ned,  1950b 

Robson,  Stuart,  1621b 


Ross,  W.,  1943b 

Rouse,  Fred,  178,  915,  1760 

Rush,  Annie,  717,  2429,  2647a,  e 

Russell,  George  H.,  1372 

Russell,  Theodore  W.,  877b 

Sanford  &  Rochez,  1208 

Sandford,  Jim,  989 

Search,  Jacob,  2333,  2435 

Sellmon,  J.,  2235b,  c 

Seymour,  Jas.,  1206 

Seymoure,  Nelse,  2710b 

Sharpley,  S.,  1580,  1861 

Sharpley,  Sam,  2438 

Shaw,  Fred, 1434a 

Shaw,  Gus,  1160,  1367 

Shaw,  Misses,  1850 

Simmons,  Lew,  603b,  718a,  1455b, 

1862b,  c,  d 
Simpson,  R.,  790a,  2653a,  b 
Sinclair,  Frank,  230b,  489 
Smith,  Chester  H.,  2046,  1976b 
Smith,  W.  M.,  1120a,  1353 
Spear,  Frank,  182,  206,  1096a,  f, 

1340b,  1528b,  2517,  2573b, 
Star  Company,  198 lo 
Stevens,  Ben,  168 
Stratton,  J.,  1504,  2465b 
Swain,  Charles,  342b,  582 
Symns,  T.  K.,  2314 
Talbot,  799c 
Taylor,  J.  H.,  197c,  e,  2412c,  2711b 


Thorne,  E.  T.,  984 

Turner,  R.  J.,  553h 

Vance, 1830 

Vance,  Tom,  713 

Vincent,  W.,  1012a 

Viola,  Mile.,  2696b 

Vivian,  Charles,  1616,  1626,  1922, 
2612 

Wallace,  J.  C,  2540c,  d 

Wambold,  David  S.,  581,  2677c 

Ward,  Billy,  6c 

Warden,  D.  A.,  1401a,  d,  1785b,  ISSOe 

Weaver,  Add,  1676d,  2711h 

White,  C,  425,  451a,  1693 

White,  Charlie,  386,  1150,  1911,  2461a 

White,  Cool,  313 

White,  James  R.,  345b,  1048,  2356b 

Wilkinson,  Jennie,  1854,  2391 

Williams,  Mrs.  Barney,  1039c 

Williams,  Gus,  321 

Winans,  John,  172,  765,  1966 

Winchell,  E.  H.,  1560a 

Winton,  H.  C,  973 

Woodhull,  Fred,  2063 

Woods  Minstrels  [Budworth  &  Camp- 
bell], 740c,  1071,  1114,  1907,  2482a, 
2517 

Worrell,  Bill,  1130d 

Worrell,  Jennie,  401 

Wray,  Wm.  A.,  1106,  1720,  2304 

Zane  St.  Grammar  School,  2361f 


205 


tl20,y5P54 


^,,3  5002  02032  7131 

Wolf,  Edwin 

American  song  sheets,  slip  ballads,  and 


