It  ilintru  itf 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 

ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


MARYLAND 
GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


THE 


BALTIMORE 
JOHNS  HOPKINS 
1900 


PRESS 


Z-tx  ^rieienrcatb  Company 

BALTIMORE,  MD.|  U.  S.  A. 


A^A  IS 


COMMISSION 


JOHN  WALTEE  SMITH,  President. 

GOVERNOR   OF  MARTLANl). 

JOSHUA  W.  HEEING,  

COMPTROLLER   OF  MARYLANll. 

DAXIEL  C.  OILMAN,    .       .       .       .       Executive  Officer. 

PRESIDBNT  OF  THE  JOHNfi  HOPKINS  UNIVERSITT. 

E.  W.  SILVESTEE,  Secretary. 

PRESIDENT   OF   THE   MAKVLAND   AGRICULTURAL  COLLEGE. 


SCIENTIFIC  STAFF 


Wii.  Bullock  Clakk,    .....        State  Geologist. 

SUPERINTENDENT  OF  THE  SURVEY. 


Edwakd  B.  "Ar.\ thews,  .  .  .  Assistant  State  Geologist. 
Charles  S.  Prosser,  Chief  of  Division  of  Appalachian  Geology. 
L.  A.  Bauer,  .  Chief  of  Division  of  Terrestrial  Magnetism. 
C.  C.  O'Harra  .....  Assistant  Geologist. 
R.  B.  EowE,  .....       Assistant  Geologist. 

Also  witli  the  cooperation  of  several  members  of  the  scientific 
bureaus  of  the  !N'ational  Government. 


LETTER  OF  TRANSMITTAL 


To  His  Excellency  Johx  "Walter  Smith, 

Governor  of  Maryland  and  President  of  the  Geological  Survey 
Commission. 

Sir: — I  have  the  honor  to  present  herewith  a  report  on  The  Physi- 
cal Features  of  Allegany  County.  The  Volume  constitutes  the  iirst 
of  a  series  of  reports  on  county  resources,  and  is  accompanied  by  an 
Atlas  with  large  scale  topographical  and  geological  maps.  The  infor- 
mation brought  forward  in  these  publications  is  of  both  economic  and 
educational  significance  and  I  believe  will  prove  of  interest  and  value 
both  to  those  who  are  residents  of  the  county  and  those  from  a  distance 
who  may  be  considering  sites  for  homes  or  for  the  investment  of 
capital  therein.    I  am, 

Very  respectfully, 

Wm.  Bullock  Clark, 

State  Geologist. 

Johns  Hopkixs  University, 
Baltimore.  November,  1900. 


CONTENTS 

PAOE 


PREFACE   17 

INTRODUCTION   23 

THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    Bv  Cleveland  Abbe,  Ju.  27 

Introductory    27 

Phtsiographic  Divisions  ■   28 

The  Plateau  District   28 

The  Topography  of  the  Plateau  District   38 

The  Drainage  of  the  Plateau  District   30 

The  Structure  of  the  Plateau  District   32 

Stream  Adjustments  in  the  Plateau  District   33 

The  Ridge  District   34 

The  Topography  of  the  Ridge  District   34 

The  Drainage  of  the  Ridge  District   37 

The  Structure  of  the  Ridge  District   40 

Stream  Adjustments  in  the  Ridge  District   40 

Topo<;rai'hic  History     49 

Stages  in  the  Topographic  History   49 

The  Present  Stage   49 

The  Terrace-forming  Stage   50 

The  Shenandoah  Plain  Stage   51 

The  Schooley  Plain  Stage    53 

The  Paleozoic  Period  and  the  Appalachian  Revolution    54 

THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    By  Cleophas  C.  O'Harra...  57 

Iktroductory   57 

■Geographic  asd  Geologic  Relatic)ns   57 

Historical  Review   60 

Bibliography   69 

Stratigraphy  and  Areal  Distribution   85 

The  Silurian   86 

The  Juniata  Formation     86 

The  Tuscarora  Formation  ...    87 

The  Clinton  Formation   89 

The  Niagara  Formation   91 

The  Salina  Formation     92 

The  Devonian   94 

The  Helderbertr  Formation     94 

The  Oriskany  Formation   98 

The  Romney  Formation   103 

The  Jennings  Formation   106 

The  Hampshire  Formation   108 


12  CONTENTS 

PAGB 

The  Carboniferous   109 

Tlie  Pocono  Formation   109 

The  Greenbrier  Formation   1 10 

Tlie  Mauch  t'liunk  Formation   113 

The  Pottsville  Formation   113 

The  Alletrliciiy  Formation   115 

Tlie  Conemautrli  Formation   118 

The  Monontrahela  Formation   124 

The  Permian   138 

Tlie  Dunkard  Formation   128 

The  Pleistocene   130 

Tlie  Alluvial  and  other  Late  Deposits   130 

Sthccture   133 

The  Orleans  Anticline   133 

The  Town  Hill  S.vncliue     136 

The  Stratford  Ridge  Anticline   138 

The  Oldtown  and  Pratt  Valley  Folds   I3» 

The  Polish  Mountain  Syncline   141 

The  Tiissey  Mountain  Anticline   142 

The  Martin  Mountiiin  and  Collier  Mountain  Anticlines   144 

The  Big  Spring  Run  Syncline   144 

The  Martin  Spring  Branch  Syncline   144 

The  Collier  Run  Syncline   144 

The  Evitts  Mountain  Anticline   145 

The  Evitts  Creek  Syncline   146 

The  Wills  Mountain  Anticline   148 

The  Rawlings  Syncline   149 

The  Fort  Hill  Anticline   150 

The  Georges  Creek  Syncline   150 

Dip,  Strike  and  Pitch   153 

Faults   153 

Structure  Sections   154 

Interpretation  of  the  Sedimentary  Recoko   155 

General  Character  and  Variation  of  Sediments   155 

The  Early  Paleozoic  Period    155 

The  Tuscarora  Period     156 

The  Later  Silurian  Period   158 

The  Ilelderberg  Period   159 

The  Oriskany  Period     UiO 

The  Devonian  Shale  Period   160 

The  Lower  Carboniferous  Period   163 

The  Coal  Measures  Period   163 

Subsequent  History   163 

THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    Br  Wm.  B.  Ci.akk. 

C.  C.  O'Harra,  R.  B.  Rowe.  axd  H.  Ries   165 

COAi.s   166 

Description  of  the  Coal  Basin   166 


lIAKYLAXr)  GEOLOGICAL  SUKVEV  13 

PAGE 

History  of  its  Development   167 

Names  used  for  the  Coal  Basin   168 

The  Coal  Veins   169 

The  Pottsville  Coals   169 

The  Allegheny  Coals   171 

The  Conemaugh  Coals   175 

The  Monongahela  Coals   176 

Clats   180 

Fire-clays   181 

Shales   183 

Sedimentary  Clays   184 

Residual  Clays   184 

Lime  and  Cement  Pkodccts   185 

Brii.DixG  Stones    187 

Road  ?\[aterials   188 

Iron  Ore   189 

Mineral  and  Oudinakt  Springs   191 

MlSCELLANEOrS    MATERIALS   192 

THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    By  Clarence  W.  Dorsey   195 

Introduction   195 

The  Formation  of  Soils   195 

External  and  Internal  Conditions  of  the  Soil   197 

Historical  Sketch   198 

Soil  Formations   200 

The  Juniata   201 

The  Tuscarora   201 

The  Clinton   203 

The  Niagara   303 

The  Salina   203 

The  Helderberg   204 

The  Oriskany   206 

The  Romney-Jennings     307 

The  Hampshire   208 

The  Pocono   209 

The  Greenbrier-Mauch  Chunk   310 

The  Pottsville   310 

The  Allegheny   210 

The  Conemaugh   211 

The  Monongahela   211 

The  Dunkard   312 

Alluvial  Soils   212 

THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    By  Olivek  L.  Fa.ssio   217 

Introduction   217 

Tempehatcre     219 


14 


COS^TENTS 


PAOE 

Rainfali   223 

Desckiption  of  Stations   228 

Cumberland   228 

Boettcberville   22» 

Westernport   229 

Flintstone     230 

Frostburg:   230 

Mount  Savage   230 

Oldtown   230 

THE  HYDROGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    By  F.  H.  Newei.l   233 

THE   MAGNETIC  DECLINATION    IN   ALLEGANY   COLNTY.     By   L.  A. 

Bacer   253 

Desckiptios  of  Stations   25+ 

On  the  Establishment  of  the  Sukveyok's  Meridian  Line  at  Cimbek- 

LAND   259 

THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    By  George  B.  Scdworth   263 

Introduction   263 

Location   264 

Topographic  Features   264 

Son   265 

Water  Flow   265 

Wooded  Regions   267 

Character  of  the  Forests   267 

Composition  of  Forests    268 

General  Distribution  of  Forest  Trees   269 

Distribution  of  Principal  Timber  Trees   270 

Distribution  of  Subordinate  Timber  Trees   272 

Distribution  of  Occasional  Timber  Trees   274 

Important  Timber  Trees:  Their  Abundance  and  Uses   275 

Relation  of  Lumbering  and  Mining  to  Reproduction   279 

Forest  Fires  and  Their  Relation  to  Reproduction   2S2 

Management  and  Utilization  of  Forest  Resources   285 

Protection  of  Forest  Lands  from  Fire.   286 

Exclusion  of  Grazing  from  Forest  Lands  ;   287 

Regulation  op  Indiscriminate  Cutting   288 

Regulation  of  Indiscriminate  Clearing    290 

THE  FLORA  AND  FAUNA  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.     By  C.  Hart  Mer- 

RiAM  AND  Edward  A.  Preble   291 

The  Life  Zones  of  Allegant  County.    By  C.  Hart  Merriam   291 

TiiF.  Summer  Birds  of  Western  Maryland.    By  Edward  A.  Preble   296 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

PLATE  FACING  PAGE 

I.    Cumberland  and  the  Narrows  of  Wills  Mountain,  from  Sbriver  Ridge  83 

II.    View  of  Model  of  Alleganj-  County   2S 

III.  View  from  Wills  Mountain,  showing  Escarpment  of  Tusearora  Sand- 

stone   36 

IV.  Anticline  in  Salina  formation  at  Cement  Mills,  Cumberland   40 

V.    Georges  Creek  Valley,  near  Barton   48 

VI.    The  Narrows  of  Wills  Creek,  near  Cumberland   53 

VII.    Views  of  Allegany  County   <iO 

Fig.  1. — Toll-house  on  the  National  Road   60 

"     2. — Pulp-mill,  near  Westernport   60 

VIII.    View  of  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac,  near  Keyser,  W.  Va   64 

IX.    View  from  Dans  Rock,  looking  across  the  Potomac  Valley   86- 

X.    Geological  Sections  in  Allegany  County   92 

Fig.  l. — Characteristic  Exposure  of  Clinton  Sandstone   92 

"    2. — Hard  Strata  in  Helderberg  Formation,  Devil's  Backbone.  92 

XI.    Geological  Sections  in  Allegany  County   100 

Fig.  1. — Fold  in  Oriskaiiy  Sandstone,  near  Mouth  of  South  Branch 

of  the  Potomac     100 

Fig.  2. — Oriskany  Exposure,  Monster  Rock,  near  Keyser,  W.  Va. .  100 

XII.    Geological  Sections  in  Allegany  County   112 

Fig.  1. — Exposure  of  Jennings  Sandstone,  Corriganville   112 

"    2. — Exposure  of  Pottsville  Sandstone,  Westernport   112 

XIII.  Geological  Sections  in  Allegany  County   120 

Fig.  1. — The  "Railroad  Seam,"  near  Piedmont   120' 

"    2. — View  of  "Big  Vein  "  Coal,  in  Ocean  Mine  No.  3   120- 

XIV.  Geological  Sections  in  Allegany  County   136 

Fig.  1. — Faulted  Anticline  in  Silurian  Strata,  five  miles  southwest 

of  Cumberland   136 

Fig.  2. — Sharp  Fold  in  Devonian  Sandy  Shales  near  Little  Orleans.  136 

XV.    Dans  Rock,  showing  Pottsville  Conglomerate   148 

XVI.    Structural  Sections  in  Allegany  County   160 

XVII.    Coal-mining  in  Allegany  County   17& 

Fig.  1. — Pumping  Station,  Consolidation  Coal  Co   176- 

"    2. — Mining  Plant  at  Ocean  No.  1   176 

XVIII.    Hydrography  of  Allegany  County   233 

Fig.  1. — Car  used  in  Measuring  Velocity  of  River  Water   233 

"    2. — Measuring  Velocity  of  River  Water  from  Boat   233 

XIX.    Price  Electric  Current  Meters,  with  Buzzers   236- 

XX.    Hydrography  of  Allegany  County   240 

Fig.  1. — Georges  Creek  at  Westernport,  near  the  Confluence  with 

North  Branch  of  Potomac   240 


16  ILLUSTRATlOIfS 

PLATE  FACING  PAGE 

Fig.  2.  Georges  Creek  at  Westemport,  looking  up-stream  from 

Wasbinerton  Street  Bridge   -40 

XXI.    Wills  Creek  at  Cumberland   244 

XXII.    Dam  at  Cumberland  for  Diverting  Water  into  the  Chesapeake  and 

Ohio  Canal  

XXIII.    Map  of  Allegany  County,  showing  the  lines  of  equal  Magnetic 

Declination   254 


XXIV.    Map  of  Allegany  County  showing  Wooded  Areas   2fi4 

XXV.    Forests  of  Allegany  County   266 

Fig.  1. — Thin  Forest  Cover,  Potomac  River   266 

"    2.  Farm  and  Forest  Land.  Martin  Mountain   266 

XXVI.    Forests  of  Allegany  County   270 

Fig.  I.  Wooded  Hill  in  Southwestern  Allegany  County   270 

II    2.  Narrow  Agricultural  Valley    in  Southeastern  Allegany 

County   270 

XXVII.    Forests  of  Allegany  County   274 

Fig.  1. — Scrub  Pine,  near  Oldtown   274 

■  '    2.— Defective  Large  White  Pine  in  Young  Hardwood,  Fifteen- 
mile  Creek     274 

XXVIIL    Forests  of  Allegany  County   380 

Fis.  1. — Neglected  Farmland,  Eastern  Allegany  County   2'iO 

•.    2. — Shortleaf  Pine  and  Pitch  Pine,  Town  Hill                        .  280 

XXIX.    Forests  of  Allegany  County   284 

Fis.  1.  Pitch  Pine,  near  Pin>  Plains,  Eastern  Allegany  County  . .  .  284 

i'    2.  Table  Mountain  Pine,  Dans  Mountain   284 

XXX.    Forests  of  Allegany  County   288 

Fig.  1.  Shortleaf  Pine  and  Hardwood,  near  Piney  Grove   288 

11    2.  Cut  over  Hardwood  Forest,  Savage  Mountain   288 

FICrBE  PAGE 

1.  Present  Drainage  in  vicinity  of  Cumberland  .  .■   41 

2.  Present  Drainaee  about  Cumberland,  on  Shenandoah  Plain   44 

3.  Present  Drainage  about  Cumberland,  on  Schooley  Plain   48 

4.  Columnar  Section  of  the  Geological  Formations  of  Allegany  County   86 

5.  Columnar  Section  showing  the  Leading  Coal  Veins  of  Allegany  County. . .  169 

6.  Absolute  Maximum.  Average  Maximum.  Mean,  Average  Minimum,  and 

Absolute  Minimum  Temperatures  for  Allegany  County   222 

7.  Fluctuations  in  Mean  Annual  Temperature  at  Cumberland   223 

8.  Fluctuations  in  the  Mean  Annual  Rainfall  at  Cumberland   226 

9.  .Monthly  Rainfall  at  Cumberland  'average  for  2.5  yearsi   227 

10.  Average  Number  of  Rainy  days  in  the  Valley  of  Allegany  County   228 

11.  Discharge  of  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac  at  Cumberland  forlS9.5   241 

12.  Discharge  of  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac  at  Cumberland  for  1896    241 

13.  Discharge  of  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac  at  Cumberland  for  1897   242 

14.  Pure  Growth  of  White  Pine,  near  Flintstone   272 

15.  Portable  Steam  Sawmill   276 


PREFACE 


The  present  volume  on  Allegany  County  inaugurates  a  new  series 
of  reports  dealing  with  the  physical  features  of  the  several  counties 
of  Maryland.  Xot  only  the  geology  and  mineral  resources  of  xVlle- 
gany  County  will  be  considered  but  also  the  physiography,  soils, 
climate,  hydrography,  magnetic  declination,  forests  and  life  character- 
istics. The  geological  chapters  are  limited  to  a  descriptive  discussion 
of  the  stratigraphy  and  structure,  the  systematic  treatment  of  the 
geology  and  the  paleontology  awaiting  later  consideration. 

The  Introduction  contains  a  brief  statement  regarding  the  location 
and  boundaries  of  Allegany  Coxmty  and  its  chief  physical  charac- 
teristics. 

The  Physiography  of  Allegany  County,  by  Cleveland  Abbe,  Jr., 
embraces  a  discussion  of  the  surface  characteristics  of  the  region, 
including  not  only  a  description  of  the  outward  forms  but  presenting 
reasons  for  their  existence  and  resisting  the  processes  by  which  they 
have  been  produced.  Dr.  Abbe's  general  report  on  the  physiography 
of  the  whole  state  in  Vol.  I  of  the  Maryland  Weather  Service  is  here 
supplemented  by  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  physiography  of  Alle- 
gany County. 

The  Geology  of  Allegany  County,  by  Cleophas  C.  O'Harra,  deals^ 
with  the  stratigraphy  and  structure  of  the  county.  An  historical 
sketch  is  given  of  the  previous  work  done  in  this  field,  to  which  is 
appended  a  complete  bibliography.  The  chapter  dealing  with  the 
interpretation  of  the  sedimentary  record  deserves  especial  mention 
since  it  gives  an  interesting  history  of  this  portion  of  Western  Mary- 
land. 

The  Mineral  Resources  of  Allegany  County,  by  Wm.  B.  Clark,  C. 
C.  O'Harra,  E.  B.  Rowe  and  H.  Ries,  deals  with  the  economic  wealth 
of  Allegany  County,  contained  in  its  rocks — the  coal,  brick,  cement 
and  other  industries  are  described. 


18 


PREFACE 


The  Soils  of  Allegany  County,  by  C.  "W.  Dorsey,  contains  a  discus- 
sion of  the  leading  soil  types  of  the  county  and  their  relation  to  the 
several  geological  formations.  It  is  an  important  article,  showing 
the  close  relations  between  the  soils  and  geological  formations.  This 
investigation  was  conducted  under  the  direct  super%'ision  of  Prof. 
Milton  Whitney,  Director  of  the  U.  S.  Soil  Survey  of  the  Department 
of  Agriculture,  who  detailed  Mr.  Dorsey  to  carry  on  the  actual  work 
in  cooperation  with  the  ;^^aryland  Geological  Survey. 

The  Climate  of  Allegany  County,  by  O.  L.  Fassig,  is  a  valuable 
digest  of  the  leading  climatic  features  of  the  county.  Dr.  Fassig  is 
a  Section  Director  in  charge  of  the  Baltimore  Office  of  the  U.  S. 
Weather  Bureau  and  has  a  thorough  knowledge  of  Maryland  Climate. 

The  Hydrography  of  Allegany  County,  by  F.  H.  Xewell,  gives  an 
excellent  account  of  the  available  water  power  in  the  upper  Potomac 
basin.  Mr.  Xewell  is  the  Chief  of  the  Division  of  Hydrography  of 
the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey  and  his  paper  is  an  important  contribu- 
tion to  the  hydrography  of  Allegany  County. 

The  Magnetic  Declination  in  Allegany  County,  by  L.  A.  Bauer, 
contains  much  important  information  for  the  local  surveyors  of  the 
county.  Dr.  Bauer  is  the  Chief  of  the  Division  of  Terrestrial  Mag- 
netism of  the  U.  S.  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  and  has  been  engaged 
for  several  years  past  in  making  a  magnetic  survey  of  Maryland  under 
the  auspices  of  the  State  Geological  Survey. 

The  Forests  of  Allegany  County,  by  G.  B.  Sxidworth,  is  a  contribu- 
tion of  much  significance  to  the  forestry  interests  of  Marv'land.  ^Ir. 
Siidworth  has  studied  the  forestry  conditions  of  the  county  with  much 
care  and  has  brought  together  many  important  facts  regarding  the 
present  and  future  prospects  of  the  himber  industry.  Mr.  Sudworth 
is  Dendrologist  of  the  Forestry  Division  of  the  U.  S.  Department  of 
Agriculture. 

The  Fauna  and  Flora  of  Allegany  County,  by  C.  Hart  Merriam 
and  Edward  A.  Preble,  contains  a  discussion  of  the  life  zones  of  the 
county,  together  with  a  list  of  the  summer  birds  of  Western  ^faryland. 
Dr.  Merriam  is  the  Chief  of  the  Biological  Survey  of  the  IT.  S.  De- 
partment of  Agriculture  and  Mr.  Preble  one  of  his  associates.  They 


MARYLAND   GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


19 


have  been  engaged  in  cooperation  with  the  Maryland  Geological  Sur- 
vey in  a  study  of  the  life  characteristics  of  the  Appalachian  region. 

The  State  Geological  Survey  desires  to  extend  its  thanks  to  the 
several  Xational  organizations  -which  have  liberally  aided  it  in  the 
preparation  of  many  of  the  papers  contained  in  this  volume.  The 
Director  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  the  Superintendent  of  the 
U.  S.  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey,  the  Chief  of  the  U.  S.  Weather 
Bureau,  the  Chief  of  the  Biological  Survey  and  the  Chiefs  of  the 
Soil  and  Forestry  Divisions  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  have 
granted  every  facility  in  the  conduct  of  the  several  investigations. 
The  value  of  the  report  has  been  much  enhanced  thereby. 

The  illustrations  contained  in  the  volume  have  been  obtained  from 
various  sources.  Many  of  the  photographs  were  taken  by  the  authors 
of  the  several  papers  while  in  the  field.  The  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Railroad  and  the  Consolidation  Coal  Company  have  also  generously 
loaned  some  of  the  most  effective  illustrations  used.  The  view  from 
Wills  Moimtain  is  the  work  of  the  Wertz's  Art  Studio  of  Cum- 
berland, while  the  views  from  Dans  Mountain  were  taken  by  Mr. 
L.  E.  Jewell,  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University. 


THE 

PHYSICAL  FEATURES 

OF 

ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEV. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  I. 


THE  PHYSICAL  FEATURES  OF  ALLEGANY 

COUNTY 


IXTEODUCTIOX. 

Allegany  county  occupies  a  central  position  among  the  three 
mountainous  counties  of  "Western  ^Maryland.  It  is  located  between  the 
parallels  39^  26'  and  39°  44'  north  latitude  and  the  meridians  78°  20' 
and  79°  4'  west  longitude  and  covers  an  area  of  477  square  miles. 
The  county  is  bounded  on  the  north  by  Mason  and  Dixon?s  line, 
which  runs  between  it  and  Somerset,  Bedford  and  Fulton  counties, 
Pennsylvania;  on  the  east  by  Sideling  Hill  Creek,  which  separates 
it  from  Washington  county,  Maryland;  on  the  southeast  and  south 
by  the  Potomac  river,  separating  it  from  Morgan,  Hampshire  and 
Mineral  counties,  "West  "\^irginia ;  and  on  the  west  by  Garrett  coimty, 
Maryland,  the  boundary  being  a  straight  line  drawn  from  the  top  of 
Savage  ^Mountain  where  it  is  crossed  by  the  Mason  and  Dixon's  line 
to  the  middle  of  the  mouth  of  Savage  river. 

Allegany  county,  as  an  independent  division  of  the  state,  dates 
from  1789,  when  an  act  was  passed  by  the  General  Assembly  creating 
out  of  the  then  existing  confines  of  Washington  county  a  new  county 
which  should  include  all  that  portion  of  the  state  lying  to  the  west  of 
Sideling  Hill  Creek.  This  continued  to  be  the  limits  of  Allegany 
county  until  1872,  when  the  General  Assembly  of  that  year  created 
out  of  the  western  part  of  the  county  the  new  county  of  Garrett, 
which  was  to  include  all  that  portion  of  Allegany  county  lying  to  the 
north  and  west  of  a  line  beginning  at  the  summit  of  Big  Backbone, 
or  Savage  Mountain,  where  that  mountain  is  crossed  by  Mason  and 
Dixon's  line  and  running  thence  by  a  straight  line  to  the  middle  of 
Savage  river  where  it  empties  into  the  Potomac  river.''  Several 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


attempts  were  made  to  establish  this  line,  but  they  were  unsuccessful 
until  1898,  when  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey  was  requested  by 
Governor  Lowndes,  in  accordance  with  an  act  of  the  General  Assem- 
bly of  tliat  year,  to  accurately  locate  the  boundary.  The  line  was 
an  extremely  difficult  one  to  nin  since  the  points  were  not  inter^-isiblc, 
and  the  country  rough  and  mountainous.  The  work  was  successfully 
accomplished  at  the  close  of  the  summer  of  1898  and  the  line  marked 
with  suitable  monuments. 

The  largest  place  in  the  county  is  Cumberland,  built  on  tlie  site  of 
old  Fort  Cumberland  of  colonial  days,  a  progressive  city  of  20,000 
inhabitants.  It  is  the  county-town  and  the  center  of  the  commercial 
life  of  the  upper  Potomac  valley.  Other  prosperous  towns  are 
Frostburg,  Lonaeoning  and  AVesteniport. 

There  are  few  regions  more  salubi-ious  in  climate  or  more  beautiful 
in  scenic  surroundings  than  Allegany  county.  It  is  crossed  from 
north  to  south  by  a  succession  of  tree-clad  mountains,  while  the  inter- 
vening valleys  are  dotted  with  prosperous  farms.  Along  its  full 
length  from  west  to  east  the  Potomac  river  meanders  through  a  beau- 
tiful valley,  in  part  bordered  by  a  broad,  alluvial  floodplain  tliat 
affords  rich  farming  lands,  but  more  often  confined  by  a  deep,  narrow 
gorge  that  presents  the  wildest  of  moimtain  scenery.  Few  regions 
anywhere  are  better  provided  with  natural  advantages  for  comfort- 
able residence. 

The  economic  resources  of  Allegany  county  are  very  extensive,  the 
annual  output  aggregating  several  million  dollars  in  value.  Among 
the  developed  and  undeveloped  products  are  coal,  fire-clay,  cement- 
rock,  iron  ore,  building-stone,  road-metal,  brick-shales,  alluvial  clays 
and  mineral  waters.  To  these  should  be  added  a  great  variety  of 
soils,  capable  of  producing  diversified  crops. 

Allegany  county  has  from  an  early  period  possessed  unusual  facili- 
ties for  the  transportation  of  its  products.  The  construction  of  the 
Cumberland  Turnpike  Road  by  private  enterprise  early  in  the  cen- 
tury, and  its  extension  westward  to  the  Ohio  by  the  general  goveni- 
nient  as  a  National  Road,  brought  Allegany  county  at  an  early  day 
into  direct  communication  with  the  regions  both  to  the  east  and  the 


1 

5IARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


25 


west  of  the  Alleglienies.  "With  the  improvement  in  methods  of  trans- 
portation Allegany  county  early  benefited,  as  the  era  of  internal  im- 
provement bronght  toward  the  middle  of  the  centniy  the  Baltiniore 
and  Ohio  Railroad  and  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  within  its 
confines.  Its  valuable  coal  had  already  to  some  extent  reached  dis- 
tant markets  by  means  of  rafts  floated  down  the  Potomac  river,  lint 
with  the  advent  of  the  railroad  and  canal  the  shipment  of  coal,  iron, 
fire-brick  and  the  products  of  the  soil  was  rendered  possible  on  a  large 
scale,  and  Allegany  county  advanced  from  that  time  forward  Avitli 
rapid  strides  until  it  has  come  to  reach  its  present  position  of  com- 
mercial prosperity.  Other  railroads  were  gradually  added,  the  Penn- 
sylvania Railroad  system  tapping  the  region  from  the  north  while  the 
"West  "S'irginia  Central  and  Pittsburg  Railway  entered  the  county 
from  the  south.  Two  local  railroads,  the  Cumberland  and  Pennsyl- 
vania and  the  Georges  Creek  and  Cumberland,  constructed  mainly 
for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  great  output  of  coal  from  the  Georges 
Creek  basin,  supply  the  necessary  transportation  facilities  to  the  most 
prosperous  districts  of  the  county. 

The  succeeding  chapters  are  devoted  to  a  consideration  of  the 
physiography,  the  geology,  the  soils,  the  hydrography,  the  climate, 
the  terrestrial  magnetism,  the  forestry,  and  the  fauna  and  flora  of  the 
county. 

W.  B.  C. 


THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY 
COUNTY 

BY 

CLEVELAND  ABBE,  Jr. 


IXTRODUCTOEY. 

There  are,  in  general,  two  methods  of  studying  the  topography  of 
any  area.  The  first  and  older  method  describes  the  outward  forms 
of  the  surface  features  and  classifies  them  according  to  their  outward 
resemblances  and  dissimilarities  only.  The  second  and  later  method 
seeks,  from  a  study  of  the  outward  forms,  to  discover  the  reasons  for 
their  existence  and  the  processes  by  which  they  have  been  produced. 
When  these  latter  are  understood,  it  then  becomes  possible  to  classify 
surface  forms  according  to  the  origin  or  genesis  of  each,  /.  e.  to 
classify  them  on  a  genetic  basis.  The  present  physiogi'aphic  study  of 
Allegany  county  aims  to  so  present  its  topography  and  topographic 
development  as  to  make  clear  the  reasons  why  the  county  has  the 
surface  features  which  characterize  it.  These  features,  when  rightly 
interpreted,  reveal  successive  stages  in  the  geologic  and  topographic 
history  of  the  county. 

In  Maryland  the  boundaries  of  the  Appalachian  Province  include 
the  three  westernmost  counties  of  the  state,  viz.,  Garrett,  Allegany 
and  "Washington,  and  also  the  Avestern  portion  of  Frederick  county.' 
This  topographic  proinnce  has  been  divided  into  three  sub-provinces; 
namely,  the  Alleghany  Plateau,  the  Greater  Appalachian  Valley  and 
the  Blue  Eidge  or  Catoctin  district.  The  major  portion  of  Allegany 
county  lies  in  the  western  part  of  the  Greater  Appalachian  Valley, 

1  Maryland  Geological  Survey  Reports,  vol.  iii,  pi.  iii,  Map  showing  tbe  Physio- 
graphic Provinces  of  Maryland. 


28 


THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


and  includes  about  one-half  of  that  portion  of  the  sub-province  which, 
because  of  its  peculiar  topography,  is  called  the  district  of  the  Alle- 
ghany Kidges.  The  western  part  of  the  county  takes  in  a  Uiirrow* 
strip  along  the  eastern  edge  of  the  Alleghany  Plateau. 

PHYSIOGRAPHIC  DIVISIONS. 
As  Allegany  county  lies  in  two  of  the  subdivisions  of  the  Appa- 
lachian Province,  it  may  be  divided  into  two  corresponding,  well- 
marked  topographic  districts.  One  of  these  districts  includes  all  that 
portion  of  the  county  Avhich  lies  to  the  west  of  the  eastern  foot  of 
Dans  and  Piney  mountains,  and  will  be  called  the  Plateau  District, 
as  it  is  a  portion  of  the  Alleghany  Plateau  sub-province.  The  other 
district  includes  that  portion  of  the  county  lying  between  Piney 
Mountain  and  Sideling  Creek.  As  this  portion  of  the  county  lies 
within  the  sub-province  of  the  Alleghany  Ridges,  it  will  be  called 
the  Ridge  District. 

THE  PLATEAU  DISTRICT. 

The  Topography  of  the  Plateau  District. — The  topography  of  the 
Plateau  District  is  simple  when  compared  with  that  of  some  other 
portions  of  Maryand,  such  as  the  Piedmont  Province.  It  consists  of 
an  elevated  area  lying  between  two  long  parallel  mountain  ci-ests,  and 
may  be  most  conveniently  divided  into  the  general  upland,  the  bound- 
ing mountains,  and  the  outer  slopes  of  the  latter. 

The  general  upland,  lying  between  the  parallel  northeast-south- 
west ridges  of  Dans  and  Big  Savage  mountains,  has  a  strongly  rolling 
surface.  This  is  due  to  the  steep-sided  stream  valleys,  which  often 
cut  deeply  into  what  would  be,  otherwise,  an  even  surface  lying 
about  2100  feet  above  mean  sea-level.  The  undulations  of  the 
surface  arc  most  strongly  marked  along  a  line  about  midway  between 
the  bounding  crests.  They  gradually  fade  out  on  either  side  this 
line,  melting  into  the  gentler,  even  slopes  which  lead  up  from  it  to 
the  boundaries.  This  rolling  surface  is  most  continuously  and  typic- 
ally developed  over  that  portion  of  the  district  lying  between  Frost- 
burg  and  the  Pennsylvania  line.  Frostburg,  itself,  occupies  one  of  the 
broader  interstream  areas.    Going  southwestward  from  Frostburg, 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  II. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


29 


Avhich  is  at  an  altitude  of  about  2000  feet,  the  general  surface  rises 
gradually.  The  average  elevation  of  the  upland  thus  incx-eases  from 
about  1900  feet  at  the  Pennsylvania  line,  to  nearly  2500  feet  near 
the  southwestern  corner  of  the  coimty.  This  increase  in  elevation 
southwestward  is  accompanied  by  an  inci*ease  in  the  number  and 
depth  of  the  stream  valleys.  The  general  upland  thus  becomes  more 
and  more  cwt  up  and  dissected.  This  is  best  shown  by  the  reproduc- 
tion of  the  model  of  the  county,  Plate  II,  and  the  topographic  map 
of  the  county  contained  in  the  Physical  Atlas. 

The  altitudes  attained  by  a  number  of  hills  belonging  to  the  present 
general  upland  are  given  in  the  accompanying  Table  of  Elevations. 
They  show  the  gradual  rise  of  the  surface  southward,  which  is  down- 
ward in  the  table,  and  when  studied  with  a  view  to  variations  above 
or  below  a  mean  plane  do  not  reveal  a  very  great  range.  This  latter 
fact  suggests  the  idea  that  formerly  the  surface  of  the  plateau  was 
less  rolling  and  lay  an  almost  even  surface,  several  hundred  feet  above 
present  stream  channels. 

TABLE  OF  ELEVATIONS  OF  THE  PLATEAU  DISTRICT,  ALLEGANY  CO. 

Crest  of  Crest  of 

Big  Savage  Mt.  General  Upland.  Dans-Little  Allegheny. 

2  7  80  feet.    315.5  feet. 

2889    "  1900  feet.   


The  slopes  of  the  upland  pass  rather  gradually  into  the  slopes 
leading  to  the  boundaries  of  the  district.  These  boundaries  are  the 
long,  straight,  even  crests  of  Big  Savage  Mountain  on  the  west  and 
Dans  Mountain  on  the  east.  They  owe  their  prominence  to  upturn- 
ings  of  the  resistant  Pottsville  sandstone  which  now  forms  the  crests 
of  both  mountains.  Because  of  this  sudden  upward  bending  of  the 
strata  around  the  edges  of  the  plateau,  the  outer  slopes  of  the  bound- 


3363 


3943 
2930 
3930 
3033 
2900 
3400 
28.59 


1977  " 

3106  " 

3031  " 

3341  " 

3200  " 

2130  " 

3400  " 


3407 
3410 
2631 
3883 
3769 
3760 


30 


THE   PHYSIOGRAPHY   OK  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


ing  mountains  are  much  steeper  than  the  inner  slopes  which  lead 
back  towards  the  elevated  general  upland.  The  boundaries  of  the 
plateau  therefore  have  unsymmetrical  slopes,  the  steeper  and  shorter 
falling,  often  precipitously,  to  the  valleys  of  the  Savage  and  the 
Potomac  rivers,  the  longer,  gentler  slopes  melting  back  into  the 
upland. 

One  remarkable  and  characteristic  feature  of  both  boundaries  is 
the  almost  unbroken  continuity  of  their  crests.  Throughout  its 
length  in  ^Maryland,  Dans  Mountain  and  its  continuation,  Little  Alle- 
gheny, is  but  three  times  crossed  by  streams.  On  the  south  the  Po- 
tomac cuts  its  way  across  in  a  gorge  at  Piedmont,  W.  Va.,  fifteen  miles 
to  the  northeast,  Braddock  Run  crosses  the  mountain  in  a  narrow 
V-shaped  gorge  1200  feet  deep,  and  four  miles  farther  on  Jennings 
Run  cuts  a  somewhat  similar  gorge  across  Little  Allegheny.  Big 
Savage  Mountain  is  not  crossed  by  streams  equal  in  size  to  those  just 
mentioned,  and  therefore  has  not  been  so  deeply  cut  by  gorges.  The 
interstream  stretches  of  Dans  Mountain  maintain  a  more  nearly 
uniform,  though  lower  altitude  than  does  the  less  deeply  but  more 
minutely  interrupted  crest  of  Big  Savage  Mountain.  The  average 
Crestline  altitude  of  the  latter  mountain  is  2913  feet,  that  of  the 
former  is  2517  feet  above  mean  sea-level.  The  trend  of  the  crests 
of  both  mountains  is  parallel  to  the  general  northeast-southwest  trend 
of  all  this  portion  of  the  Appalachians. 

The  Drainage  of  the  Plateau  District. — The  streams  of  the  Plateau 
District  are  all  comparatively  small,  Avith  the  single  exception  of  the 
North  Branch  of  the  Potomac.  Georges  Creek,  which  is  the  largest 
of  the  streams,  is  about  15  miles  in  length.  It  drains  the  greater 
portion  of  the  district,  flowing  midway  between  Dans  and  Big  Savage 
mountains  southwestward  to  join  the  Xorth  Branch  of  the  Potomac 
at  Westernport.  The  valley  of  Georges  Creek  is  slightly  tortuous 
in  character  and  very  deep  in  comparison  witli  its  widtli.  As  the 
stream  is  subject  to  spring  and  fall  floods,  considerable  quantities  of 
soil  and  debris  have  been  washed  into  the  channel  from  the  steep 
slopes  leading  down  from  the  hilltops  of  the  upland.  Consequently 
a  narrow  flood-plain  of  boulders,  coarse  gravel  and  sand  has  been. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


31 


formed.  The  southward  increase  in  depth  of  the  valley  is  accounted 
for  by  increased  steepness  of  the  side  slopes.  The  creek  is  fed  by 
numerous  small  streams  heading  along  Dans  and  Savage  Mountains 
and  occupying  narrow,  steep-sided  ravines  in  which  minor  flood-plains 
are  also  developing  as  the  result  of  the  rapid  waste  of  the  less 
resistant  strata. 

The  northern  portion  of  the  general  upland  is  drained  by  Braddock 
and  Jennings  runs,  two  tributaries  to  "Wills  Creek.  These  two 
streams  differ  from  Georges  Creek  in  leaving  the  Plateau  District 
through  transverse  gaps  in  tlie  northern  part  of  its  eastern  boundary, 
i.  e.  Piney  and  Little  Allegheny  mountains.  They  run  against  the 
inward  or  westward  dipping  strata  of  these  mountains  and  are  there- 
fore in  striking  contrast  to  Georges  Creek,  which  follows  down  the 
southward  sloping  axis  of  the  stratigraphic  trough  which  makes  up 
the  Plateau  District.  Their  valleys  are  characteristically  narrow  and 
steepsided.  Jennings  Run  has  developed  a  rather  narrow  but  well- 
defined  valley  lowland  between  Mt.  Savage  and  Little  Allegheny. 
This  is  probably  due  to  locally  resistant  layers  near  Mt.  Savage.  The 
sharp  ravines  and  steeper  grades  which  mark  the  headwaters  of  these 
streams  indicate  that  they  are,  at  present,  more  aggressive  than  the 
headwaters  of  Georges  Creek;  but  it  is  not  certain  that  they  will  long- 
continue  so.  The  steep  and  narrow  gorge  which  now  characterizes 
the  lower  course  of  Georges  Creek  indicates  that  that  stream  has  been 
actively  at  work  in  recent  times,  eroding  the  yielding  rocks  of  the 
Lower  Coal  measures  (Allegheny  formation).  This  activity  has  not 
yet  aifected  its  headwaters.  In  the  deepening  and  widening  of  their 
valleys,  the  two  northern  streams  are  now  opposed  by  the  resistant 
Pocono  and  Pottsville  strata.  These  have  a  much  lower  elevation  at 
the  mouth  of  Georges  Creek  than  they  have  where  Braddock  Run 
and  Jennings  Run  cross  them.  Therefore  Georges  Creek  Avill  be 
able  to  reduce  its  valley-floor  to  a  lower  level  more  quickly  and  easily 
than  can  Braddock  and  Jennings  runs. 

Besides  noticing  these  three  leading  drainage  lines,  attention  should 
be  called  to  the  large  number  of  small  streams,  most  of  them  inter- 
mittent in  character,  which  drain  the  eastern  slope  or  face  of  Dans 


32 


TIIK    I'HYSIOGBAPHY   OF  AI.LEGAXY  COUNTY 


Mountain.  They  have  brought  out,  bv  a  sort  of  etching  process,  the 
several  la^-ers  of  which  the  mountain  is  made  up.  By  removing  the 
yielding  strata  underlying  the  resistant  summit  rock  (Pottsville),  the 
crest  has  come  to  present  a  precipitous  rocky  face  on  the  eastern  side. 
At  somewhat  regular  intervals  spurs  run  from  the  foot  of  this  cliflF 
and  reach  one-half  way  down  the  mountain  to  rounded  knobs  of 
Pocono  sandstone,  while  in  behind  these  eminences  gullies  and 
ravines  are  growing  along  the  yielding  ^lauch  Chunk  and  Greenbrier 
strata,  reaching  on  either  side  from  the  main  furrows  leading  down 
the  slope  to  the  Xorth  Branch  of  the  Potomac.  Still  lower  down, 
at  about  1800  feet,  are  rounded  foothills  marking  the  junction  of  the 
Hampshire  and  Jennings  formations. 

The  Structure  of  the  Plateau  District. — The  structure  of  the 
Plateau  District  is  comparatively  simple.  The  rocks  Avhich  enter 
into  its  composition  are  the  youngest  Paleozoic  strata  in  the  county. 
They  are  of  many  degrees  of  resistance,  and  i-ange  from  the  slowly 
yielding  quartzitic  Pocono  sandstone  to  the  yielding  shales  of  the 
Hampshire  and  Dunkard  formations.  The  structure  sections  accom- 
panying the  report  on  the  geolog}'  of  the  county  (PI.  XVI)  show 
that  these  strata  are  but  slightly  disturbed.  It  appears  that  they 
have  been  bent  into  a  broad  shallow  trough  or  svncline.  The  central 
depression  of  this  trough  now  stands  higher  than  the  deep  valleys  of 
Savage  and  Potomac  rivers  on  either  side.  The  trough  is  much 
longer  than  it  is  wide,  and  extends  from  Somerset  county,  Penn- 
sylvania, across  Maryland  and  continues  southwestward  for  a  number 
of  miles  into  West  Virginia.  The  strata  contained  in  this  trough 
sliow  very  slight  and  unimportant  minor  disturbances,  but  the  trough 
as  a  whole  is  tipped  slightly  southwestward,  or  its  longer  axis  is 
observed  to  rise  gently  towards  the  northeast.  This  inclination  of 
the  longer  axis  is  not  sufficient  to  cause  a  convergence  of  the  outcrops 
of  the  different  strata.  On  the  contrary,  the  long  parallel  crests  of 
Big  Savage,  Little  Savage  and  Dans  mountains  do  not  betray,  within 
the  boundaries  of  ^Maryland,  the  fact  of  this  tipping.  The  strata 
which  make  up  the  Plateau  District  therefore  appear  on  the  eastern 
slope  of  Dans  Mountain  as  long  parallel  bands  of  rock  dipping  some- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


33 


what  steeply  northwestward  into  the  monntain.  Witliin  the  limits  of 
the  upland  area  the  strata  lie  for  the  most  part  almost  horizontal, 
tipping  vip  rather  rapidly  only  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  two 
bounding  crestlines. 

There  are,  then,  Avithin  the  Plateau  District  two  distinct  types  of 
structure  which  will  affect  the  topography  and  drainage-pattern  of 
the  district.  Along  the  boundaries  the  structure  is  essentially  mono- 
clinal,  while  within  the  upland  area  the  structure  is  horizontal  in 
character. 

Stream  Adjustments  in  the  Plateau  District. — The  streams  of  the 
district  present  several  interesting  examples  of  both  adjustment  and 
non-adjustment  to  the  structural  features  just  outlined.  The  only 
marked  example  of  complete  adjiistment  to  the  existing  structure  is 
furnished  by  Georges  Creek.  This  stream,  which  occupies  an  axial 
position  in  that  portion  of  the  plateau  which  in  former  times  would 
seem  to  have  been  the  bottom  of  the  great  trough,  probably  belongs 
to  the  class  of  consequent  streams  which  were  described  by  Professor 
Davis  in  his  study  of  the  Pennsylvania  drainage.  These  streams 
always  occupy  positions  which  they  would  be  compelled  to  take  if  the 
configuration  of  the  surface  were  determined  only  by  the  foldings 
and  dislocations  of  the  strata.  The  tributaries  to  Georges  Creek  in 
general  confirm  this  classification  of  the  main  stream.  They  run  into 
the  creek  almost  at  right  angles  to  its  general  direction  after  having 
themselves  followed  courses  do^vn  the  gentle  dip  of  the  strata  on 
either  side  of  the  structural  trough.  The  headwaters  of  many  of 
thesQ  side-streams  show  a  tendency,  sometimes  very  marked  in  its 
character,  to  develop  along  the  more  ^aelding  bands  which  run 
parallel  to  the  general  trend  of  the  boundaries  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
crestlines.  Among  the  better  marked  examples  of  this  incipient 
adjustment  to  the  structure  as  it  is  revealed  by  erosion,  may  be 
mentioned  the  headwaters  of  "Winebrenner  Run,  Elk  Lick  Run  and 
Wrights  Run. 

The  most  marked  cases  of  discordant  or  unadjusted  drainage  are 
those  of  Braddock  Run  and  Jennings  Run.  These  two  streams,  as 
has  already  been  mentioned,  drain  the  northern  portion  of  the  district 

3 


34: 


THE  PHYSIOGKAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COCNTY 


by  cutting  their  way  eastward  directly  across  the  crests  of  Dans  and 
Piney  mountains.  They  are  thus  in  striking  contrast  to  Georges 
Creek  and  its  tributaries.  It  is  only  in  the  tendency  of  their  head- 
waters to  seek  out  adjusted  subsequent  courses  along  the  tilted  strata 
on  the  western  slopes  of  Dans  Mountain  that  they  bear  any  resem- 
blance to  Georges  Creek.  Beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  district  they 
become  a  part  of  the  Wills  Creek  drainage  system  of  the  Ridge 
District,  and  here  show  more  perfect  adjustment  to  existing  struc- 
tures. Their  discordant  location  upon  the  boundary  of  the  Plateau 
District  and  the  adjustments  of  their  lower  courses,  seem  to  be  very 
clearly  connected  with  the  development  of  certain  topographic  fea- 
tures of  the  Ridge  District.  The  discussion  of  these  streams  will 
therefore  be  deferred  until  the  drainage  development  of  a  portion 
of  the  Ridge  District  has  been  considered. 

The  remaining  streams  of  the  Plateau  District,  those  small  streams 
flowing  down  the  east  slope  of  Dans  ^Mountain,  show  a  slight  degree  of 
adjustment  along  their  headwaters.  Their  upper  courses  are  gener- 
ally in  narrow  vales  between  the  knobs  of  Pocono  sandstone  and  the 
Pottsville  which  forms  the  crest.  The  major  portion  of  their  courses 
lies  at  right  angles  to  the  strike  or  outcrop  of  the  strata  and  they  run 
against  the  dip.  They  have  developed  chiefly  as  wet-weather  streams 
on  the  valley  slopes,  gradually  increasing  in  length  as  the  Potomac 
has  cut  its  valley  deeper. 

THE  EIDGE  DISTRICT. 

The  Topography  of  the  Ridge  District. — The  topography  of  the 
Ridge  District  is  much  more  varied  than  is  that  of  the  Plateau  Dis- 
trict. The  most  distinctive  features  of  the  topography  are  the  sets 
of  long,  parallel,  shai'p-c rested  ridges  and  narrow  intervening  valleys 
which  here  cross  the  state  from  northeast  to  southwest.  The  general 
parallelism  of  the  prominent  topographic  features  is  best  shown  by 
the  model  of  the  county  (Plate  II).  The  model  of  the  State  of 
Maryland '  and  the  hypsometric  map '  also  bring  out  these  features. 

The  most  prominent  ridges  of  the  district  are  Wills  Mountain, 


•  Maryland  Geol.  Survey,  Vol.  i,  1S'.»7,  plate  i. 


*Ibid.,  plate  vi. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


35 


rising  to  a  height  of  1S70  feet;  Martin  ^lonntain,  above  1980  feet; 
Warrior  ]\Loiintain,  2135  feet;  Polish  Mountain,  1740  feet;  and  Town 
Hill,  2000  feet.  Minor  ridges  such  as  the  Devil's  Backbone  west  of 
Wills  Mountain,  Shriver  Ridge  at  Cumberland  and  Fort  Hill  are 
sometimes  found  subdividing  the  valleys  between  the  major  eleva- 
tions. In  nearly  all  cases  the  ridges  are  the  southward  continuations 
of  elevations  which  are  perhaps  more  typically  developed  in  Penn- 
sylvania. Their  distinctive  features  in  that  state  are  the  long,  even 
and  iminterrupted  crestline,  the  generally  uniform  and  but  slightly 
ravined  slopes,  and  the  marked  mutual  parallelism  of  direction.  Such 
a  description  will  apply  equally  well  to  the  Maryland  ridges.  In 
Allegany  county,  however,  a  number  of  the  ridges  do  not  pass  com- 
pletely across  the  state,  but  decline  in  elevation  quite  rapidly  just 
before  reaching  the  Potomac.  The  resultant  rather  tapering  points 
leading  down  to  lower  levels  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Potomac 
are  well  illustrated  in  the  southern  terminations  of  Warrior  Mountain 
and  Polish  Mountain.  The  minor  ridges  are  also  characterized  by 
even  crestlines  and  a  general  parallel  arrangement  which  is  in  har- 
mony with  that  of  the  larger  ones.  They  are,  however,  mucli  more 
frequently  interrupted  by  the  crossing  and  recrossing  of  streams, 
while  their  slopes  are  somewhat  less  frequently  dissected  by  small 
streams. 

The  cross-profiles  of  tlie  ridges  are  commonly  very  expressive  of 
the  internal  structure  or  the  attitude  of  the  strata  which  make  them. 
Some  of  the  ridges  are  due  to  the  arching  up  of  a  stratum  of  resistant 
sandstone  or  quartzite.  Then  either  slope  has  its  steepness  controlled 
by  the  inclination  of  that  resistant  layer.  If  the  arch  is  symmetrical, 
giving  equal  inclination  on  either  side,  that  fact  will  appear  in  the 
symnretrical  cross-profile  of  the  ridge.  Shoidd  one  side  have  a  steeper 
dip  than  the  other,  as  is  the  case  in  Wills  Mountain,  then  the  slopes 
of  the  ridge  are  found  to  be  imequal.  Sometimes,  as  in  Shriver 
Ridge,  the  ridge  is  due  to  a  resistant  stratum  underlain  and  overlain 
by  yielding  layers,  the  whole  being  inclined  in  one  direction.  Then 
by  the  removal  of  the  yielding  strata,  the  resistant  one  has  been 
brought  into  relief  as  a  ridge  whose  one  side  is  of  gentle  slope  agree- 


36 


THK  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


iiig  witli  the  dip  of  the  rocks,  while  the  other  side  is  steep  where 
undermining  has  gone  on  by  the  removal  of  the  yielding  rocks  lying 
below  the  ridge-making  stratum.  Such  ridges  may  be  called  mono- 
clinal  ridges,  since  the  strata  which  make  them  are  all  inclined  in  the 
one  direction.  Those  ridges  and  mountains  which,  like  Wills  !Moun- 
tain,  are  arches  of  rock,  may  be  called  anticlinal  ridges.  "Wills 
Mountain  and  Evitts  ilountain  are  the  best  examples  of  this  type  of 
ridge.  Warrior  Mountain  is  also  anticlinal  in  structure,  but  its  crest 
owes  its  prominence  not  to  the  resistance  of  a  roof  of  sandstone,  but 
to  its  Oriskany  sandstone  flanks,  which  have  prevented  streams 
from  attacking  the  weak  limestone  core.  There  is  one  other  type  of 
ridge  in  this  district,  viz.,  the  synclinal  ridge.  Such  a  ridge  is  char- 
acterized .by  a  trough-like  internal  arrangement  of  its  strata  with  a 
bed  of  resistant  rock  forming  the  crest  or  serving  as  a  barrier  along 
the  sides  and  protecting  the  more  yielding  rocks  beneath  it  Town 
Hill,  with  its  narrow  capping  of  Pocono  sandstone  protecting  the 
Hampshire  shales  beneath  it,  seems  to  be  the  only  example  of  such  a 
ridge  in  this  district. 

The  area  occupied  by  the  higher  and  more  important  ridges  is  a 
comparatively  small  proportion  of  the  Kidge  District.  By  far  the 
gi-eater  area  is  occupied  by  the  valleys  between  these  ridges.  As 
these  valleys  have  an  average  elevation  above  mean  sea-level  of  about 
900  feet,  the  mean  elevation  of  the  district  is  several  hundred  feet 
(800)  below  that  of  the  Plateau  District.  These  valleys  are  the  result 
of  erosion,  which  has  removed  the  more  yielding  rocks,  leaving  the 
resistant  strata  as  ridges.  Xo  case  has  been  found  where  a  present 
valley  in  the  Ridge  District  coincides  as  closely  with  a  structural 
trough  or  syncline  as  was  found  to  be  the  case  with  the  Georges 
Creek  valley  in  the  Plateau  District.  All  the  larger  valleys  seem  to 
have  been  determined,  both  as  to  position  and  direction,  by  the 
arrangement  of  the  moi-e  yielding  rocks.  They  therefore  belong  to 
the  same  general  class  of  valleys  as  those  smaller  ones  carved  by  the 
headwaters  of  the  tributaries  to  Georges  Creek.  They  have  been 
developed  subsequent  to  the  deformation  of  the  strata  and  are  not 
consequent  upon  original  troughs  and  ridges. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  III. 


VIEW   FROM   WILLS   MOUNTAIN,   SHOWING    ESCARPMENT   OF   TUSC.AROR.A.  SANDSTONE. 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


37 


To  the  casual  observer  these  sxthsequent  valleys  appear  to  have 
very  uneven  floors.  The  streams  which  noAv  occupy  the  valleys  often 
flow  at  the  bottom  of  steep-sided  ravines  or  gorges,  a  hundred  or  two 
hxandred  feet  in  depth  in  many  cases,  while  their  tributaries  have  cut 
up  the  surface  very  considerably.  Thus  there  are  very  few  interstream 
areas  which  afford  even  stretches  more  than  two  or  three  miles  in 
extent.  The  general  impression  of  the  traveler  is  that  the  country 
is  very  hilly.  If,  however,  one  ascends  one  of  the  higher  ridges,  such 
as  Shriver  Ridge  at  Cumberland,  or  Pine  Eidge  north  of  Oldtown, 
the  appearance  of  the  valley  topography  is  changed.  The  many 
small  valleys  and  ravines  drop  out  of  sight.  The  hills  are  seen  to  be 
of  nearly  the  same  height  and  their  level,  slightly  rounded  tops  seem 
to  unite  in  a  single  broad,  gently  rolling  surface.  The  even  and 
level  appearance  which  the  A-alley  floors  thus  take  on  is  yet  more 
marked  when  they  are  viewed  from  a  point  near  the  crest  of  one  of 
the  higher  ridges,  such  as  Warrior  Mountain. 

It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  accordant  hilltops  in  the  one 
valley  rise  to  the  same  level  as  do  those  in  neighboring  valleys. 
When  the  bounding  ridges  do  not  come  quite  to  the  Potomac,  it  is 
possible  to  trace  their  levels  around  the  southern  termination  of  the 
ridges  from  one  valley  to  the  next.  The  general  level  to  which  most 
of  the  hillcrests  seem  to  rise  is  about  nine  hundred  feet  above  mean 
sea-level,  but  this  is  not  an  absolutely  constant  figure.  The  general 
level  rises  to  about  one  thousand  feet  towards  the  Pennsylvania 
boundary  and  increases  gradually  going  Avestward  to  the  same  eleva- 
tion in  the  vicinity  of  Cumberland. 

The  Drainage  of  the  Ridge  District. — The  drainage  of  the  district 
is  entirely  into  the  Potomac,  and  except  in  one  case,  that  of  Fifteen- 
mile  Creek,  the  streams  have  a  general  southward  direction  parallel 
with  the  ridges.  The  courses  of  the  streams,  especially  the  smaller 
ones,  are  generally  direct  and  closely  parallel  with  the  smaller  ridges. 
The  larger  streams,  however,  do  not  adhere  strictly  to  this  general 
rule;  but,  in  many  cases,  after  flowing  parallel  with  a  larger  ridge 
for  some  distance,  make  a  sudden  turn  and  cut  through  the  ridge  in 
narrow  V-shaped  gorges,  after  which  they  again  turn  southward  and 


38 


THE  rHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEC.AXY  COrXTV 


resume  their  parallel  courses.  Tlie  most  marked  instances  of  these 
transverse  gorges  with  parallel  courses  on  either  side  are  found  in 
Wills  Creek,  Avhich  has  to  cross  Wilh  ^lountain  hefore  it  reaches  the 
Potomac,  and  Town  Creek,  which  crosses  "Warrior  !Mountain  in  its 
upper  course,  and  then,  after  flowing  southward  parallel  with  this 
ridge  for  a  number  of  miles,  again  turns  eastward  and  cuts  back  and 
forth  through  the  northern  extremity  of  Stratford  Ridge.  In  the 
case  of  Fifteeumile  Creek,  the  general  direction  of  the  stream  is 
southeastward  instead  of  southwestward,  as  is  the  case  with  all  the 
other  streams.  This  course  takes  the  stream  more  directly  to  the 
Potomac,  but  compels  it  to  cross  several  high  ridges  of  resistant 
rocks  instead  of  following  one  of  the  southwestward  valleys  on  the 
yielding  rock.  Many  of  the  small  side-streams  of  this  creek  have 
sought  out  courses  along  bands  of  yielding  rock  crossed  by  the  main 
stream,  so  that  their  courses  are  developed  in  conformity  with  the 
general  direction  of  the  streams  of  the  district.  Most  of  the  streams 
of  the  district  are  characterized  by  somewhat  meandering  courses, 
particularly  along  their  lower  courses.  The  range  of  the  meandering 
is  often  restricted  to  the  valley  limits  as  bounded  by  the  smaller  ridges. 
Such  is  the  case  with  Evitts  Creek.  Sometimes,  however,  the  stream 
is  found  to  range  beyond  the  minor  barriers  of  the  valley,  in  its 
course  crossing  from  one  side  to  the  other  of  ridges  of  resistant  rocks. 
Thus,  Town  Creek  crosses  the  northern  end  of  Stratford  Ridge,  com- 
posed of  Oriskany  sandstone,  and  Sideling  Hill  Creek  meanders  across 
a  number  of  minor  ridges  between  Town  Hill  and  its  mouth.  These 
streams  ai"e  all  characterized  by  tlood-plains  or  rich  bottom-land«  of 
moderate  extent,  and  their  meandering  courses  are,  in  part,  due  to 
their  present  flood-plain  conditions.  These  bottom-lands,  however, 
form  the  floors  of  meandering  trenches  from  50  to  200  feet  in  depth 
and  bounded  by  steep,  even  precipitous  sides.  In  spite  of  the  graded 
channels  now  occupied  by  the  streams,  these  deep  and  comparatively 
narrow  trenches  indicate  recent  down-cutting  of  the  streams.  It  is 
probable,  therefore,  that  the  meandering  courses,  though  in  part 
accentuated  by  the  present  stream-cutting  activities,  in  large  part  have 
been  inherited  from  some  former  different  condition  of  the  streams. 


MAKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


39 


These  meandering  lower  courses  seem  to  characterize  chiefly  the  larger 
streams,  and  are  best  illustrated  by  Town  Creek,  Sideling  Hill  Creek 
and  Evitts  Creek.  These  characteristics  are  not  confined  to  the 
streams  flowing  into  the  Potomac  from  the  north,  but  are  also  to  be 
found  among  the  streams  of  "West  Virginia  which  empty  into  the 
same  riA'er  in  this  district. 

Another  characteristic  of  certain  streams  is  that  of  deflected  lower 
courses.  The  most  marked  instance  of  this  deflection  is  found  in 
Big  Spring  Run,  wliich  enters  the  Potomac  at  Oldtown.  This 
stream  in  its  upper  course  flows  southward  along  the  western  foot  of 
"Warrior  Mountain.  After  reaching  the  southern  extremity  of  the 
ridge,  where  it  is  about  1^  miles  from  the  Potomac,  instead  of  con- 
tinuing southward,  it  turns  sharply  around  the  nose  of  the  ridge  and 
follows  a  longer  southeast  course  to  Oldtown,  four  miles  from  the 
point  where  it  would  have  entered  the  Potomac  if  it  had  followed  the 
more  direct  course.  Another  example  of  deflection,  though  on  a 
smaller  scale,  is  found  in  the  case  of  Maple  Run,  a  small  tributary 
wliich  enters  Town  Creek  opposite  the  northern  end  of  Stratford 
Ridge.  This  stream  flows  southwestward  until  within  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  of  the  creek,  then,  instead  of  continuing  in  this  direction,  it 
turns  abruptly  down  stream  and  flows  parallel  with  Town  Creek  for 
nearly  a  mile  before  entering  it.  A  ridge  about  100  feet  high  and 
with  an  elevation  above  sea-level  of  something  more  than  700  feet 
stands  between  the  two  streams  throughout  this  distance. 

Many  of  the  streams,  such  as  Sideling  Hill  Creek  and  Pifteenmile 
Creek  show  slight  deflections  up  or  down  stream  where  they  approach 
most  nearly  to  the  Potomac;  but  the  only  other  well-marked  instance 
showing  considerable  deflection  seems  to  be  that  of  the  stream  which 
flows  into  the  Potomac  opposite  Paw  Paw,  "W.  Va.  It  rises  between 
Green  Ridge  and  Town  Hill,  flows  southwestward  for  a  mile  and  a 
half,  imtil,  when  within  the  same  distance  of  the  Potomac,  it  turns 
sharply  to  the  southeast  around  the  southern  end  of  Town  Hill. 
After  uniting  with  a  small  southwestward  floA\'ing  stream  on  the  east 
side  of  Town  Hill,  it  continues  its  course  southeastward  to  the  Poto- 
mac.   It  is  noteworthy  that  these  deflections  are  all  down  stream 


40 


THE  PHYSIOGEAPHY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COrXTY 


with  reference  to  the  Potomac,  and  that  they  are  confined  almost 
entirely  to  the  larger  streams. 

The  Structure  of  the  Ridge  District. — The  structure  of  the  Ridge 
District  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  Plateau  District.  Begin- 
ning with  the  arch  on  the  west,  of  which  "Wills  Mountain  is  the  core, 
the  same  series  of  rocks  appears  again  and  again  as  one  travels  east- 
ward across  the  county.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  rocks  have 
been  folded  into  arches  and  troughs,  whose  axes  nm  northeast-south- 
west, and  which  are  now  cut  across  by  the  general  surface  of  the 
district.  Thus  the  edges  of  the  cut  strata  appear  on  the  surface  as 
parallel  or  convergent  bands.  Where  the  axes  of  the  folds  are  almost 
horizontal,  the  recurring  bands  of  rock  run  parallel  for  considerable 
distances.  TVlien  an  arch  or  a  trough  rises  or  sinks,  the  bands  draw 
closer  together  or  diverge.  Sometimes  a  great  arching  of  the  strata 
brings  up  above  the  levels  of  the  stream-channels  a  bed  of  heavy 
sandstone,  or  of  limestone  flanked  by  sandstone.  Then  the  streams 
are  found  to  etch  out  surrounding  strata  and  leave  an  anticlinal  ridge. 
Again,  in  past  ages  a  great  trough  may  have  biiried  a  sandstone  bed 
below  the  ancient  stream-levels,  thus  preventing  its  removal.  In 
such  cases  it  often  happens  that  the  arches  on  either  side  of  the 
trough  will  be  removed  completely,  while  the  trough  remains  as  the 
crest  of  a  synclinal  ridge.  Between  the  anticlines  and  the  SNTiclines, 
the  rocks  come  to  the  surface  only  as  eastward-  or  westward-dipping 
beds.  Thus  the  foundations  are  furnished  for  monoclinal,  synclinal 
and  anticlinal  ridges  and  valleys. 

Stream  Adjustments  in  the  Ridge  District. — In  discussing  the 
topography  of  the  Ridge  District,  the  valleys  have  already  been 
described  and  referred  to  as  of  subsequent  origin.  The  streams 
occupying  such  valleys  are  always,  in  part  at  least,  confined  to  them. 
In  a  number  of  cases  in  the  Ridge  District,  it  has  been  found  that 
at  one  or  more  points  ceitain  streams  will  break  their  way  across 
bounding  ridges  or  mountains.  They  thus  become,  for  a  short  dis- 
tance, transverse  in  character  and  lose  the  close  adjustment  to  struc- 
ture which  distinguishes  a  number  of  them.  Many  of  the  streams 
are  characterized  by  adjusted  courses,  at  least  in  so  far  as  they  are 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  IV. 


MAEYLAyD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


41 


related  to  the  more  important  structural  features.  This  class  includes 
Evitts  Creek,  the  stream  draining  Frog  Hollow,  the  two  streams  on 
either  side  of  Shriver  Ridge,  and  one  or  two  smaller  streams.  Some 
of  these  streams,  notably  Town  Creek,  while  following  adjusted 
courses  so  far  as  the  major  features  are  concerned,  yet  betray  a 
rather  general  disregard  for  the  minor  variations  in  resistance  pos- 


-7^ 

r 


Fig.  1. — Present  drainage  in  vicinity  of  Cnmberland. 


sessed  by  many  of  the  valley-making  rocks.  Most  of  the  streams  of 
any  importance,  however,  embrace  within  single  systems  both  ad- 
justed and  transverse  features.  Thus,  Wills  Creek  follows  yielding 
strata  for  a  long  distance,  only  to  turn  abruptly  across  Wills  Mountain 
at  Cumberland.  Its  principal  tributary  on  the  south,  Braddock  Eun, 
also  follows  an  adjusted  course  in  part,  but  above  Allegany  Grove  it 
is  located  transversely  across  Piney  Mountain.  Jennings  Run  is 
similar. 


42 


THE  PHVSIOGBAPHY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


The  streams  of  the  Ridge  District  are  thus  seen  to  show  three 
diflferent  classes  or  degrees  of  adjustment  to  the  arrangement  of  the 
underlying  rocks.  These  three  degrees  are  of  double  significance. 
At  first  sight  it  is  evident  that  only  the  smaller  and  weaker,  perhaps 
also  only  the  younger,  streams  belong  to  the  first  class,  which  includes 
the  streams  closely  adjusted  to  the  smaller  differences  among  the 
rocks.  The  streams  belonging  to  the  second  class  are  in  most  cases 
among  the  larger,  stronger  streams  of  the  district.  The  third  class 
of  streams,  those  showing  besides  adjustments,  transverse  characters 
even  with  respect  to  the  strongest  structural  features,  include  only  the 
strongest  and  largest  streams  of  the  county.  Further  study  will 
show  that  in  general  these  three  degrees  of  adjustment  among  the 
streams  indicate  three  ejxichs  in  the  topographic  develoimient  of  the 
county.  The  smaller,  more  delicately  adjusted  streams  indicate  the 
most  recent  changes;  the  larger,  more  discordant  streams  point  back 
farther  and  farther  into  the  past. 

To  illustrate  this,  consider  the  geologically  recent  history  of  Town 
Creek.  Just  before  the  creek  excavated  the  meandering  trench 
which  it  now  occupies,  it  flowed  through  a  comparatively  broad  and 
gently  rolling  valley  which  extended  from  "Warrior  Mountain  on  the 
west  to  Polish  Mountain  and  Green  Eidge  on  the  east.  The  general 
characteristics  and  indubitable  former  existence  of  this  higher  valley- 
floor  are  manifest  to  any  one  who  will  ascend  one  of  the  flat-topped 
hills  or  ridges.  Standing  on  Pine  Eidge  near  the  gorge  of  the  creek, 
for  example,  and  looking  thence  aci'oss  the  remarkably  accordant 
tops  of  all  the  neighboring  hills,  one  may  easily  imagine  the  young 
gorge  to  be  filled  again  ^vith  all  the  waste  rock  and  earth  which  the 
streams  have  recently  carried  away.  "When  such  a  restoration  has 
been  made,  all  the  sharj)  inequalities  of  the  present  surface  disappear. 
Stratford  Eidge  becomes  a  low,  even  insignificant  mound,  and  Pine 
Eidge,  together  with  many  other  hills  and  ridges,  unite  to  form 
a  common  broad  valley-floor,  standing  about  900  feet  above  mean  sea- 
level  near  the  Potomac  and  rising  slowly  to  1000  feet  at  the  Penn- 
sylvania line.  This  even,  level  valley  must  have  been  occupied  by  a 
winding  stream,  just  as  to-day  small  streams  occupying  similar  valleys 
are  found  to  be  meandering  and  uncertain  in  direction. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


43 


The  fact  that  to-dav  Town  Creek  is  flowing  in  a  deep  trench  indi- 
cates that  its  basin  has  been  elevated,  giving  the  stream  opportunity 
to  cut  its  channel  deeper  than  it  did  at  the  time  when  it  fashioned  the 
broad  valley  now  standing  above  it.  The  old  elevated  valley  itself 
indicates  that,  during  the  period  preceding  the  elevation  just  referred 
to,  the  land  had  remained  stationary  long  enough  to  allow  the  stream 
to  cut  its  channel  as  low  as  possible  and  the  rains  and  rills  to  wear 
down  the  more  yielding  rocks  of  the  valley  close  to  the  level  of  the 
stream.  Even  beds  of  more  resistant  sandstone,  such  as  that  found 
in  Stratford  Eidge,  were  well  worn  down  by  the  rain  and  other 
agencies,  so  that,  as  the  stream  spread  out  its  broadening  flood-plain  of 
bottom-land  and  shifted  its  coiirse  about,  its  channel  stood  across 
rocks  which  formerly  made  hills  as  often  as  across  those  which  had 
always  been  valley-floors.  "When  the  elevation  occurred  which 
caused  the  creek  to  entrench  itself,  the  stream  exit  down  rapidly,  keep- 
ing the  windings  which  it  had  in  its  flood-plain  condition.  To-day, 
therefoi'c,  the  stream  shows  a  general  course  which  is  independent  of 
the  minor  variations  in  resistance  foimd  in  the  rocks  of  its  broader 
valley.  Smaller  streams  which  have  grown  since  this  elevation 
occurred  have  taken  advantage  of  the  various  kinds  of  rocks  and  have 
developed  most  strongly  along  those  which  have  been  the  easiest  to 
remove.  As  these  streams  started  later,  they  have  not  been  able  to 
attain  as  great  a  size  as  have  those  streams  which  were  in  existence 
before  the  elevation  took  place. 

In  some  cases  the  development  of  these  younger,  smaller  and  better- 
adjusted  streams  has  resulted  in  decided  changes  in  drainage  lines. 
A  striking  and  interesting  example  is  found  in  Braddock  Run,  of  the 
Wills  Creek  system. 

The  period  of  lower  level  which  permitted  Town  Creek  to  carve 
such  a  wide,  evenly -floored  valley,  gave  Wills  Creek  similar  oppor- 
tunity. At  that  time,  however,  Braddock  Run  did  not  pursue  its 
present  course  northeast  from  Allegany  Grove,  but  ran  eastward  to 
join  "Wills  Creek  or  perhajis  the  Potomac,  after  cutting  across  "Wills 
Mountain  through  a  gap  now  seen  about  one  mile  northeast  of  Alle- 
gany Grove.    The  present  valley  between  Piney  and  Wills  mountains 


44 


THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


is  but  the  successor  of  a  \\-ider  valley  which  in  those  days  had  been 
worn  out  on  the  same  yielding,  soluble  limestones  and  shales  that  are 
found  there  as  valley-makers  to-day.  This  former  valley  was  due  to 
the  work  of  two  small  streams,  one  (b)  flowing  northward  emptied 
into  Wills  Creek  just  where  it  turned  to  cross  Wills  Mountain,  the 
other  (a)  flowing  southward  joined  Braddock  Run  near  where  it  also 
crossed  the  same  sandstone  barrier. 


Fig.  *i. — Drainage  about  Cumberland,  ou  Shenancloab  Plain. 

At  that  time,  both  Wills  Creek  and  Braddock  Run  were  smaller 
than  they  are  to-day;  still  Wills  Creek  must  have  been  the  larger,  and 
therefore  the  more  powerful,  even  then,  for  it  had  in  addition  to 
Jennings  Run  a  considerable  tributary  from  the  north.  The  stream 
arrangement  at  this  time  was  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  "Wlien  the  eleva- 
tion  occurred,  as  a  result  of  which  both  Town  Creek  and  Wills  Creek 
deepened  their  channels,  the  two  streams  a  and  h  also  went  to  work 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


45 


with  renewed  \ngor.  These  two  tributaries  Avere  limited  in  their 
rates  of  down-cntting  bv  the  rates  at  which  their  two  main  streams, 
Wills  Creek  and  Braddock  Knn,  could  reduce  their  channels.  The 
superior  power  of  Wills  Creek,  due  to  its  greater  size,  would  soon 
become  apparent,  and  as  a  result,  b  would  have  the  advantage  of  a 
lower  outlet  than  a.  This  advantage  possessed  by  b  resulted  in  the 
gradual  but  continual  shortening  of  a  hj  the  capture  of  its  head- 
waters. Finally,  when  Wills  Creek  had  cut  its  gorge  do^Am  close  to 
its  present  level,  and  b  had  lowered  its  channel  in  a  corresponding 
degree,  a  was  entirely  extinguished.  Braddock  Run,  which  had  been 
long  delayed  in  its  gap-cutting  by  the  heavy  sandstone  of  Wills 
Mountain  and  by  its  owti  small  volume,  was  then  tapped  by  the  head- 
waters of  b  and  led  out  along  its  present  course  into  Wills  Creek  (see 
Fig.  7).  Thus  the  gorge  cut  in  Wills  Mountain  by  Braddock  Run 
has  come  to  be  abandoned  and  is  but  a  wind-gap,  while  the  activity 
of  a  small  subsequent  stream  has  caused  a  marked  change  in  the 
course  of  the  Run. 

A  yet  more  marked  change  in  course  is  now  threatening  Braddock 
Run.  Warrior  Run  (Fig.  1,  Wr.),  which  empties  into  the  K"orth 
Branch  at  Brady,  has  been  rapidly  working  its  way  around  the  south 
end  of  Wills  Mountain,  pushing  up  in  between  it  and  Dans  Mountain 
until  at  the  present  time  the  headwaters  at  Winchester  reach  within 
a  mile  of  the  larger  stream  where  it  tui'us  northward  at  Allegany 
Grove.  The  steep  slopes  and  deep,  sharply  incised  channels  of  the 
Warrior  Run  headwaters  contrast  very  strongly  with  the  open,  gently 
sloping  and  much  higher  valley  of  Braddock  Run.  This  contrast  is 
very  clearly  shown  by  the  contour  lines  on  the  topographic  map  of 
the  county.  Steep  slopes,  whether  found  on  hills  or  in  stream  chan- 
nels, indicate  rapid  wearing  away  of  the  land  surface,  while  mild  and 
gentle  slopes  always  indicate  localities  of  more  gradual  wasting.  In 
the  present  case  it  is  clear  that  the  headwaters  of  Warrior  Run  are 
rapidly  (in  a  geological  and  geographical  sense)  encroaching  upon  the 
domain  of  Braddock  Run.  Already  the  former  stream  has  reduced 
its  valley  to  levels  several  scores  of  feet  below  the  levels  of  correspond- 
ing points  on  the  northern  side  of  the  saddle-like  divide,  and  it  can  be 


46 


THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEOANY  COUNTY 


but  a  short  time,  geologically,  before  the  working  backward  of  its 
headwaters  will  intersect  and  undercut  the  channel  and  vallev  of  the 
much  less  active,  though  larger,  stream.  The  upper  portion  of 
Braddock  Run  will  then  be  drawn  off  to  the  Xorth  Branch  via  War- 
rior Run,  while  the  lower  course,  much  shrunken  in  volume,  will 
still  flow  into  "Wills  Creek. 

The  reasons  for  the  superior  power  of  "Warrior  Run  are  not  difficult 
to  find.  In  the  first  place  "Warrior  Run,  which  falls  470  feet  in  4 
miles,  has  a  much  steeper  slope  than  has  Braddock  Run,  which  falls 
the  same  vertical  distance  only  after  flowing  for  about  7  miles. 
AVarrior  Run  therefore  has  much  more  power  to  c\it  down  its  channel 
and  to  push  back  its  headwaters.  In  the  second  place,  l)v  reason 
of  the  rapid  plunging  of  the  "Wills  Mountain  anticline  or  arch, 
"Warrior  Rim  is  able  to  avoid  crossing  the  resistant  sandstone  of  that 
mountain  and  has  made  its  course  entirely  on  the  yielding  rocks  lying 
above.  Thus  this  stream,  finding  less  resistance  offered  by  the  rocks 
it  crosses,  can  rapidly  lower  its  grade,  while  Braddock  Run  and  "Wills 
Creek,  opposed  in  "  The  Xarrows  "  by  the  sandstone,  are  continually 
delayed. 

In  studying  the  minor  discordances  of  Town  Creek  and  "WiUs 
Creek,  the  younger  gorges  of  these  streams  were  supposed  to  have 
been  refilled  by  tJie  materials  carried  from  them,  thus  restoring  the 
former  wide  valley-floors  between  the  highest  ridges  and  mountains 
of  the  district.  There  are  many  hills  and  ridges  in  neighboring  val- 
leys whose  accordant  tops  rise  to  elevations  corresjwnding  with  those 
in  the  two  valleys  mentioned.  This  suggests  that  similar  restorations 
carried  on  at  large  would  produce  a  number  of  similar  and  even 
confluent  vallej'-floors.  Such  a  general  restoration,  indeed,  would 
reveal  the  fact  that  the  valleys  were  etched  out  and  leveled,  at  about 
tlie  same  time  and  to  the  same  depth,  over  a  very  wide  expanse  of 
territory.  Because  the  limestone  valley  of  the  Shenandoah  best  shows 
this  old  lowland  plain,  the  epoch  during  which  it  was  produced  is 
sometimes  called  the  Shenandoah.  Plain  Epoch,  and  the  plain  itself  the 
Shenandoah  Plain. 

When  one  attempts  to  unravel  the  reasons  for  the  greater  dis- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


47 


cordauces  wliich.  exist  between  the  structure  and  tlie  larger  streams 
of  the  Ridge  District,  he  must  look  back  to  periods  in  the  topographic 
history  yet  earlier  than  the  Shenandoah  Plain  Epoch.  Here,  again,, 
the  first  step  may  be  a  restoration  of  earlier  forms  by  supposing  that 
the  rocks  which  have  been  removed  are  back  in  jjlace.  Restore  them 
not  only  to  the  level  of  the  Shenandoah  Plain,  but  beyond  to  the 
general  levels  of  the  yet  higher  ridges  and  mountains.  The  result  is 
even  more  striking  than  in  the  first  case.  Instead  of  a  series  of  com- 
paratively even-bottomed  valleys  lying  between  well-marked  ridges 
a  broad  gently  rolling  surface  is  found  to  have  existed.  It  was  crossed 
from  south  to  north  by  long  low  ridges,  whose  locations  corresponded 
with  the  present  crests  of  Dans  Mountain,  Savage  Mountain,  ]\[artin 
Mountain,  Warrior  Mountain,  and  perhaps  ToAvn  Hill  and  Sideling 
Hill.  Between  these  divides  were  broad  shallow  valleys  coinciding 
in  general  location  with  the  present  larger  valleys.  The  gi-eat  areal 
extent  of  this  old  almost  plain  surface  is  evidenced  by  many  level 
mountain  crests  which  rise  to  the  same  general  altitude.  One  of 
these,  Schooley  Moitntain,  in  Pennsylvania,  has  given  its  name  to 
the  general  feature.^ 

The  restoration  assumed  wotild  bury  the  present  sandstone  crest  of 
"Wills  Mountain  several  hundred  feet  deep  beneath  a  series  of  shales 
and  limestones  which  are  now  found  forming  valleys  and  low-lying 
areas.  This  fact  makes  it  probable  that  in  the  period  being  treated, 
the  area  between  Dans  Mountain  and  Martin  Mountain  was  a  broad 
level  valley  occupied  by  the  predecessor  of  the  present  Potomac. 
At  that  time  it  would  have  been  easy  and  natural  for  a  moderate- 
sized  tributary,  growing  westward  from  the  Potomac  at  Cumberland,, 
to  develop  a  branching  system  of  streams  across  the  buried  crest  of 
Wills  Mountain  and  even  to  push  its  headwaters  a  short  distance  back 
behind  the  then  low-lying  ridge  of  Dans  Mountain  and  Piney  Moun- 
tain.   This  scheme  of  the  drainage  is  sketched  in  Fig.  3. 

The  stream  arrangements  shown  in  this  sketch  must  have  been 
completed  rather  near  the  close  of  the  long  period  of  erosion  which 

1  For  more  detailed  description  of  tlie  Schooley  Plain  see  Maryland  Weather  Ser- 
vice, vol.  i,  pp.  119.121,  1899. 


48 


THE  PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGAKT  COTOTY 


produced  the  Schooley  Plain.  This  is  evident,  because  the  discordant 
position  of  Wills  Creek  and  its  tributaries  across  Piney  Mountain 
could  best  be  obtained  at  a  time  when  the  ridges  of  resistant  rocks 
were  well  reduced  and  probably  rather  deeply  covered  with  a  mantle 
of  disintegrated  rock.  The  course  taken,  at  this  time  by  the  Potomac 
across  Dans,  Knobly,  Martin  and  other  mountains  is  also  evidence  of 
the  low,  mild  character  of  the  topography. 


Fig.  o. — Drainaiie  about  Cumberland,  on  Schooley  Plain. 

The  stream-revival  which  caused  the  etching  out  of  the  Shenan- 
doah, the  Town  Creek,  and  other  valleys,  also  started  Wills  Creek  on 
a  period  of  rapid  down-cutting.  In  the  course  of  the  first  rapid 
trenching  of  the  stream-channels,  the  buried  crest  of  the  Wills  Moun- 
tain arch  was  notched  by  Jennings  Run  and  Braddock  Run.  The 
further  removal  of  the  overlying  beds  exposed  the  whole  long  arch  of 
sandstone.    Finally,  when  the  valleys  and  notches  had  been  reduced 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  V. 


GEORGES   CREEK   VALLEY,    NEAR  BARTON 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


49 


to  the  general  level  of  the  then  low-lying  Slienandoah  Plain,  "Wills 
Mountain  stood  out  as  a  long  ridge  whose  crest  was  cut  in  two  places 
bv  watergaps  (Fig.  2,  Wg  and  Xr).  One  of  these  is.  still  a  watergap 
and  is  occupied  bv  Wills  Creek,  i.  e.  it  is  "  The  Xarrows."  The 
other  notch  is  now  the  windgap  from  which  Braddock  Run  has  been 
diverted  (Fig.  7).  During  this  cutting  down  to  the  Shenandoah 
Plain,  Jennings  Run  developed  a  small  subsequent  tributarv  along 
the  easy  path  between  Little  Allegheny  and  "^ills  mountains.  This 
stream  has  in  later  time  developed  more  rapidly  than  its  older 
brothers,  Jennings  Run  and  Braddock  Run.  This  is  for  the  reason 
that  it  is  located  along  yielding  rocks,  while  the  other  branches  have 
to  contend  with  both  Pocono  and  Pottsville  sandstones.  It  is  now 
the  main  stream  of  Wills  Creek. 

TOPOGRAPHIC  HISTORY. 
Stages  in  the  Topogeaphic  History. 
In  the  foregoing  discussion  of  the  topography  of  Allegany  county, 
certain  features  have  been  referred  to  as  if  they  were  stages  or  mile- 
stones in  the  series  of  changes  which  the  surface  features  of  the 
county  have  been  passing  through.  It  will  be  a  convenient  way  of 
summing  up  and  correlating  the  features  already  considered  if  the 
several  stages  of  topographic  history  are  taken  up  in  order  and  briefly 
considered.  Six  stages  may  at  present  be  clearly  distinguished. 
They  may  be  named : 

1.  The  Present  or  Channel-cutting  Stage. 

2.  The  Terrace-forming  Stage. 

3.  The  Shenandoah  Plain  Stage. 

4.  The  Schooley  Plain  Stage. 

5.  The  Appalachian  Mountain  Stage. 

6.  The  Rock-forming  or  Paleozoic  Stage. 

the  present  stage. 
At  the  present  time  all  the  streams  of  Allegany  county  are  at  work 
fashioning  their  channels.    In  many  cases  they  are  putting  the  finish- 
ing touches  to  the  even  slopes  which  they  prefer  to  flow  on,  and  some 

4 


50 


THE  PHYSIOGKAPHY   OF  ALLEOAXY  COUNTY 


etreams  have  even  completed  this  slope  in  places.  All  the  streams, 
however,  are  here  and  tlierc  interrupted  bv  rapids  and  shallows, 
which  show  that,  in  spite  of  the  plains  or  bottom-lands  built  during 
floods,  they  have  not  vet  perfectly  graded  their  channels.  The 
Potomac  has  reduced  its  channel  to  so  flat  a  slope  that  the  low  dam 
for  the  canal  at  Cumberland  backs  up  the  water  for  a  distance  of  two 
miles  upstream.  But  even  this  large  stream,  flowing  eight  or  ten 
feet  below  its  flood-plain  during  its  ordinary  stages,  has  many  un- 
reduced ledges  in  its  channel. 

The  present  downward  tendency  of  the  streams  may  be  traced 
back  to  the  close  of  the  Shenandoah  Plain  period,  for  it  has  resulted 
in  the  carving  out  of  trenches  below  the  general  level  of  that  plain. 

THE  TEBBACE-FOBMIXG  STAGE. 

This  down-cutting  has  not  been  iminterrupted,  however.  Border- 
ing the  lower  courses  of  all  the  larger  streams  of  the  county,  and  of 
many  of  the  smaller  streams,  are  two  well-detined  stream-terraces. 
Such  stream-terraces  indicate  former  positions  of  the  stream-bed,  and 
when  found  along  the  banks  of  a  stream  indicate  that  its  vertical 
cutting  has  been  interrupted  for  a  while.  Instead  of  cutting  ver- 
tically, the  stream  may  have  cut  horizontally,  or  even  stopped  cutting 
and  begun  to  build  up  by  depositing  gravel  and  sand. 

The  stream-terraces  in  Allegany  county  are  usually  gravel-strewn, 
often  deeply  so;  but  never  consist  Avholly  of  gravels  and  sand.  Always 
beneath  this  looser  covering  can  be  found  smooth,  even  surfaces 
which  were  cut  across  the  bedding  of  the  rocks  b}'  the  streams  and 
later  strewn  with  gravel  and  sand.  The  higher  terrace  has  an  eleva- 
tion of  about  800  feet  along  the  Potomac  above  Cumberland,  and  the 
one  next  below  stands  at  about  050  or  700  feet.  This  lower  one  is 
generally  better  defined,  particularly  at  Cresaptown  and  Cedar  Cliff 
and  above  Riverside  station,  on.  the  West  Virginia  Central  and  Pitts- 
burg Raihvay.  The  800-foot  terrace  forms  the  cobble-strewn  hills 
overlooking  Cunil>erland  and  South  Cumberland,  while  the  town  is 
built  on  the  lower  one. 

These  terraces,  with  one  or  two  lower  and  minor  ones  in  the  irame- 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


51 


diate  Ticinity  of  the  streams,  may  be  traced  along  the  Potomac  from 
one  side  of  the  county  to  the  other,  and  also  np  the  larger  streams 
flowing  into  it.  Going  iip  the  tributary  streams  the  terraces  natur- 
ally rise,  since,  the  smaller  volumes  of  these  streams  will  always  leave 
their  channels  steeper  than  that  of  the  Potomac.  The  levels  also 
teem  to  draw  together  somewhat.  The  best  traces  of  the  terraces 
can  be  found  near  Allegany  Grove  (1000  feet)  on  Braddock  Eun, 
about  Corriganville,  and  between  that  place  and  Ellerslie  (750 
feet),  on  Wills  Creek.  They  also  occur  along  the  lower  courses  of 
the  streams  joining  the  Potomac  at  Oldtown  (720  feet);  and  all  along 
Town  Creek  at  about  680  feet. 

Since  these  terraces  are  both  cut  out  of  the  rock  and  slightly  built 
up  also,  it  is  evident  that  they  are  the  indices  of  stages  in  the  post- 
Shenandoahan  do^vTi-cutting.  Just  why  they  were  formed  is  not  yet 
clear.  They  may  indicate  a  temporary  loss  of  speed  due  to  a  slight 
westward  tilting  of  the  river  channel  and  a  consequent  cessation  in 
downward  ciitting  accompanied  by  deposition  of  gravels.  Or  it  may 
prove  to  be  the  case  that  these  benches  indicate  the  positions  of  the 
land  during  periods  of  temporary  rest  when  the  streams  really  cut 
down  to  their  lowest  possible  grade — the  rock-plains  of  the  terraces. 
Whatever  may  be  their  final  explanation,  these  terraces  are  still 
significant  as  indicating  that  there  has  not  been  a  steady  downward 
tendency  of  the  streams,  but  an  intermittent  one.  Periods  of  rest  or 
of  sluggish  work,  accompanied  by  lateral  cutting,  succeeded  periods 
of  active  vertical  attack. 

THE  SHEXAXDOAH  PLAIN  STAGE. 

Immediately  preceding  the  uplift  which  inaugurated  the  recent 
gorge-cutting  and  terrace-forming  activities,  there  came  a  period  of 
some  length  during  which  not  only  Allegany  county  but  the  whole 
Atlantic  slope  stood  fast  with  reference  to  sea-level.  This  gave  the 
streams  the  opportunity  to  etch  out  valleys  on  the  yielding  limestones 
and  shales,  Avhile  they  left  the  more  resistant  rocks  standing.  So 
long  a  time  was  allowed  that  the  valleys  thus  determined  by  yielding 
rocks  were  worn  down  verv  low  indeed.    Their  surfaces  were  almost 


52 


THE  PHY3I0GKAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


smooth,  even  plains;  the  streams  began  to  wind  back  and  forth  across 
flat  bottom-lands  and  paid  no  attention  to  the  rocks  which,  earlier, 
had  formed  low  ride^es  in  the  valleys.  The  later  g<>r£re-cutting  dis- 
sected these  level  valley-floors,  but  many  hill-tops  and  ridges  between 
the  streams  still  retain  a  portion  of  this  old  intenuontane  plain.  To 
it  belong  the  tops  of  many  hills  along  Town  Creek,  Evitts  Creek  and 
Fifteenmile  Creek,  reaching  elevations  of  about  900  feet  above  sea- 
level. 

Along  the  meandering  course  of  the  Potomac,  also,  are  many  hills 
rising  to  900  or  1000  feet,  and  lying  between  still  higher  ridges. 
They  are  most  noticeable  between  Paw  Paw  and  Little  Orleans, 
where  they  have  an  elevation  of  about  900  feet.  About  Cumberland, 
also,  the  old  valley -level  is  preserved  in  the  crest  of  Shriver  Ridge 
(1100  feet)  and  tlie  long  flat  spur  (1115  feet)  forming  the  north  end 
of  Knobly  Mountain.  These  traces  of  the  Shenandoah  Plain,  found 
in  the  hilltops  bordering  the  meandering  and  trenched  Potomac  lend 
support  to  the  theory  that  these  meanders  are  inherited  from  flood- 
plain  meanders  of  the  Shenandoah  Plain  stage.  The  fact  that  the 
meanders  are  not  found  cutting  across  ridges  which  rise  above  the 
Shenandoah  Plain  is  additional  evidence  in  favor  of  this  theory. 

The  Shenandoah  Plain  period  also  gave  opportunity  for  the  further 
and  closer  adjustment  of  many  streams  in  existence  at  the  opening  of 
the  period.  This  was  notably  the  case  with  "Wills  Creek.  Fifteen- 
mile  Creek  and  Town  Creek.  Xumbers  of  smaller  streams  which 
came  into  existence  during  this  period  started  on  yielding  rocks  and 
in  later  times  have  simply  continued  along  their  originally  5ul)sequent 
courses.  Towards  the  close  of  the  period,  however,  many  streams 
lost  their  finer  adjustments  by  reason  of  their  flood-plained  condition. 
The  best  instances  of  this  have  been  referred  to  already,  viz..  Town 
Creek  and  Fifteenmile  Creek.  Other  smaller  streams  seem  to  have 
been  throAvn  out  of  adjustment  by  the  influence  of  the  broad  flood- 
plain  along  the  Potomac.  This  is  notably  the  case  with  the  streams 
entering  near  Oldtown  and  also  with  Sideling  Hill  Creek.  These 
streams  instead  of  joining  the  Potomac  by  the  most  direct  line,  which 
is  the  rule,  are  deflected  down  stream  when  within  two  miles  or  less 
of  the  river. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  VI. 


MAKTLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


53 


THE   SCHOOLEY  PLAI>'  STAGE. 

The  gorge-cutting  period  was  inaiigiiratecl  bv  a  general  warping 
and  uplifting  of  tlie  Shenandoah  Plain,  the  nplift  being  greatest  in 
the  southwestern  districts  and  least  in  the  east.  The  Shenandoah 
Period  was  inaugurated  by  a  closely  similar  uplift  of  the  Schooley 
Plain.  The  Schooley  Plain  was  produced  in  the  same  way  as  the 
Shenandoah  Plain.  The  main  difference  between  the  two  features 
is  the  absence  from  the  Schooley  Plain  of  extensive  mountain  ranges 
or  ridges  looking  down  upon  it.  This  resulted  simply  from  the  fact 
that  the  earlier  period  was  of  much  longer  duration,  so  that  oppor- 
tunity was  given  for  the  complete  reduction  to  the  general  level  of 
the  zones  of  resistant  rock.  Of  this  former  surface  there  are  now 
numerous  remnants  to  be  found  in  the  long  even  crests  of  the  higher 
ridges  in  the  coimty.  On  account  of  the  much  greater  erosion 
which  this  older  plain  has  suffered,  its  traces  are  much  fewer  than  are 
those  of  the  yoimger  Shenandoah  Plain.  They  are  preserved  only 
by  the  most  resistant  rocks  of  the  county;  but  they  are  sufficient  to 
show  that  the  old  surface  was  widespread  and  imposed  upon  all  the 
rocks  of  a  large  area  regardless  of  differences  in  resistance. 

By  the  time  that  the  agents  of  denudation  had  established  this 
surface,  all  the  streams  had  adjusted  themselves  to  the  structures 
revealed  by  the  widespread  planing  off.  Probably  all  the  well- 
grown  streams  of  the  time  had  meandering  courses,  except  the  young- 
est streams,  initiated  towards  the  close  of  the  period  which  would 
haA'e  had  more  direct  and  vigorous  paths.  Among  these  younger 
streams  were  probably  foimd  the  forerunners  of  Jennings  Run, 
Braddock  Run  and  Fifteenmile  Creek,  as  their  present  discordant 
courses  are  at  variance  "with  features  which  were  then  much  less 
significant  than  they  are  to-day.  The  other  streams,  snch  as  Evitts 
Creek  and  Sideling  Hill  Creek,  probably  existed  during  the  Schooley 
Plain  period  as  smaller,  adjusted,  subsequent  streams  flowing  into  the 
contemporary  representative  of  the  Xorth  Branch  of  the  Potomac. 
Wills  Mountain  lay  several  hundred  feet  below  that  surface,  not  yet 
revealed  by  the  erosion  which  folloAved  upon  the  uplifting  of  the 
plain.    Town  Hill  also  was  still  in  embryo,  but  for  a  different  reason. 


54 


THE   PHYSIOGRAPHY  OF   AI.T.EGAXY  COrXTY 


'l  lic  liard  sandstone  Avhicli  was  to  form  its  crest  was  not  buried  beneath 
many  feet  of  overlying  rocks,  but  lay  almost  at  the  surface  of  the 
plain.  It  had  formed  the  floor  of  a  trough  of  rock  which  had  been 
folded  down  so  low  that  it  escaped  removal  in  the  general  planing 
off  which  resulted  in  producing  the  Schooley  Plain.  Thus  when 
re-elevation  revived  the  streams  and  enabled  tliem  to  etch  <iut  the 
softer  rocks,  this  long  slab  of  sandstone  still  remained  to  protect  the 
rocks  beneath  it.  A  similar  reason  may  be  found  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  coal-beds  of  the  Georges  Creek  basin.  These  would  not 
now  be  available  had  it  not  been  for  the  fortunate  accident  whereby 
the  broad  synclinal  trough  of  the  Plateau  District  was  so  greatly 
depressed  below  the  general  level  to  which  the  whole  county  was 
reduced.  Because  of  this  depression,  the  coal-formations  were  not 
worn  away  from  this  district.  Since  their  position  was  higher  over 
the  western  portion  of  the  county,  they  were  all  removed  during  its 
reduction  to  the  Schooley  Plain. 

THE   PALEOZOIC  PERIOD  AXI)  THE  APPALACHIAX  REVOLrTIOX. 

Thus  far  one  may  read  the  history  of  Allegany  county  topography 
from  existing  surface  features.  The  earliest  stage  related  in  that  his- 
tory, the  Schooley  Plain,  caimot  be  the  beginning,  however.  The 
very  folds  and  breaks  in  the  great  series  of  strata  which  form  the 
foundations  and  skeleton  of  present  topography,  themselves  suggest 
the  ]iossibility  of  a  time,  preceding  all  the  periods  just  recounted, 
when  the  earth's  surface  was  cut  into  valleys  and  mountains  which 
Avere  duo  directly  to  the  great  folds  now  traceable  only  where  valleys 
out  down  across  them.  If  there  ever  was  such  a  time  and  such 
topography,  the  scenery  must  have  boon  much  orander  than  it  is 
to-day.  Thousands  upon  thousands  of  feet  of  rock  have  been  re- 
moved since  the  folding  began,  so  that  the  folds  themselves  must 
have  given  rise  to  mountaiuB  five  or  six  times  as  high  as  the  present 
Appalachians  with  some  correspondingly  deep  valleys  between.  These 
would  have  been  the  earliest  mountains  and  valleys. 

It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  surface  which  would  have  thus 
appeared,  never  existed  in  an  altogether  unmodified  state.    As  soon 


MAKYI.A>-D  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


55 


as  the  folds  appeared  above  the  sea,  the  rain  and  wind  and  frost  would 
have  begun  to  wear  away  their  surfaces,  cut  out  gullies  and  cross- 
valleys,  rapidly  changing  the  new  surface.  Thus  the  earliest  land 
toi^ography  here  would  have  been  at  best,  the  original  folds,  trouglis 
and  ridges,  modified  by  the  rain  and  other  denuding  agents. 

These  folds  were  produced  in  rocks  of  horizontal  strata  deposited 
on  the  floor  of  a  great  sea.  This  sea  washed  the  western  shores  of 
a  land-area  located  about  Avhere  the  present  Blue  Ridge  is,  and  it  was 
the  waste  washed  from  this  land  which  formed  the  rocks  of  the  sea- 
floor.  According  to  geological  chronology,  those  rocks  are  said  to 
be  of  Paleozoic  age,  and  the  sea  in  which  they  were  deposited  may 
be  called  the  Paleozoic  sea.  This  period,  during  which  the  present 
rocks  were  being  deposited  in  the  Paleozoic  sea,  is  the  earliest  one 
of  which  there  is  any  trace  in  Allegany  county.  In  fact,  it  was  the 
beginning  of  the  geographic  history  of  the  county.  The  great  fold- 
ing and  upthrusting  of  the  horizontal  strata  on  this  old  sea-floor  put 
an  end  to  further  accumulations  by  raising  them  above  sea-level. 
The  change  was  so  complete  and  tremendous  and  comparatively 
rapid  that  it  is  often  spoken  of  as  a  revolution.  Since  it  resulted  in 
the  bxiilding  up  of  the  forerunners  of  the  Appalachian  Mountains,  it 
is  usually  referred  to  as  the  Appalachian  Revolution. 

It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  present  Appalachians 
resulted  only  indirectly  from  this  so-called  revolution.  The  imme- 
diate predecessor  of  the  present  topography  of  Allegany  county  was 
a  broad,  almost  featureless  plain,  and  the  mountains,  ridges,  valleys 
and  clifi^s  of  to-day  have  all  resulted  from  the  wearing  away  of  areas 
of  yielding  rock  and  the  continuance  of  the  resistant  ones  standing- 
out  in  relief. 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

BY 

CLEOPHAS  C.  O  HARRA 


IXTEODUCTOEY. 
Particular  attention  is  given  in  the  following  pages  to  the  strati- 
graphy, structure  and  areal  distribution  of  the  various  formations 
exposed  in  Allegany  county;  the  processes  and  conditions  under  which 
the  sediments  were  deposited:  and  the  forces  that  have  operated  in 
bringing  about  the  present  attitude  of  the  strata.  A  brief  review  of 
previous  work  is  given,  and  a  bibliography  is  added.  Only  such  gen- 
eral references  to  the  paleontology,  physiography  and  soils  of  the 
region  have  been  made  as  are  necessary  to  give  a  clear  understanding 
of  the  geological  features  since  these  branches  are  more  fully  dis- 
cussed in  other  places. 

GEOGEAPHIC  AND  GEOLOGIC  EELATIOIsTS. 

The  situation  and  boundaries  of  Allegany  county  have  been  de- 
scribed in  earlier  pages.  Although  bounded  on  the  north  and  west 
by  straight  lines  whose  combined  length  approximates  only  50.8 
miles,  the  entire  periphery  is  about  14.5  miles,  the  amount  being  verj 
miich  increased  by  the  tortuous  channels  of  the  Potomac  river  and 
Sideling  Hill  Creek. 

The  county  contains  several  mountains  of  importance.  learning 
them  in  order  from  the  east,  they  are:  Town  Hill,  Green  Eidge, 
Stratford  Eidge,  Polish  Mountain,  "Warrior  Mountain,  Tussey  Moun- 
tain, Martin  Mountain,  Collier  Mountain,  Evitts  Mountain,  Nicholas 
Mountain,  Shriver  Eidge  Mountain,  Wills  Mountain,  Allegheny 
Mountain  and  Dans  Mountain.    The  last  two,  which  may  really  be 


58 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAIfY  COUNTY 


considered  as  one  mountain,  and  wliich  are  alluded  to  in  this  paper 
as  the  Dans-Allegheny  Mountain,  form  a  part  of  the  great  Allegheny 
Front.  Tussey  Mountain  dies  out  almost  immediately  after  entering 
the  county  from  Pennsylvania,  and  E^^tts  Mountain  becomes  oblit- 
erated nearly  as  quickly.  Other  ridges  and  hills  of  less  geological 
importance  are  named  on  the  map. 

The  drainage  of  the  county  is  wholly  to  the  south.  Among  the 
more  important  streams  entering  the  Potomac  are  the  following: 
Sideling  Hill  Creek,  Fiftcenmile  Creek,  Town  Creek,  Martins  Spring 
Run,  Colliers  Run,  Evitts  Creek,  "Wills  Creek,  Georges  Creek  and 
Stony  Run.  Among  the  other  streams,  lying  wholly  or  parth*  within 
Allegany  county,  whose  waters  eventually  find  their  way  into  the 
Potomac  are  Flintstone  Creek,  Murley  Branch,  Jennings  Run,  Brad- 
dock  Run,  Moores  Run,  Jackson  Run,  Hill  Run,  Elk  Lick  Run, 
Matthew  Run,  Xeffs  Riin,  Winebrenner  Run,  Staub  Run,  Wrights 
Run,  Squirrel  Xeck  Run,  Koontz  Run,  Laurel  Run,  Bartlett  Run, 
Mill  Run,  Rock  Gully  Creek,  ^laple  Run,  White  Sulphur  Creek, 
Piney  Ridge  Run.  Flintstone  Creek,  Murley  Branch  and  Maple 
Run  flow  into  To^vn  Creek;  Jennings  Run  and  Braddock  Run  flow 
into  Wills  Creek;  Rock  Gully  Creek  flows  into  Evitts  Creek;  White 
Suli^hur  Creek  and  Piney  Ridge  Run  flow  into  Fiftcenmile  Creek; 
while  all  of  the  others  named  enter  Georges  Creek. 

The  area  covered  by  Allegany  county  forms  an  integral  part  of 
the  Appalachian  Province,  hence  an  accurate  and  exhaustive  study  of 
tlie  geology  of  the  coimty  can  be  made  only  by  adequate  reference  to 
the  conditions  governing  the  complete  geologic  history  of  the  entire 
province.  The  province  itself  is  composed  of  three  genetically  re- 
lated physiographic  divisions,  the  principal  features  of  which  have 
been  brought  about  by  geographic  conditions  that  no  longer  exist' 
The  eastern  division  is  a  part  of  the  ancient  continent  of  Appalachia, 
a  land-mass  of  uncertain  area  from  which  most  of  the  sediments  of 
the  Appalachian  Province  were  derived.  The  western  limit  of  this 
division  of  the  province  is  now  represented  by  the  Blue  Ridge. 

'  Willis,  Bailey.  The  Northern  Appalachians,  Geographic  Monographs,  vol.  i, 
1895. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SUKVEl' 


59 


Lying  to  the  west  of  Appalacliia  there  was  a  great  inland  sea  in  which 
the  sediments  from  this  ancient  continent  were  gradually  laid  down. 
The  littoral  zone  of  this  mediterranean  ?ea  having  received  many 
thousands  of  feet  of  various  kinds  of  sediments,  was  from  time  to  time 
affected  by  powerful  organic  movements,  possibly  not  yet  ceased,  the 
result  of  which  has  been  to  bring  the  formerly  almost  horizontal 
beds  into  a  greatly  folded  condition.  This  old  littoral  zone,  now 
constituting  the  central  physiographic  di^dsion  of  the  province,  cor- 
responds to  what  is  sometimes  known  as  the  Greater  Appalachian 
Valley,  using  that  term  in  its  -wider  sense  to  include  the  area  between 
the  Blue  Ridge  and  the  Alleghany  Front.  Along  the  outskirts  of 
the  littoral  zone  the  strata  were  much  less  influenced  by  the  enormous 
forces  which  so  disturbed  the  central  and  eastern  divisions;  and, 
although  considerably  elevated,  they  have,  as  a  rule,  been  left  in  a 
more  nearly  horizontal  jX)sition.  This  part  Avhich  now  forms  the 
Alleghany  Front  and  the  Alleghany  Plateau  constitutes  the  western 
physiographic  division  of  the  Ajipalachian  Province. 

Structurally,  the  area  which  is  covered  by  the  central  and  western 
physiogi'aphic  divisions  as  above  defined,  is  divided  somewhat  differ- 
ently. According  to  the  structure,. two  divisions  are  recognized,  but 
the  line  of  separation  falls  much  farther  east.  In  Maryland,  the 
western  structural  division  known  as  the  district  of  open  folding  is 
limited  on  the  eastern  side  by  Xorth  Mountain,  Avhile  the  western 
limit  extends  beyond  the  western  borders  of  the  state.  East  of  North 
Mountain  lies  the  structural  division  known  as  the  district  of  close 
folding.  In  Maryland  it  occupies  approximately  the  position  of  the 
Hagerstown  Valley. 

Structurally,  then,  Allegany  coimty  lies  wholly  within  a  single  dis- 
trict, that  of  open  folding.  Physiographically,  it  includes  parts  of  two 
divisions,  viz.,  the  Greater  Appalachian  Valley  and  the  Alleghany 
Plateau.  Stratigraphically,  it  is  not  referable  to  any  well-defined 
district  or  division.  The  stratigraphic  features  are,  in  a  sense,  much 
the  same  as  for  all  of  the  area  west  of  the  great  limestone  valley. 
Furthermore,  the  various  structural  features,  as  well  as  the  contacts- 
of  the  various  formations  found  in  the  county,  extend  in  many 


60  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  AIXEGAXY  COCKTY 

instances  without  a  break  or  disappearance  for  miles  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  county.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  the  county  is  not  a 
geological  unit  and  has  not  been  so  considered  in  this  paper.  How- 
ever, lying  along  the  Potomac  and  favorably  situated  for  the  display 
of  the  structural,  physiographic  and  stratigraphic  features  of  a  con- 
tinuous series  of  sediments,  from  the  middle  Silurian  to  the  late 
Carboniferous  or  Permian,  rich  in  easily  accessible  and  well-preserved 
fossils,  and  containing  also  in  the  western  part  large  deposits  of 
economic  importance,  the  county  has  for  many  years  been  known  as 
a  region  of  peculiar  interest,  and  one  deserving  careful  geologic 
study. 

HISTOKICAL  REVIEW. 

The  most  prominent  phj'siographic  features  of  Allegany  county 
have  lono-  been  known.  Natural  facilities  for  a  careful  studv  of 
the  rocks  have  always  been  good,  and  in  addition,  especially  favorable 
opportimitics  have  at  times  been  provided  by  means  of  the  various 
extensive  improvements  made  for  military  and  commercial  purposes. 
During  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century  military  expeditions  to 
Fort  Cumberland  and  beyond  necessitated  the  construction  of  a  good 
road  from  the  Atlantic  coast  to  the  Ohio  valley.  George  "Wasliington, 
in  a  letter  to  Colonel  Bouquet,  dated  "  Camp  at  Fort  Cumberland, 
2,  August,  1758,"  says  that  the  first  good  road  for  commercial  inter- 
course between  the  traders  of  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania  and  the 
Indians  along  the  Ohio  was  by  way  of  "Wills  Creek  [Cumberland], 
which  place  had  been  selected  by  intelligent  Indians  who  had  been 
hired  to  choose  the  most  favorable  route  of  communication.  He 
further  states  that  the  Ohio  Company  in  1753  opened  the  road  at  a 
considerable  expense,  and  that  in  the  following  year  his  own  troops 
greatly  repaired  it.  In  1755  it  was  widened  and  comjileted  by  Gen- 
eral Braddock  to  near  Fort  Duquesne.  Early  in  the  present  century 
the  IS'ational  Road  was  surveyed  and  constructed,  the  military  road 
being  in  part  utilized  for  this  purpose.  Later  extensive  surveys  were 
made  for  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  and  for  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  Railroad,  the  latter  reaching  Cumberland  in  the  year  1842  and 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  VII. 


r 


Fig.  2.— pulp-mill,  near  westekxport. 
VIEWS  OF  .\LLEG.ANy  COUNTY. 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


61 


the  former  in  1850.  These  surveys,  references  to  Tvhicli  are  given 
in  tlie  bibliograpliv,  added  mucli  to  the  general  knowledge  of  the 
physiogTaphy  and  gave  considerable  detailed  information  concerning 
the  character  of  the  rocks  and  their  folded  condition,  but  there  appears 
to  have  been  little  attention  given  to  the  purely  scientific  study  of  the 
geology  of  the  area. 

During  the  autumn  of  1831,  Samuel  Whyllys  Pomeroy  traveled 
through  the  county  and  made  some  hasty  observations  on  the  geology 
along  the  Xational  Koad,  particularly  in  the  vicinity  of  Cumberland 
and  Frostburg  (2). 

In  "  Some  [N^otices  of  the  Geology  of  the  Country  between  Balti- 
more and  the  Ohio  Eiver,  with  a  Section  illustrating  the  Superposi- 
tion of  the  Eocks,"  by  William  E.  A.  Aiken,  published  in  the 
American  Journal  of  Science,  volume  xxv,  1834,  we  have  one  of  the 
earliest  attempts  to  explain  the  structure  of  the  mountains  and  to 
correlate  the  various  kinds  of  rocks  (3).  Unhappily,  Mr.  Aiken's 
observations  in  Allegany  county  were  so  meagre  that  many  of  the 
conclusions  were  necessarily  faulty  and  little  definite  advance  was 
made. 

In  the  same  year,  1834,  J.  T.  Ducatel,  State  Geologist,  and  J.  H. 
Alexander,  State  Topographical  Engineer,  in  a  "  Eeport  on  the  Pro- 
jected Survey  of  the  State  of  Maryland,  pursuant  to  a  resolution  of 
the  General  Assembly,"  give  general  statements  concerning  the 
geology  of  the  county  (4).  Mention  is  made  of  the  mineral  and 
warm  springs  near  Elintstone,  and  of  the  Frostburg  coal-field.  Much 
of  the  information  was  taken  from  the  collection  of  reports  and 
letters  of  the  engineers  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal. 

In  his  "  Eeport  of  a  Geological  Eeconnaissance  made  in  1835  from 
the  seat  of  government  by  way  of  Green  Bay  and  the  Wisconsin 
territory  on  the  Coteau  du  Prairie,  an  elevated  ridge  dividing  the 
^Missouri  from  the  St.  Peters  river,"  G.  W.  Featherstonhaugh  gives 
considerable  geological  information  concerning  Allegany  county  (8). 
He  traveled  under  the  direction  of  the  United  States  government 
and  passed  through  the  county  while  en  route  westward,  evidently 
entering  the  county  by  the  National  Eoad.    East  of  Cumberland  he 


62 


TItE  GKOLOOY  OF  A  LI- KG  A  XY  COUNTY 


makes  little  mention  of  the  rock?,  but  refers  to  fossils  found  in  the 
limestone  at  Flintstone.  This  limestone  he  erroneously  correlates 
with  the  Carboniferous  limestone  further  we«t.  Shriver  Ridg'e  is 
mentioned  as  heinp:  compose<l  of  shale  and  limestone  with  "  produrta,'^ 
"  spirifer"  and  "  cardia."  The  Wills  Creek  gorge  he  describes 
with  considerable  detail,  and  gives  a  sketch  of  the  same.  A  crude 
hypothesis  for  the  anticlinal  structure  of  Wills  and  neighboring 
mountains  is  also  given.  From  Cumberland  he  went  to  Frostburg, 
thence  doAvn  the  Georges  Creek  valley  to  the  Potomac,  which  he 
ascended  beyond  the  mouth  of  Savage  river,  then  returned  along  the 
Potomac  to  Cumberland.  He  speaks  briefly  of  the  Georges  Creek 
coal  area  and  believed  that  the  coal-bearing  strata  were  deposited 
after  the  movement  which  produced  the  folding  to  the  east. 

About  this  time  much  interest  began  to  be  manifested  in  the  coal, 
iron,  cement,  and  fire-clay  of  the  coal  basin.  With  the  prospect  of 
an  opportunity  to  ship  by  rail  and  canal,  a  greater  interest  was 
aroused  in  the  mineral  wealth  of  the  county,  various  mining  com- 
panies were  incorporated,  and  reports  began  to  appear  giving  more 
or  less  accurate  descriptions  of  the  geology  of  this  part  of  the  state. 
Some  of  these  papers  show  the  result  of  original  work;  but  not  a  few 
were  only  compilations  from  the  writings  of  others. 

In  a  report  dated  October,  1836,  to  the  Georges  Creek  Coal  and 
Iron  Company,  one  of  the  earliest  companies  to  develop  the  mineral 
resources  of  the  Georges  Creek  basin,  J.  H.  Alexander  and  P.  T. 
Tyson  give  two  maps  of  portions  of  the  (Jeorges  Oeek  area,  one 
columnar  section  known  as  the  "  Dug  Hill  Section,"  one  structure 
section  and  various  oilier  details  (10).  Two  months  later,  Mr. 
Ducatel,  the  State  Geologist,  in  his  official  report  to  the  Governor 
of  Maryland,  included  a  description  of  the  Frostburg  coal-field  in 
which  the  columnar  section  made  for  the  (ieorges  Creek  Coal  Com- 
pany is  given.  In  this  report  there  is  also  given  a  carefully  prepared 
hachured  map  of  tlie  entire  area  on  which  tlie  various  streams,  towns 
and  mines  are  located  and  named.  Frostburg  is  given  on  the  map 
as  Frost  Town,  and  the  coal  area  is  called  after  it. 

During  this  year,  1836,  the  State  Topographical  Engineer,  J.  IL 


MABYLAJsD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


63 


Alexander,  directed  the  execution  of  a  chain  of  triangles  with  a  plane- 
table  survey  over  a  part  of  the  Georges  Creek  area.  The  work  of 
this  survey  was  accomplished  at  individual  expense,  but  the  results 
were  generously  offered  for  the  use  of  the  state  survey. 

During  the  same  year,  1836,  George  W.  Hiighes  made  a  report 
to  the  Maryland  Mining  Company  in  which  he  gives  the  result  of 
an  examination  of  the  coal  measures  and  iron  ore  deposits  belonging 
to  the  company  (9).  The  paper  includes  various  analyses  and 
columnar  sections. 

In  this  year  also,  James  C.  Booth  studied  the  area  and  published 
the  results  in  a  short  paper  entitled  "  Report  of  the  Examination  and 
Survey  of  the  Coal-fields  and  iron  ores  belonging  to  the  Barton  and 
!N^ew  York  Coal  Company  "  (7).  The  next  year,  1837,  further  notes 
by  Mr.  Booth,  as  well  as  short  reports  by  L.  Howell  and  John  Powell 
were  published  for  the  same  company. 

On  February  9,  1837,  Professor  Philip  T.  Tyson  read  before  the 
Maryland  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Literature  a  paper  entitled  "  A 
description  of  the  Frostburg  coal  formation  of  Allegany  county, 
Maryland,  with  an  accoi;nt  of  its  geological  position"  (12).  Later 
this  was  published  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Society.  With  the  de- 
scription of  the  area  one  columnar  section  and  two  structure  sections 
are  given. 

In  the  same  year,  D.  B.  Douglas  spent  three  weeks  in  the  coal- 
field. He  made  a  columnar  section  and  studied  the  physical  and 
chemical  character  of  the  coals  (15). 

The  following  year,  1838,  Benjamin  Silliman  made  a  brief  study 
of  the  area  in  the  employ  of  the  Maryland  Mining  Company  (16). 

During  the  year  1840,  the  State  Geologist,  J.  T.  Ducatel,  made  a 
study  of  the  physical  geography,  geology  and  agricultural  and  mineral 
resources  of  Western  Maryland  (23).  The  results  of  his  observations 
were  published  in  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Geologist  of  Mai-yland, 
1840  "  (23).  This  is  a  paper  of  46  pages,  30  pages  of  which  are,  how- 
ever, taken  up  with  a  study  of  the  area  now  included  in  Garrett 
county.  !Mr.  Ducatel's  report  was  the  first  published  document  of 
any  considerable  length  which  reviewed  with  reasonable  accuracy  the 


64 


THE  GEOLOGT  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


geology  of  the  entire  county.  It  includes  the  geology  and  physical 
geography  with  remarks  on  the  actual  agricultural  condition,  pros- 
pects and  resources,  as  well  as  information  concerning  the  mineral 
wealth  of  the  county  and  the  best  means  of  developing  it.  Two 
columnar  sections  of  the  coal-fields,  one  structure  section  along  the 
"  Cumberland  and  ^Xational  roads,"  and  a  topographical  map  of  Alle- 
gany and  "Washington  counties  on  the  scale  of  1:400,000  are  given. 

The  3'ear  1842  is  one  of  particular  interest  on  accoimt  of  Sir 
Charles  Lyell's  visit  to  the  county.  In  May  of  that  year  he  passed 
through  the  county  by  way  of  the  National  Road,  stopping  at  Cum- 
berland and  Frostburg.  In  the  vicinity  of  the  latter  place  a  number 
of  plants  and  marine  shells  were  obtained  from  the  coal  measures. 
Among  the  shells,  he  mentions  BeUerophon,  Euomphalus,  Nucula, 
Loxonema  and  Producta — seventeen  species  in  all.  Of  the  plants, 
Bunbury,  who  described  them,  gives  Danaeites,  Neuropteris,  Pecop- 
teris,  Lepidodendron,  Sigillaria,  Stigmaria,  Asterophyllites  and 
Calamites — twenty  species  altogether  (30). 

In  1844,  the  classic  paper  "  A  Report  to  the  Xavy  Department  of 
the  United  States  on  American  coals  applicable  to  steam  navigation 
and  other  purposes,"  by  Walter  R.  Johnson  was  published  (27). 
Coals  from  several  Maryland  mines  were  among  those  studied. 

During  the  next  few  years  little  original  investigation  was  carried 
on  in  the  county,  but  this  period  marks  the  time  of  much  of  the 
valuable  work  done  by  the  illustrious  brothers,  W.  B.  Rogers,  Direc- 
tor of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Virginia,  and  H.  D.  Rogers,  State 
Geologist  of  Pennsylvania,  who  published  many  reports  giving  valu- 
able information  concerning  the  geology  of  their  respective  states, 
much  of  which  information  was  extremely  helpful  in  interpreting  the 
geology  of  Allegany  county. 

In  1852  reports  were  published  by  the  Phoenix  Mining  and  Manu- 
facturing Company  which  included  a  '*  topography  of  the  mineral 
regions  "  by  Professor  Forrest  Sheppard  and  a  report  on  the  topog- 
raphy and  structure  of  the  coal-field  by  Professor  C.  U.  Shepard  (33). 

Two  years  later,  1854,  George  W.  Hughes,  President  and  Engineer 
of  the  Hampshire  Coal  and  Iron  Company,  published  a  report  dealing 
especially  with  the  lands  conti'oUed  by  his  company  (34). 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  VIII. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


65 


In  1855,  Robert  G.  Rankin  published  a  report  on  the  economic 
value  of  the  semi-bituminous  coal  of  the  Cumberland  basin  (36). 
This  is  an  excellent  paper  in  which  the  author  gives  a  description  of 
the  basin,  analyses,  use  and  origin  of  the  coal  and  the  facilities  for 
transportation. 

In  1S59  a  great  advance  was  made  in  the  historical  study  of  the 
rocks.  Professor  James  Hall,  State  Geologist  of  'Sew  York,  who 
was  so  exhaustively  studying  the  Paleozoic  fossils  of  his  own  state, 
made  also  from  time  to  time  large  collections  from  several  of  the  states 
to  the  west  and  south.  In  September,  1856,  he  visited  Cumberland, 
made  some  geological  examinations  and  studied  the  extensive  collec- 
tion of  ATr.  Andrews.  Later  Professor  Hall  purchased  Mr.  Andrews' 
collection  and  continued  his  studies  upon  it.  Three  years  after  his 
visit  volume  3  of  the  Paleontology  of  the  State  of  Xew  York  was 
published.  In  this  volume  sixty-three  species  are  described  from 
Cumberland  and  vicinity,  many  of  which  are  figured.  Several  of  the 
subsequent  paleontological  reports  published  under  the  direction  of 
Professor  Hall  also  contain  descriptions  and  figures  of  numerous 
species  from  the  same  locality. 

The  year  1860  marks  the  appearance  of  the  state  geological  map 
by  Philip  T.  Tyson,  published  in  his  official  report  as.  State  Agricul- 
tural Chemist  (40).  This  map,  which  is  on  the  scale  of  twelve  miles 
to  the  inch,  represents  the  first  serious  attempt  to  arrange  in  accurate 
detail  the  various  geological  formations  in  Allegany  county.  With 
the  map  there  are  three  structure  sections,  one  of  which  crosses  the 
county  from  west  to  east  near  the  Maryland-Pennsylvania  line. 

During  the  summer  of  1868,  Professor  James  T.  Hodge  of  Boston, 

studied  the  coal  basin  and  made  an  extensive  survey  of  the  coal 

projjerties  (47).    In  his  report,  published  the  following  year,  he  gives 

much  attention  to  property  lines,  but  also  discusses  the  coal  region 

as  a  whole,  including  the  drainage  of  the  basin,  access  to  the  coal-bed, 

system  of  mining,  area  covered  by  tlie  Big  Vein  and  product  of  Big- 

Yein  coal  to  the  acre.    To  the  property-owner  this  has  been  a  most 

valuable  work,  but  the  report  is  now  almost  wholly  inaccessible. 

In  1874,  Professor  James  Hall  published  his  paper  on  The 
5 


66 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Niagara  and  Lower  Helderberg  Groups;  their  relations  and  geo- 
graphical distribution  in  the  United  States"  (51).  In  this  paper 
brief  but  valuable  references  are  made  to  the  relations  of  the  groups 
as  they  occur  at  Cumberland. 

In  1878,  under  the  direction  of  the  United  States  Jfavv  Depart- 
ment, B.  F.  Sherwood,  Theodore  Zeller  and  Henry  L.  Snyder  made 
careful  experiments  on  various  coals,  including  the  Frostburg  coal 
(58).  Particular  attention  was  given  to  the  physical  structure  of  the 
coal,  to  its  action  while  burning,  to  its  heat-producing  power  and  to 
the  residual  ash,  clinker  and  soot. 

In  1878,  Professor  J.  J.  Stevenson  published  two  articles  in  the 
American  Journal  of  Science  on  the  geolc^'  of  portions  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, Maryland  and  West  Virginia.  In  one  article  particular  men- 
tion is  made  of  the  terraces  in  Garrett  and  Allegany  counties,  and  in 
this  article  the  causes  of  the  present  physiographic  features  are  dis- 
cussed (GO).  The  other  article  deals  with  the  Upper  Devonian 
rocks  (61). 

The  year  1882  was  one  of  particixlar  interest  in  the  development 
of  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  structural  geology  of  the  county. 
Among  the  important  publications  which  appeared  during  this  year 
was  a  paper  by  Howard  Grant  Jones  and  one  by  Professor  I.  C. 
White.  In  Mr.  Jones'  paper  a  section  west  of  Cumberland  was 
given  which  was  accompanied  by  a  discussion  of  the  correlation  of  the 
various  rocks  (72).  Professor  White  later  reviewed  the  work  and 
rectified  some  of  Mr.  Jones'  conclusions.  Professor  White's  paper 
is  the  first  publication  showing  conclusively  the  conformity  and 
proper  relations  of  the  rock  formations  as  found  in  the  western  part 
of  Allegany  county  (76). 

It  was  during  this  year  also  that  report  TT  of  the  Second  Geological 
Survey  of  Pennsylvania  was  published  (75).  This  report  is  by  Pro- 
fessor J.  J.  Stevenson  and  deals  with  the  geology  of  Bedford  and 
Fulton  counties,  which  lie  immediately  north  of  Allegany  county. 
In  this  report  frequent  reference  is  made  to  Allegany  county,  and 
much  of  the  general  discussion  concerning  the  Pennsylvania  counties 
is  directly  applicable  to  it. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


67 


In  tlie  Transactions  of  the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers, 
vol.  xiv,  1886,  R.  S.  Cook  gives  an  account  of  the  manufacture  of 
fire-brick  at  Mt.  Savage,  which  inchided  a  discussion  of  the  occur- 
rence and  composition  of  the  clay  and  a  description  of  the  methods  of 
manufacture  (90). 

During  the  years  1883-4-5  considerable  topographical  mapping  was 
done  in  "Western  Maryland  and  adjacent  portions  of  West  Virginia 
by  the  United  States  Geological  Survey.  The  topographic  party  in 
the  early  part  of  the  work  was  in  charge  of  Mr.  S.  H.  Bodfish.  Later, 
Mr.  Bodfish's  health  having  failed,  Mr.  AV.  T.  Griswold  took  charge 
of  the  party  and  remained  in  charge  during  the  following  two  field 
seasons  (86).  During  the  year  1886  much  of  this  work  was  examined, 
reviewed  and  prepared  for  publication  by  Mr.  Merrill  Hackett  (87). 
Of  the  sheets  surveyed  at  this  time  which  include  portions  of  Alle- 
gany county,  only  those  covering  the  Piedmont  and  the  Romney 
quadrangles  have  been  published. 

In  the  year  1897,  topographic  work  was  resumed  in  Allegany 
county  by  the  United  States  Geological  Survey  in  connection  with 
the  Maryland  Geological  Survey,  since  which  time  the  survey  of  the 
county  has  been  completed. 

In  volume  34  of  the  American  Journal  of  Science,  1887,  Professor 
J.  J.  Stevenson  discusses  the  lower  Carboniferous  rocks  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, Maryland  and  the  Virginias,  and  mentions  various  Allegany 
county  localities  (95). 

In  the  same  journal  and  in  the  same  year,  Professor  I.  C.  "White 
discusses  the  probable  causes  which  have  brought  about  the  deposition 
of  rounded  boulders  at  high  altitudes  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Alle- 
ghanies  and  makes  particular  mention  of  the  vicinity  of  Ciimberland 
(96). 

In  the  42d  Annual  Report  of  the  ^^ew  York  State  Museum,  1889, 
Professor  John  M.  Clarke  discusses  "  The  Hercynian  Question,"  in 
connection  with  which  he  gives  important  notes  on  some  of  the  for- 
mations in  the  region  about  Cumberland  (101). 

During  the  year  1891,  Bulletin  Xo.  65  of  the  United  States  Geo- 
logical Survey  was  published.    This  is  by  Professor  1.  C.  "White  on 


68 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


"  The  Stratigraphy  of  the  Bituminous  Coal  Field  of  Pennsylvania, 
Ohio  and  AVest  Vii-giuia  "  (113).  In  this  bulletin  reference  is  made 
to  the  Coal  Measures  of  Maryland,  and  the  map  which  accompanies 
the  bulletin  includes  the  Cumberland-Georges  Creek  district. 

Tt  wa?  in  May  of  this  year,  1891,  that  the  students  in  the  Geo- 
logical Department  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University  visited  Allegany 
county  under  the  direction  of  the  late  Professor  George  H.  AVilliams 
for  the  jDurpose  of  studying  Appalachian  geology.  The  results  of 
their  study  are  given  in  vohmie  xi,  number  94,  of  the  University 
Circulars  for  that  year  (114). 

In  1893,  in  the  Maryland  World's  Fair  Book,  entitled  "  [Maryland, 
its  Resources,  Industries  and  Institutions,"  a  general  summary  of 
the  geology  of  the  state  was  published  by  Professors  George  H.  Wil- 
liams and  AVilliam  B.  Clark  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  in 
which  the  geology  of  AVestern  Maryland  is  discussed  at  considerable 
length  (144).  AA^itli  this  publication  there  is  a  geological  map  of 
the  state  in  which  the  areal  distribution  of  the  various  formations 
and  the  structure  of  the  rocks  of  Allegany  county  are  represented  in 
much  greater  detail  and  accuracy  than  on  any  previoiis  map. 

In  1894,  Mr.  Howard  Shriver,  of  Cumberland,  published  a  short 
paper  containing  a  catalogue  of  fossils  found  in  the  vicinity  of  Cum- 
berland (150). 

In  the  Fourteenth  Annual  Rei^ort  of  the  United  States  Geological 
Sun'ey,  published  during  the  same  year,  1894,  Joseph  D.  AVeeks, 
under  the  title  of  "  The  Potomac  and  Roaring  Creek  Coal  Fields," 
describes  at  some  length  the  Cumberland-Georges  Creek  district,  and 
gives  a  columnar  section  of  the  same  (151). 

During  the  years  1894  and  1895,  H.  O.  Hofman  and  C.  D.  Demond 
describe,  in  the  Transactions  of  the  American  Institute  of  Alining 
Engineers,  extensive  experiments  which  were  carried  on  by  them  for 
the  purpose  of  determining  the  refractiveness  of  fire-clays  (148). 
A'arious  experiments  were  made  with  the  Mt.  Savage  fire-clay,  and  in 
the  paper  a  number  of  analyses  are  given. 

In  1896,  the  Piedmont  Folio,  Xo.  28  of  the  Geologic  Atlas  of  the 
United  States,  was  published  by  the  United  States  Geological  Survey 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


69 


(159).  The  geological  work  was  done  by  Messrs.  X.  H.  Darton  and 
Joseph  Taff  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Bailey  Willis,  and  was  begun 
in  the  autumn  of  1894.  The  quadrangle  covered  by  this  folio  in- 
cludes a  small  area  in  the  southwestern  part  of  Allegany  county,  and 
the  geology  of  the  entire  quadrangle  is  very  similar  to  that  of  this 
county.  Several  of  the  formational  names  used  in  the  folio  have 
been  adopted  by  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey,  and  much  of  the 
discussion  concerning  the  various  geological  features  is  directly 
applicable  to  Allegany  county. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  year  1S96,  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey 
was  organized,  and  at  the  opening  of  the  field  season  began  work  in 
various  parts  of  the  state.  Since  then  three  volumes  have  been  pub- 
lished by  the  survey  under  the  direction  of  Professor  William  B. 
Clark,  State  Geologist.  In  volume  I  a  general  preliminary  discussion 
of  the  various  geological  features  of  the  state  is  given,  including 
much  new  and  valuable  information  concerning  the  stratigraphic, 
physiographic,  economic  and  structural  features  of  Allegany  county. 

Volume  II  includes  a  description  of  the  various  building  stones  and 
of  the  geologic  maps  of  the  state,  with  particular  mention  of  Alle- 
gany county. 

Volume  III  treats  especially  of  the  highways  of  the  state,  their 
present  conditions  and  the  material  at  hand  in  each  of  the  counties  for 
road-construction, 

BIBLIOGEAPHY. 

CONTAIXIXG  EEFERE>XES  TO  THE  GEOLOGY  A:N'D  ECOXOMIC  RESOUKCES  OF 

ALLEGAXY  COUXTY. 

1824. 

1.  Shkiver,  Jaiies.  An  Account  of  the  Examination  and  Surveys, 
with  Remarks  and  Documents  relative  to  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio 
and  Lake  Erie  Canals.    Baltimore,  1824.    116  pp.,  map. 

1832. 

2.  PojiEROi*,  Sam.  "Whyllys.  Remarks  on  the  Coal  Region  be- 
tween Cumberland  and  Pittsburg,  and  on  the  TopogTaphy,  Scenery, 


70 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


etc.,  of  that  portion  of  the  Alleghany  Mts.  [Letter  written  Xov., 
1831.] 

Aiuer.  Jour.  Sci.,  vol.  x.\i,  1S32,  pp.  342-347. 

1834. 

3.  Aiken,  William  E.  A.  Some  of  the  notices  of  the  Geology  of 
the  Country  between  Baltimore  and  the  Ohio  River,  with  a  section 
illustrating  the  superposition  of  the  rocks. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  vol.  xxvi,  1834,  pp.  219-232,  plate. 

4.  Ducatel,  J.  T.,  and  Alexander,  J.  H.  Report  on  the  Pro- 
jected Survey  of  the  State  of  Maryland,  pursuant  to  a  resolution  of 
the  General  Assembly.    8vo.    39  pp.    Annapolis,  1834.  Map. 

Md.  House  of  Delegates,  Dec.  Sess.,  1833  (Annapolis,  1834). 
Another  edition,  Annapolis,  1834,  8vo.,  58  pp.  and  map. 
Another  edition,  Annapolis,  1834,  8vo.,  43  pp.  and  folded  table. 

5.  Merceb,  Chas.  Fenton.  Report  of  the  Hon.  Charles  Fenton 
Mercer  [on  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal]. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  23rd  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  Doc.  414.  Washington,  1834, 
378  pp. 

1836. 

6.  Anon.  Charter,  etc.,  of  the  Georges  Creek  Coal  and  Iron 
Company,  containing  a  detailed  account  of  the  Geology,  <fcc.,  of  this 
locality.    Baltimore,  1836. 

7.  Booth,  Jas.  C.  Report  of  the  Examination  and  Survey  of  the 
Coal  Lands,  etc.,  belonging  to  the  Boston  Purchase,  near  Cumber- 
land, in  the  State  of  Maryland.    Xew  York,  D.  Faushaw,  1836. 

8.  Feathekstonhaugh,  G.  Report  of  a  Geological  Recon- 
naissance made  in  1835  from  the  seat  of  government  by  way  of  Green 
Bay  and  the  Wisconsin  Territory  on  the  Coteau  du  Prairie,  an  ele- 
vated ridge  dividing  the  Missouri  from  the  St.  Peters  River.  169  pp. 
4  plates.    Washington.  1836. 

9.  Hughes,  George  W.  Report  of  an  Examination  of  the  Coal 
Measures,  inchidiug  the  Iron-ore  deposits,  belonging  to  the  Mary- 
land Mining  Company,  in  Allegany  County,  &c.,  &c.  1836. 

1837. 

10.  Ducatel,  J.  T.,  and  Alexander,  J.  H.  Report  on  the  new 
Map  of  Maryland,  1836.  8vo.  104  pp.  and  5  maps.  [Annapoli>, 
1837.] 

Md.  House  of  Delegates,  Sess.  Dec,  1836. 
Another  edition,  117  pp. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


71 


11.  Eldredge,  X.  T.  Report  of  the  Special  Agent  sent  to  exam- 
ine the  Mines  of  the  Company.   Sm.  8vo.    13  pp.   ISTew  York,  1837. 

12.  Tyson,  Philip  T.  A  description  of  the  Frostburg  Coal  For- 
mation of  Allegany  County,  Maryland,  with  an  account  of  its  geo- 
logical position. 

Trans.  Md.  Acad.  Sci.  and  Lit.,  1S37,  pp.  92-98,  plate. 

1838. 

13.  Anon.  Report  upon  the  Surveys  for  the  Extension  of  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad  from  its  present  termination  near  Har- 
per's Ferry,  on  the  Potomac,  to  AYheeling  and  Pittsburg  on  the  Ohio 
river.    8vo.    138  pp. 

14.  Anon.  Charter  of  the  Carroll  White  Sulphur  Spring  Com- 
pany, in  Allegany  County,  Maryland,  Avith  a  scientific  Report  upon 
the  situation,  properties,  composition,  etc.,  of  the  springs.  1838. 

15.  Douglas,  D.  B.  Report  on  the  Coal  and  Iron  Formation  of 
Frostburg  and  Upper  Potomac  in  the  States  of  Maryland  and  Vir- 
ginia.   Brooklyn  (  ?),  1838,  with  map. 

16.  SiLLiMAN,  B.  Extracts  from  a  report  made  to  the  Maryland 
Mining  Company,  1838. 

1839. 

17.  Erickson,  Captain.  Report  of  Captain  Erickson,  Civil  Engi- 
neer, London,  showing  the  cost  of  the  coal  of  the  Maryland  3Iining 
Company  per  ton,  delivered  at  the  several  cities  of  Washington, 
Baltimore,  Philadelphia  and  ISTew  York.  1839. 

18.  Sheppard,  F.  Report  to  the  Potomac  and  Allegany  Coal  and 
Iron  Manufacturing  Company.  1839. 

19.  SiLLniAN,  B.  Extract  from  a  report  made  to  the  Maryland 
and  Xew  York  Coal  and  Iron  Company.  1839. 

20.  Weld,  Henry  Thoaias.  A  Report  made  by  Henry  Thomas 
Weld,  Esq.,  of  the  Maryland  and  New  York  Iron  and  Coal  Company's 
Land,  &c. 

1810. 

21.  Alexander,  J.  H.  Report  on  the  Manufacture  of  Iron, 
addressed  to  the  Governor  of  Maryland  by  J.  H.  Alexander.  Printed 
by  order  of  the  Senate.    Annapolis,  1810.    8vo.    369  pp.,  3  plates. 

22.  Anon.  Charters  of  the  Union  Potomac  Company  and  the 
Union  Company,  with  a  description  of  their  Coal  and  Iron  Mines,  &c. 
1840. 


72 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


1841. 

23.  ]JucATEL,  J.  T.  Annual  Keport  of  the  Geologist  of  Maryland, 
1840.    Svo.    4G  pp.    [Annapolis,  1840.]    Map  and  sections. 

Another  edition,  8vo.,  59  pp.  and  3  plates;  also  Md.  Hoiise  of  Delegates, 
Dee.  Sess.,  1840,  n.  d.,  Svo.,  43  pp.,  3  plates. 

24.  Rogers,  Henry  D.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  the  Appa- 
lachian Coal  Strata — Bituminous  and  Anthracitic. 

Trans.  Assoc.  Amer.  Geol.  and  Xat.,  1842,  pp.  433-474. 

25.  KoGERS,  "W.  B.  and  H.  D.  On  the  Physical  Structure  of  the 
Appalachian  Chain  as  Exemplifying  the  Law>  which  have  Regulated 
the  Elevation  of  Great  Mountain  Chains. 

Repts.  Amer.  Assoc.  Geol.  and  Nat.,  1S42,  pp.  4T4-.»31. 
(Absts.)  British  Assoc.  Repts.,  1842,  Pt.  II,  pp.  40-42. 
Proc.  Assoc.  Amer.  Geol.  and  Xat.,  1840-42,  pp.  70-71. 
Amer.  Jour.  Sei.,  vol.  xliii,  1842,  pp.  177-178;  vol.  -xliv,  1843,  pp.  359-3G2. 

1843. 

20.  SiLLiM.\N,  Benj.  Lecture  VII.  Coal,  its  Origin  and  Organic 
Remains.    Pittsburg,  1848. 

1844. 

27.  Johnson,  W.  R.  A  Report  to  the  Xavy  Department  of  the 
United  States  on  American  Coals  applicable  to  steam  navigation  and 
to  other  purposes. 

Exec.  Doc.  House,  2Sth  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  vi,  1S44,  No.  276,  pp.  1-607. 
Sen.  Doc.  Xo.  386,  28th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  vi,  June  6,  1844,  607  pp. 

1845. 

28.  Lonsdale,  V^"^. 

Appendix  Quart.  Jour.  Geol.  Soc.  London,  vol.  i,  1S45,  pp.  427-429.  (See 
Lyell,  Chas.) 

29.  Lyell,  Chas.  Travels  in  Xorth  America,  with  Geological 
Observations  on  the  United  States,  Canada  and  Xova  Scotia.  2  vols. 
12  mo.    New  York,  1845. 

Another  edition.     2  vols.     12mo.     London,  1843. 

Second  English  edition.     London,  1855. 

German  edition,  translated  by  E.  T.  Wolft,  Halle,  1846. 

1846. 

30.  BuNBURv,  C.  J.  F.  On  some  remarkable  Fossil  Ferns  from 
Frostburg,  Md.,  collected  by  Mr.  Lyell.    (Read  Dec.  3,  1845.) 

Quart.  Jour.  (ieol.  Soc,  London,  vol.  ii,  1S40,  pp.  S2-91,  2  plates. 
(Abst.)  .\nier.  Jour.  Sci.,  2nd  ser.,  vol.  ii,  1846,  pp.  427-428. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


73 


1848. 

31.  Taylor,  R.  C.  Statistics  of  Coal.  The  geographical  and 
geological  distribution  of  Mineral  Combustibles  or  Fossil  Fuel.  Svo. 
745  pp.    Philadelphia,  1848. 

1850. 

32.  Johnson,  AV.  R.  The  Coal  Trade  of  British  America  with 
Researches  on  the  Character  and  Practical  Values  of  American  and 
Foreign  Coals.    1850.    Svo.    179  pp. 

1852. 

33.  Anon.  Documents  relating  to  the  Phoenix  Mining  and  Manu- 
facturing Company's  Cumberland  Coal  and  Iron.  Comprising  ex- 
tracts from  various  official  reports  made  under  direction  of  Govern- 
ment officers  and  othei's.    i^ew  York,  1852.    52  pp.  and  map. 

1854. 

34.  HiGGiNS,  James.  The  fourth  Annual  Report  of  James  Hig- 
gins,  M.  D.,  State  Agricultural  Chemist,  to  the  House  of  Delegates 
of  the  State  of  Maryland.    8vo:    92  pp.    Baltimore,  1854. 

Also  ^Id.  House  of  Delegates,  Jan.  Sess.,  1853. 

35.  Hughes,  Geo.  W.  Report  of  Coal.  Geo.  "W.  Hughes,  Presi- 
dent and  Engineer  of  the  Hampshire  Coal  and  Iron  Company  of 
Virginia  and  Maryland.    35  pp.  with  map.    !Xew  York,  1854. 

1855. 

36.  Rankin,  Robert  G.  A  Report  on  the  economic  value  of  the 
semi-bituminous  coal  of  the  Cumberland  coal  basin.  Xew  York, 
1855.    71  pp.  and  2  plates. 

1856. 

37.  Lesley,  J.  P.  Manual  of  Coal  and  its  Topography,  or 
Geology  of  the  Appalachian  Region  of  the  United  States  of  America. 
Philadelphia,  Lippincott,  1856. 

38.  Phillips,  G.  Jenkins.  Prospectus  of  the  Balcarras  Coal  and 
Iron  Company,  Allegany  county,  Maryland.  KeAV  York,  1856. 
15  pp.  with  plate. 

1858. 

39.  Rogers,  H.  D.  The  Geology  of  Pennsyh-ania.  2  vols.  (vol.  ii 
in  two  parts)  and  maps.    4to.    Philadelphia,  1858. 


74 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


1860. 

40.  Tyson,  P.  T.  First  Keport  of  Philip  T.  Tyson,  State  Agricul- 
tural Chemist,  to  the  House  of  Delegates  of  Marvland,  January, 
1860.    8to.    145  pp.    Annapolis,  1860.  Maps. 

Md.  Sen.  Doc.  [E]. 
Md.  House  Uoc.  [C]. 

1861. 

41.  Hall,  James.  Paleontology.  Vol.  iii.  Part  I.  Containing 
Descriptions  and  Figures  of  the  Organic  Remains  of  the  Lower  Hel- 
derberg  Group  and  the  Oriskany  Sandstone.  1855-1859.  Geolog- 
ical Survey  of  New  York,  Albany,  1861. 

1862. 

42.  Tyson,  Philip  T.  Second  Report  of  Philip  T.  Tyson,  State 
Agricultural  Chemist,  to  the  House  of  Delegates  of  Maryland,  Jan., 
1862.    8vo.    92  pp.    Annapolis,  1862. 

:Mc1.  Sen.  Doc.  [F]. 

1866. 

43.  Daddow,  S.  H.,  and  Bannon,  Benj.  Coal,  Iron  and  Oil;  or 
the  Practical  American  Miner.  8vo.  808  pp.  Maps,  sections, 
illustrations.    B.  Bannon,  Pottsville,  Pa.,  1866. 

1867. 

44.  Anon.  Reports  on  the  Iron  Interests  of  the  Cumberland  Coal 
and  Iron  Company.    Xew  York,  1867.    14  pp. 

45.  Hall,  James.  Paleontology,  Vol.  iv,  part  I.  Containing 
Descriptions  and  Figures  of  the  Fossil  Brachiopoda  of  the  Upper 
Helderberg,  Hamilton  and  Chemimg  Groups,  1862-1866.  Geological 
Survey  of  Xew  York,  Albany,  1867.    4to.    427  pp.,  63  plates. 

1869. 

46.  Anon.    Cumberland  Bituminous  Coal. 

Eng.  and  ^Nlin.  Jour.,  vol.  viii,  1S69,  p.  153. 

47.  Hodge,  Jas.  T.  Report  of  the  Coal  Properties  of  the  Cum- 
berland Coal  ]jasin  in  Maryland,  from  surveys  and  examinations 
made  during  the  summer  of  1868.    Xew  York,  1869.    65  pp. 

1871. 

48.  Tyson,  P.  T.    Section  of  Cumberland  Coal  Basin. 

Proc.  Anier.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  xi,  1S71.  pp.  9-13. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


75 


1872. 

49.  Stephens,  Thomas.    Mining  Summary.  Maryland. 

Eng-.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xiv,  1872,  p.  411. 

1873. 

50.  MacFarlane,  James.  The  Coal  Eegions  of  America,  tlieir 
Topography,  Geology  and  Development.    NeAv  York,  1873. 

1874. 

51.  Hall,  Jas.  The  Niagara  and  Lower  Helderberg  Groups; 
their  relations  and  geogi'aphical  distribution  in  the  United  States. 

Proe.  Amer.  Assoc.  Adv.  Sci.,  vol.  xxiii,  1874,  pp.  321-335. 
27th  Kept.  N.  Y.  State  Museum,  Albany,  1874,  pp.  117-131. 

52.  Merrill,  Wm.  E.  Extension  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio 
Canal  to  the  Ohio  River.  Including  Reports  by  J.  S.  Sedgwick, 
Totten,  Poussin,  Lesley  and  Latrobe. 

House  Doc.  No.  208,  43rd  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  59  pp. 

1875. 

53.  Anon.    The  Maryland  Coal  Company's  Cumberland  Coal. 

Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xix,  1875,  p.  1. 

1876. 

54.  Fontaine,  T\^m.  M.  The  Conglomerate  Series  of  West  Vir- 
ginia. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  3rd  ser.,  vol.  xi,  1S76,  pp.  276-284,  374-384. 

1877. 

55.  Anon.  Assessed  Valuation  of  Coal  and  ]\[iniug  Corporations 
in  Allegany  County,  Maryland. 

Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xxiii,  1877,  p.  242. 

56.  ScHOOT,  Chas.  a.  Tables,  Distributions  and  A''ariations  of  the 
Atmospheric  Temperature  in  the  United  States. 

Smithsonian  Contrib.  Knowledge,  vol.  xxi,  1876,  360  pp.,  9  diagrams,  2 
plates,  3  charts. 

1878. 

57.  Cook,  George  H.  Report  on  the  Clay  Deposits  of  "Wood- 
bridge,  South  Amboy,  and  other  places  in  New  Jersey,  etc.  8vo. 
Geol.  Survey  of  New  Jersey,  1878.    Pp.  300,  341,  351. 

58.  Sherwood,  B.  F.,  Zeller,  Theo.,  Snyder,  Henry  L.  Report 
on  the  two  kinds  of  Coal  submitted  by  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio 
Railroad  agency.    Washington,  1878.    30  pp. 


76 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COCXTY 


59.  I^wDERMiLK,  Will  H.  History  of  Ciimberland  [etc.],  with 
maps  and  illustrations,  by  Will  H.  Lowdermilk.  8vo.  Washington, 
D.  C,  1878. 

60.  Stevexsox,  Johx  J.  On  the  Surface  Geologj'  of  Southwest 
Pennsylvania,  and  adjoining  portions  of  Maryland  and  West  Vir- 
ginia. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Srd  ser.,  vol.  xv,  1S78,  pp.  245-250. 

61.    The  Upper  Devonian  Kocks  of  Southwest  Pennsyl- 
vania. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  Srd  ser.,  vol.  xv,  1S78,  pp.  423-l.'~.0. 

1879. 

62.  Axox.    Keview  of  the  Coal  Trade  of  1878. 

Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xxvii,  1S79,  pp.  1-10. 

63.  Caiit,  Petek.  Second  Annual  Keport  of  Peter  Cain,  Inspec- 
tor of  Mines.    Annapolis,  1S7S.    Svo.    16  pp. 

64.  Frazer,  Persifor,  Jr.  Classification  of  Coals.  (Read  ^lay 
1877.) 

Trans.  Amer.  Inst.  Min.  Eng.,  vol.  vi,  1879,  pp.  430-4.31. 

65.  McCreath,  Andrew  A.  Second  Eeport  of  Progress  in  the 
Laboratory  of  the  Survey  at  Harrisburg. 

Rept.  2nd  Geol.  Survey,  Pa.     MM,  Harrisburg,  1879. 

1880. 

66.  Browx,  Thojias.    The  Maryland  Union  Coal  Company. 

Eng.  and  ^lin.  Jour.,  vol.  xxx,  ISSO,  p.  3. 

67.  Daxa,  J.  D.    Manual  of  Geology.    3rd  edit. 

68.  Fontaixe,  AVm.  M.,  and  White,  I.  C.  The  Permian  or  Upper 
Carboniferous  Flora  of  West  Virginia  and  S.  W.  Pennsylvania. 

Kept.  2nd  Geol.  Survey  Pa.    PP,  Harrisburg,  ISSO,  143  pp.  and  3S  plates. 

69.  PaoRDAX,  O.  Second  Annual  Report  of  Owen  Eiordan,  In- 
spector of  Mines  for  Allegany  and  Garrett  Counties.  For  year  end- 
ing Dec,  1879.    8vo.    31  pp. 

Md.  House  and  Sen.  Doc,  ISSO  [J]. 

70.  Stevexsox,  J.  J.  Surface  Geology  of  Southwest  Pennsylvania 
and  adjacent  portions  of  West  Virginia  and  Maryland.  (Read  April, 
1879). 

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc.,  vol.  xviii,  1S79,  pp.  289-316. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEV 


77 


1881. 

71.  Brown,  T.  Second  Annual  Eeport  of  T.  Brown,  Inspector 
of  Mines  for  Allegany  and  Garrett  counties.    8vo.    40  pp. 

Md.  House  and  Senate  Doc,  18S1  [F]. 

1882. 

72.  Jones,  Howard  Grant.  ISotes  on  tlie  Cumberland  or  Poto- 
mac Coal  Basin.    (Bead  Sept.  11,  1880.) 

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  xix,  1882,  pp.  11-110. 

73.  Lesley,  J.  P.  (The  Cumberland  or  Potomac  Coal  Basin.) 
Eemarks  on  the  paper  by  Mr.  Jones. 

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  Phila.,  vol.  xix,  1SS2,  p.  110. 

71.  ScHARF,  J.  T.  History  of  Western  Maryland,  being  a  history 
of  Frederick,  Montgomery,  Carroll,  Washington,  Allegany  and 
Garrett  Counties  from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  day.  2  vols. 
4to.    Philadelphia,  1882. 

75.  Stevenson,  J.  J.  The  Geology  of  Bedford  and  Fulton  Coun- 
ties, Pennsylvania. 

2nd  Geol.  Survey  Pa.,  Eept.  T2.    Harrisburg,  1SS2,  8va.,  382  pp.,  two  maps. 

76.  White,  I.  C.  is^otes  on  the  Geology  of  West  Virginia.  A 
Rectification  of  the  Sections  made  by  Mr. "Howard  Grant  Jones.  M.  S. 
(Bead  June  17,  1881.) 

Proc.  Amer.  Phil.  Soc,  vol.  xix,  1882,  pp.  438-446. 

1883. 

77.  Smock,  J.  C.    The  Useful  Minerals  of  the  United  States. 

Mineral  Eesources  U.  S.     Washington,  1883,  pp.  664,  690-693. 

78.  Wilbur,  F.  A.  Clay. 

Mineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  18S2.     Washington,  18S.!,  pp.  465-4T5. 

1884. 

79.  Brown,  T.  Eeport  of  T.  Brown,  Inspector  of  Mines  for 
Allegany  and  Garrett  Counties.    Annapolis,  1884.    64  pp. 

Md.  House  and  Senate  Doc,  1884  [D]. 

80.  Eogers,  William  Barton.  A  Eeprint  of  Annual  Eeports 
and  other  papers,  on  the  Geology  of  the  Virginias.  ~ 

Sm.  8vo.     Appleton,  1884. 

81.  Smock,  J.  G.  Geologico-geogTaphical  Distribution  of  the  Iron 
Ores  of  the  Eastern  United  States. 

Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xxxvii,  Xew  York,  1884,  pp.  217-218,  230-232. 
Trans.  Inst.  INIin.  Eng.,  vol.  xii,  1884,  pp.  130-144. 


78 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


82.  SwAXK,  JA>n:s  M.  History  of  the  !^^anufact^l^e  of  Iron  in  all 
Ages.    Philadelphia,  1884. 

83.  "Weeks.  Joseph  I).  Report  on  the  Manufacture  of  Coke. 
Tenth  Census,  vol.  x.    Washington,  1884. 

1885. 

84.  Anon.    General  !^^^n^ng  Xews — Maryland. 
Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  xl,  18S5,  p.  294. 

85.  Armstrong,  S.  C.  (Compiler).  Coal. 

:Mineral  Besources  U.  S.,  1883-84.     Washington,  1885. 

86.  Gannett,  Henry.  Administrative  Reports.  Topographic 
work  in  Maryland. 

5th  Ann.  Report.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey-,  188.3-1884.    Washington,  1885,  pp.  7-8. 

87.    Administrative    Reports.    Topographic    work  in 

Maryland. 

6th  Ann.  Eeport  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1SS4-1885.     Washington,  1885,  p.  8. 

88.  Swain,  Geo.  F.  Report  on  the  water  power  of  the  ^Middle 
Atlantic  Watershed. 

Tenth  Census,  vol.  xvi.     Washington,  1SS5,  pp.  51.3-CCO. 

1886. 

89.  AsHBCRNEK,  Chas.  A.  Coal. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1885.     Washington,  1886,  pp.  3.3-34. 

90.  Cook,  R.  S.  The  Manufacture  of  Fire-brick  at  Mount  Savage, 
Maryland. 

Trans.  Amer.  Inst.  Min.  Eng.,  vol.  xiv,  1SS6,  pp.  698-706. 

91.  Lesley,  J.  P.  Annual  Report  of  the  Geological  Survey  of 
Pennsylvania  for  1885.    8vo.    Harrisburg,  1886.    Pp.  227-249. 

92.  Peale,  a.  C.  Lists  and  analvses  of  the  mineral  Springs  of 
the  U.  S. 

Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  No.  32,  1886,  pp.  51-53. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  49th  Cong.,  2ncl  Sess.,  vol.  viii.  No.  164. 

93.  PuMPELLY,  R.  (Editor).  Klines  and  Metallurgical  Establish- 
ments East  of  the  100th  ^leridian. 

Tenth  Census,  vol.  xv.  Mining  Industries  of  the  U.  S.  Washington.  1886, 
pp.  3-36. 

1887. 

94.  AsHBURNER,  Chas.  A.  Coal. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1886.     Washington,  1887,  pp.  224-279. 


MARYLA>'D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


79 


95.  Stevexsox,  Johx  J.  Xotes  on  tlie  Lower  Carboniferous 
gronps  along  the  easterly  side  of  the  Appalachian  area  in  Pennsyl- 
vania and  the  Virginias. 

Amer.  Jour.  Sci.,  3rd  ser.,  vol.  xxxiv,  1887,  pp.  37-44. 

96.  White,  I.  C.  Rounded  Bonlders  at  High  Altitudes  along 
some  Appalachian  Rivers. 

Araer.  Jour.  Sci.,  3rd  ser.,  vol.  xxxiv,  1SS7,  pp.  374-381. 

1888. 

97.  AsHBUHXEE,  Chas.  A.  Coal. 

Mineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  1887.  Washington,  1888,  pp.  169,  171,  177,  2C3- 
270,  337. 

98.  Day,  D.  T.    Useful  l^Iinerals  of  the  United  States. 

:Mineral  Resources  IT.  S.,  1887.     Washington,  1888,  pp.  739-742. 

99.  Hall,  James,  and  Claeke,  J.  M.  Paleontology,  vol.  vii. 
Texts  and  Plates  containing  descriptions  of  the  Trilobites  and  other 
Crustacea  of  the  Oriskany,  Upper  Helderberg,  Hamilton,  Portage, 
Chemung  and  Catskill  Groups.  Geological  Survey  of  iTew  York, 
Albany,  1888. 

100.  Swax-k,  Jas.  M.  The  Iron  and  Steel  Industries  of  the 
United  States  in  1887  and  1888. 

iNIineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  1887.     Washington,  1888. 

1889. 

101.  Clarke,  J.  M.    The  Hercynian  Question. 

42nd  Ann.  Eept.  X.  Y.  State  Museum,  pp.  408-437.     Albany,  1889. 

102.  Merrill,  G.  P.  The  Collection  of  Building  and  Ornamental 
Stones  in  the  U.  S.  I^ational  ^luseum. 

Smithsonian  Eept.,  1886,  pt.  II,  1889. 

103.  Miller,  S.  A.  ^s^orth  American  Geology  and  Paleontology 
for  the  use  of  Amateurs,  Students  and  Scientists.  8vo.  664  pp. 
Cincinnati,  1890. 

10-i.  ScHucHERT,   Chas.    A  List  of  Fossils  Occurring  in  the 
Oriskany  Sandstone  of  Maryland,  Xew  York  and  Ontario. 
8th  Ann.  Eept.  X.  Y.  State  Geol.    Albany,  1899,  pp.  50-54. 
42nd  Ann.  Eept.  X.  Y.  State  Museum.     Albany,  1889,  pp.  396-400. 

105.  Ward,  I>ester  F.  The  Geographical  Distribution  of  Fossil 
Plants. 

8th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1886-87.  Washington,  1889,  part  II, 
pp.  663-960,  maps. 


80 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


1890. 

106.  AsHBUEXEB,  Chas.  A.  Coal. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1S8S.     Washington,  1890. 

107.  MacFaklaxe,  J.  E.  An  American  Geological  Eaihvay 
Guide.    2nd  edit.    Svo.    426  pp.    Appleton,  1890. 

108.  SciiAEF,  J.  T.  Report  of  the  Commissioner  of  Land  Olfice. 
Report  from  Jan.  1st,  1888,  to  Jan.  1st,  1890,  ....  with  a  series  of 
carefully  prepared  articles  on  Maryland's  resources.  .  .  .  1890. 

Md.  House  of  Delegates,  Dec.  Sess.,  1890,  Svo.,  148  pp. 

1891. 

109.  Jones,  John  H.  (Spec.  Agt.).  Census  Bulletins  of  the  Coal 
Industry  in  1889. 

Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  vol.  li,  1S91,  p.  238. 

110.  Keyes,  Charles  Eollin.    Paleozoic  fossils  of  Maryland. 
Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Cir.  No.  94,  vol.  xi,  1S91,  pp.  28-29. 

111.  KiNNECUT,  L.  P.,  and  Eogees,  J.  F.  Fire-clay  from  Mount 
Savage,  Allegany  Co.,  Md. 

Jour.  Anal,  and  Appl.  Chem.,  vol.  v,  1S91,  p.  542. 

112.  AV ATKINS,  J.  Elfeeth.  The  Development  of  the  American 
Eail  and  Track  as  illustrated  by  the  Collection  in  the  U.  S.  National 
Museum. 

Eeport  of  the  U.  S.  Xat.  Mus.  for  1889,  p.  671.     Washington,  1891. 

113.  White,  Israel  C.  Stratigraphy  of  the  Bituminous  Coal 
Field  of  Pennsylvania,  Ohio  and  West  Virginia. 

Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  Xo.  65,  1891. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  olst  Cong.,  2nd  Sess.,  vol.  xiii,  No.  136. 

114.  Williams,  G.  H.  The  Geological  Excursions  by  University 
students  across  the  Appalachians  in  May,  1891. 

Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Cir.  Xo.  94,  vol.  xi,  1891,  pp.  25-27. 

115.  Williams,  H.  S.  Correlation  Papers — Devonian  and  Car- 
boniferous. 

BxUl.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  Xo.  SO,  1891. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  52nd  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  xix,  Xo.  24. 

1892. 

116.  Axon.    Fire-Brick  Industry. 

The  Iron  Belt,  Koanoke.  Va.,  vol.  iii.  Nov.  1892,  pp.  4-5. 


MARYLA^"D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


81 


117.  Babb,  Cyrus  C.    The  Hydrography  of  the  Potomac  Basin. 

Amer.  Soc.  Civ.  Eng.,  vol.  xxvii,  1892,  pp.  21-33. 

lis.  Clark,  Wji.  B.    The  Surface  Configuration  of  Maryland. 
^Monthly  Eept.  :Md.  State  Weather  Service,  vol.  ii,  1S92,  pp.  83-89. 

119.  Joxxs,  J.  H.  Coal. 

House  !Misc.  Doc,  o2nd  Cong'.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  i,  pt.  I,  Xo.  340. 
Eleventh  Census,  Kept,  on  Mineral  Industries,  1892,  pp.  345-422. 

120.  Lesley,  J.  P.  A  Summary  description,  of  the  Geology  of 
Pennsylvania.    3  vols.    Harrisbiirg,  1892. 

121.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

^klineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  1SS9-90.     Washington,  1892. 

122.  Peale,  a.  C.    Mineral  Waters. 
Mineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  1889-90.    Washington,  1892. 

123.  ScHARF,  J.  Thomas.  The  Xatural  Eesources  and  advantages 
of  Maryland,  being  a  complete  description  of  all  of  the  counties  of  the 
State  and  City  of  Baltimore.    Annapolis,  1892. 

121-.  "Williams,  G.  H.  The  University  and  its  Xatural  Environ- 
ment. 

Johns  Hopkins  Univ.  Cir.  Xo.  90,  vol.  xi,  1S92,  pp.  54-56. 

1893. 

125.  Clark,  Wm.  Bullock.  The  Available  Water  Power  of 
Maryland. 

Monthh-  Eept.  :Md.  State  Weather  Service,  vol.  iii,  1893,  pp.  7-9. 

126.    Physical  Features  [of  Maryland]. 

Maryland,  its  Eesources,  Industries  and  Institutions.  Pp.  11-54.  Balti- 
more, 1893. 

127.    The  Leading  Features  of  Maryland  Climate. 

Monthly  Eept.  :Md.  State  Weather  Service,  vol.  iii,  1893,  pp.  1-G. 

128.  Gannett,  Henry.  The  Average  Elevation  of  the  United 
States.  , 

13th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survej-,  1891-2,  pt.  II.  Washington,  1893, 
pp.  283-289. 

129.  Hill,  R.  T.    Clay  Materials  of  the  United  States. 

Mineral  Eesources  U.  S.,  1891.     Washington,  1893. 

130.  Howard,  A.  B.  First  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of 
Industrial  Statistics  of  Maryland.    Annapolis,  1893. 

6 


82 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


131.  Keysee,  W.  Iron. 

Maryland,  its  Resources,  Industries  and  Institutions,  pp.  100-112.  Balti- 
more, 1893. 

132.  Paekee,  E.  ^y.  Coal. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1891.     Washington,  1893. 

133.    Coal. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1892.     Washington,  1893. 

134.  Peale,  a.  C.    Mineral  Waters. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1891.     Washington,  1893. 

135.    Mineral  "Waters. 

Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1892.     Washington,  1893. 

136.  ScHTM.vxN-,  C.  H.    The  ^Manufacture  of  Bricks. 

Cassier's  Magazine,  vol.  iv,  1893,  pp.  403-4". 

137.  Spencer,  S.  B.    Natural  and  Artificial  Cements. 
Mineral  Resources  U.  S.,  1891.     Wa.shington,  1S93. 

138.  Stevenson,  J.  J.    Origin  of  Pennsylvania  Anthracite. 

Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Amer.,  vol.  v,  1893,  pp.  39-70,  pi.  II. 

139.  "Whitney,  Milton.    The  Soils  of  Maryland. 

Md.  Agri.  Exper.  Sta.,  Bull.  No.  21.     College  Park,  1893,  58  pp.,  map. 

1-iO.    Agriculture  and  Live  Stock  [of  Maryland]. 

Marjland,  its  Resources,  Industries  and  Institutions.  Baltimore,  1893, 
pp.  152-217. 

141.    Soils  of  Maryland. 

Monthlj-  Rept.  Md.  State  Weather  Service,  vol.  iii,  1893,  pp.  15-22,  map. 

142.  "\\^illiams,  G.  H.  [The  Appalachian  Kegion  and  the  Itin- 
erary from  "Washington,  D.  C,  to  Cumberland,  Maryland.] 

Geological  Guidebook  of  the  Rockj'  Mt.  Excursion,  Comte  Rendu  de  la 
5me  Ses.  Congres  Geolog.  Internat.     Washington,  1893,  pp.  268-279. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  53rd  Cong.,  2nd  Sess.,  vol.  xiii,  Xo.  107,  pp.  268-279. 

143.    Mines  and  Minerals  [of  Maryland]. 

Maryland,  its  Resources,  Industries  and  Institutions.  Baltimore,  1893, 
pp.  89-153. 

144.  "Williams,  G.  H.,  and  Clark,  "W.  B.  Geology  [of  Mary- 
land]. 

Maryland,  its  Resources,  Industries  and  Institutions.  Baltimore,  1S93, 
pp.  55-89. 

145.  AViLLis,  Bailey.  The  ^Mechanics  of  Appalachian  Structure. 

13th  Ann.  Rept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1891-92,  pt.  II.  Washington,  1S93, 
pp.  211-281,  plates  and  maps. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


83 


1894. 

146.  Clark,  VTu.  BrLLOCK.  The  Climatology  and  Physical  Fea- 
tures of  Maryland. 

1st  Biennial  Kept.  Md.  State  \Yeather  Service,  1S94. 

147.  Gannett,  Henry.    Results  of  Primary  Triangulation. 

Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  No.  122,  1894,  pp.  64-65. 
House  ilisc.  Doc,  53rd  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  ix,  Xo.  78. 

148.  HoFMAN,  H.  O.,  and  Demond,  C.  D.  Some  Experiments  for 
Determining  the  Refractiveness  of  Fire-clays. 

Trans.  Amer.  Inst.  Min.  Eng.,  vol.  xxiv,  1894,  pp.  42-66.     See  also  1895. 

149.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

:Mineral  Eesourees  U.  S.,  1893.     Washington,  1894. 

150.  Shriver,  Howard.  Catalogue  of  Fossils  Found  at  Cumber- 
land, Md.    (n.  d.)    4  pp. 

151.  Weeks,  Joseph  D.  The  Potomac  and  Roaring  Creek  Coal- 
fields in  West  Virginia. 

14th  Ann.  Kept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1892-93,  pt.  II.  Washington,  1S94, 
pp.  567-590. 

1895. 

152.  Baird,  G.  W.  Experiment  to  Determine  the  Economic 
Vaporization  of  George's  Creek  Ctimberland  Coal,  Under  Condi- 
tions of  Actual  Practice  on  Board  the  Dolphin  in  port. 

Jour.  Amer.  Soc.  Naval  Eng.,  vol.  vii,  1895,  pp.  329-331. 

153.  Dana,  J.  D.  Manual  of  Geology.  4th  edit.  8vo.  j^ew 
York,  Blakeman,  Taylor  &  Co.,  1895. 

154.  HoFMAN,  H.  O.  Further  Experiments  for  Determining  the 
Fusibility  of  Fire-clays. 

Trans.  Amer.  Inst.  Min.  Eng.,  vol.  xxv,  1895,  pp.  3-17.     See  1894. 

155.  Kemp,  James.  The  Ore  Deposits  of  the  United  States.  8vo. 
343  pp.    Xew  York,  1895. 

156.  Xewell,  F.  H.  Report  of  Progress  of  the  Di\dsion  of 
Hydrography',  1893-94. 

Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  No.  131,  1895. 

House  Misc.  Doc,  54th  Cong.,  1st  Sess.,  vol.  — ,  No.  318. 

157.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

16th  Ann.  Kept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1894-95,  pt.  IV.     Washington,  1895. 

158.  RiES,  Heenrich.    Technology  of  the  Clay  Industry. 

16th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1894-95,  pt.  IV.  Washington,  1895, 
pp.  523-575. 


84 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


1896. 

159.  Dakton,  2^.  H.,  and  Taff,  Joseph.  Piedmont  Folio,  Ex- 
planatory sheets. 

U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  Geol.  Atlas,  folio  28.     Washington,  1896. 

160.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

17th  Ann.  Rept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1895,  pt.  ni.     Washington,  1896. 

161.  Whitney,  Milton.  Texture  of  some  Important  Soil  Forma- 
tions. 

U.  S.  Dept.  Agri.,  Div.  Agri.  Soils,  Bull.  Xo.  5.  Washington,  1896.  Illus- 
trated, 23  pp.,  35  plates. 

162.  Willis,  Bailey.    The  Northern  Appalachians. 

The  Phj'siography  of  the  United  States. 

Geographic  Monographs,  I.     American  Book  Co.,  169  pp.,  1896. 

1897. 

163.  Clark,  William  Bullock.  Historical  Sketch  embracing 
an  Account  of  the  Progress  of  Investigation  Concerning  the  Physical 
Features  and  Natural  Resources  of  Maryland. 

Md.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  i,  pt.  II,  pp.  43-138.     Baltimore,  1S97. 

164.    Outline  of  Present  Knowledge  of  the  Physical 

Features  of  Marjdand  embracing  an  Account  of  the  Physiography, 
Geology  and  Mineral  Resources. 

Ibid.,  pt.  Ill,  pp.  139-228. 

165.  Mathews,  Edward  B.  Bibliogi-aphy  and  Cartography  of 
Maryland,  including  Publications  relating  to  the  Physiography,  Geol- 
ogy and  Mineral  Resources. 

Ibid.,  pt.  TV,  pp.  229-401. 

166.  NicoLLS,  William  Jasper.  The  Story  of  American  Coals. 
8vo.    405  pp.    Philadelphia,  1897. 

167.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

18th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1896,  pt.  V.     Washington,  1897. 

1898. 

168.  Bauer,  L.  A.  Report  on  the  Survey  of  the  Boimdarj^-line 
between  Allegan}^  and  Garrett  Counties.  8vo.  48  pp.  Baltimore, 
1898. 

169.  Clark,  Wm.  Bullock.  Administrative  Report  containing 
an  Account  of  the  Operations  of  the  Survey  during  1S96  and  1897. 

Md.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  i,  pt.  I.  pp.  25-43. 


MARYLAIsT)  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


85 


170.  ^Mathews,  Edwabd  B.  An  Account  of  the  Character  and 
Distribution  of  Maryland  Building  Stones,  etc. 

Md.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  i,  pt.  II,  pp.  125-241. 

171.   The  Maps  and  Map-makers  of  Maryland. 

Md.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  i,  pt.  m,  pp.  337-488. 

172.  XicoLLS,  "WiLLiAJi  Jasper.  Above  Ground  and  Bolow  in 
the  George's  Creek  Coal  Region.  (Published  for  the  Consolidation 
Coal  Company.)    Sm.  Svo.    32  pp.    Baltimore,  1898. 

173.  Parker,  E.  W.  Coal. 

19th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1897-98,  pt.  \1. 

174.  White,  I.  C.    The  Pittsburg  Coal  Bed. 

Amer.  Geol.,  vol.  xxi,  pp.  49-60,  1898. 

1899. 

175.  Abbe,  Clevelajstd,  Jr.  A  General  Eeport  on  the  Physiog- 
raphy of  Maryland. 

Md.  Weather  Service,  vol.  i,  pt.  II,  pp.  39-216. 

176.  Clark,  William  Bullock.  '  The  Relations  of  Maryland 
Topography,  Climate  and  Geology  to  Highway  Construction. 

Md.  Geol.  Surv.,  vol.  iii,  pt.  II,  pp.  47-106. 

177.  IsTewell,  p.  H.,  axd  others.  Report  of  progress  of  stream 
measurements  for  the  calendar  year  1897,  including  papers  by 
Dwight  Porter,  J.  B.  Lippincott  and  other  hydrographers. 

19th  Ann.  Eept.  U.  S.  Geol.  Survey,  1897-98,  pt.  IV.     Washington,  1899. 


STRATIGRAPHY  AND  AREAL  DISTRIBUTION. 

With  the  exception  of  some  scattering  Pleistocene  deposits,  all  of 
the  geological  formations  exposed  in  Allegany  county  are  of  Paleo- 
zoic age.  The  Pleistocene  deposits  are  too  poorly  defined  to  receive 
satisfactory  mapping,  but  the  areal  distribution  of  the  Paleozoic  for- 
mations is  indicated  on  the  geological  map  in  the  Physical  Atlas  ac- 
companying this  report,  while  their  lithological  features  are  shown 
on  the  columnar  sections. 

The  stratigTaphic  relations  of  the  several  geological  formations,  all 
of  which  are  herein  described,  are  shown  in  the  following  table: 


86 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


TABLE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY  FORMATIONS. 

Cenozoic. 

Pleistocene  Alluvial,  etc. 

Paleozoic. 

Permian  Dunkard. 

Carboniferous  Monong-ahela, 

Conemaugh, 

Allegheny, 

Pottsville, 

Mauch  Chunk, 

Greenbrier, 

Pocono. 

Devonian  Hampshire, 

Jennings, 
Eomney, 
Oriskany, 
Helderberg. 

Silurian  Salina, 

Niagara, 
Clinton, 
Tuscarora, 
Juniata. 

The  Silurian. 


Maach  Chunk 


Fig.  4. 


THE  JUNIATA  FORMATION. 

The  Juniata  formation,  known  farther  north  as  the  Lower  or  Red 
Medina  or  Levant  Red  Sandstone,  (IV  b)  receives  its  name  from  the 
Juniata  river,  Pennsylvania,  along  which  it  is  typically  developed. 
It  includes  the  oldest  rocks  that  appear  at  the  surface  in  Allegany 
county  and  outci'ops  in  only  one  locality.  This  outcrop  is  in  the 
gorge  just  northwest  of  Cumberland  where  Wills  Creek  cuts  through 
Wills  Mountain. 

The  formation  is  made  up  of  dull  red  sandstones  and  shales  inter- 
bedded  without  any  regularity  of  succession.  The  sandstones  are 
hard,  fine-grained,  quartzitic  near  the  top,  cross-bedded  and  mica- 
ceous. Some  of  the  beds  exposed  are  more  than  one  foot  in  thick- 
ness, but  most  of  them  are  less  than  six  inches.  A  few  of  the  beds 
contain  small  rounded  or  flattened  pellets  of  brittle  yellowish-green 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  IX. 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


8Y 


or  reddish  clay,  the  largest  of  which  are  usually  less  than  one-half 
inch  in  diameter. 

The  shale  beds  vary  from  less  than  one  inch  to  six  feet  or  more  in 
thickness.  In  general,  they  are  considerably  thicker  than  the  sand- 
stones, and  the  total  thickness  of  shale  in  the  exposure  is  much  greater 
than  the  total  thickness  of  sandstone.  The  shales,  like  the  sandstones, 
are  almost  always  distinctly  micaceous  and  weather  readily. 

The  depth  to  which  Wills  Creek  has  cut  into  the  formation  is  530 
feet.  However,  140  feet  of  this,  computed  according  to  the  hori- 
zontal distance  and  supposed  average  dip,  is  concealed  by  the  heavy 
talus  derived  from  the  overlying  Tuscarora  quartzite.  Along  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  on  the  north  side  of  Wills  Creek  the 
upper  370  feet  is  well  shown,  there  being  in  all  of  this  not  more  than 
twenty  feet  hidden.  Here  all  of  the  remainder  of  the  Juniata  is 
concealed,  but  140  feet  below,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  creek,  along 
the  Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  Eailroad,  an  additional  exposure 
of  thirty  feet  may  be  seen.  With  the  exception  of  the  140  feet  con- 
cealed, the  measurements  were  all  made  with  a  steel  tape. 

N^otwithstanding  the  good  exposure  of  much  of  the  formation,  the 
various  strata  of  shales  and  sandstones  are  more  or  less  inclined  to 
grade  into  each  other,  so  that  no  satisfactory  detailed  section  can  be 
given.  The  top  of  the  formation  is  considered  as  beginning  with  the 
highest  distinct  red  shale  bed,  which  is  six  inches  thick  where  best 
shown.  This  may  be  seen  in  the  small  excavation  at  the  spring  on  the 
north  side  of  Wills  Creek  near  the  east  end  of  the  Narrows,  a  few 
feet  above  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  track.  Here  the  red 
shale  bands  quickly  become  of  little  importance,  and  the  whiteness 
of  the  sandstone  gradually  but  rapidly  increases,  the  Juniata  forma- 
tion thus  being  separated  from  the  Tuscarora  by  a  transition  zone  of 
only  a  few  feet  in  thickness.^ 

THE  TUSCAEOEA  FOKMATIOX. 

The  Tuscarora  formation,  perhaps  nearly  identical  with  the  White 
Medina  of  the  Pennsylvania  and  Xew  York  surveys,  receives  its 

'  For  a  discussion  of  contacts  and  transition  zones,  see  Lesley,  J.  P.,  A  Summary 
Description  of  the  Geology  of  Pennsylvania,  in  three  volumes.  Vol.  i,  pp.  627  to 
629,  Harrisburg,  1893. 


88 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COTJITTY 


name  from  Tuscarora  Mountain,  Pennsylvania,  where  the  formation 
is  most  tvpically  developed.  It  is  brought  to  the  surface  in  five 
places  in  the  county,  viz.,  in  "Wills  Mountain,  where,  lying  conform- 
ably upon  the  Juniata,  it  gives  rise  to  the  higher  portions  of  that 
mountain;  in  Evitts  Mountain  and  in  Tussey  Mountain,  of  which  it 
makes  up  almost  the  entire  exposed  surfaces;  and  in  two  small  areas 
along  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  near  Potomac  Station,  south- 
east of  the  southern  end  of  Wills  Mountain.  The  smaller  of  these 
last  areas  has  been  excavated  about  twenty  feet  in  order  to  give  a 
suitable  grade  for  the  railroad  track.  The  larger  area  has  a  perpen- 
dicular exposure  of  more  than  one  hundred  feet  above  the  railroad 
and  extends  to  the  southwest  as  a  well-marked  low  ridge  for  a  distance 
of  nearly  five  hundred  yards. 

The  formation  is  made  up  of  snow-white  to  light  gray  quartzite, 
frequently  cross-bedded  and  consisting  usually  of  medium-coarse 
quartz  grains  in  a  very  hard  siliceous  matrix.  In  some  of  the  beds 
scattering  quartz  pebbles  are  found,  but  these  are  never  abundant, 
and  usually  are  not  larger  than  wheat  grains.  Yellowish-green,  hard 
clay  pebbles  of  various  sizes  are  sometimes  found,  but  they  are  not 
common. 

"With  the  exception  of  casts  of  Arthrophycus  harlani,  no  forms  of 
positive  organic  origin  have  been  found  in  the  Tuscarora  of  this 
county.  Even  Arthrophycus  harlani  is  not  abundant  in  any  of  the 
Allegany  county  exposures,  although  the  faces  of  some  of  the  upper 
beds  along  Wills  Creek  in  the  Xarrows  are  pretty  well  covered  by 
the  casts.  Casts  of  Arthrophycus  are  also  shown,  and  possibly  to  a 
better  advantage  in  the  outcrops  along  tlie  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road near  Potomac  Station.  This  plant  form  was  found  in  greater 
abundance  in  the  upper  beds,  the  lower  beds  apparently  being  nearly 
destitute  of  them. 

In  general,  the  rocks  are  liighly  indurated  and  massive,  and  do  not 
weather  readily.  In  the  Xarrows  and  in  Rocky  Gap  on  Evitts  Moun- 
tain, heavy  talus  slopes  conceal  the  lower  faces  of  the  cliffs,  while  the 
overhanging  walls  of  white  rock  give  to  these  gorges  a  very  rugged 
appearance.    To  some  extent  the  same  is  true  of  the  gap  in  Tusseys 


MARYLAND  GEOIyOGICAL  SUKVEY 


89 


Mountain,  bnt  this  gap  is  so  near  the  point  Tvhere  the  mountain 
pitches  beneath  the  surface  that  the  walls  of  the  gorge  are  very  low. 

The  total  thickness  of  the  formation  is  shown  only  in  the  Wills 
Creek  gorge  in  Wills  Mountain.  Here  the  thickness  is  287  feet,  a 
good  measurement  having  been  obtained  by  means  of  a  line  dropped 
from  the  top  of  the  ISTarrows  to  the  Tuscarora-Juniata  contact  at  a 
point  near  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  yard  limits. 

THE  CLINTOX  FOKM^i-TION. 

The  Clinton,  formation  is  identical  with  the  Clinton  rocks  of  the 
IS^ew  York  section,  the  name  being  first  used  by  the  Kew  York 
survey  on  account  of  the  excellent  development  of  the  rocks  in  that 
state  in  the  vicinity  of  Clinton.  This  formation  lies  conformably 
upon  the  Tuscarora  quartzite  and  immediately  surrounds  the  areas 
covered  by  the  Tuscarora  formation. 

The  largest  area  flanks  Wills  Mountain  on  either  side,  and  con- 
tinuing south-southeast  beyond  Cresap,  encloses  the  smaller  Tus- 
carora areas  on  the  Potomac  where  that  river  makes  a  strong  bend  to 
the  southeast.  Another  area  lies  to  the  northeast  of  Cumberland 
where,  coming  in  from  Pennsylvania,  it  flanks  the  southern  end  of 
Evitts  Mountain.  A  third  area  lies  further  east  and  holds  the  same 
relation  to  Tussey  Mountain  northwest  of  Flintstone  that  the  second 
area  holds  to  Evitts  Mountain. 

The  Clinton  is  composed  essentially  of  thin  reddish  and  greenish- 
yellow  shales,  while  sandstone  beds,  some  of  which  are  of  considerable 
thickness,  occur  in  it,  and  a  few  thin  beds  of  limestone  appear  in  the 
upper  part.  Two  important  beds  of  iron  ore  are  also  found  in  it. 
In  the  lower  part,  where  light  colored  shales  predominate,  the  several 
transition  sandstones  present  are  more  or  less  quartzitic,  but  are  of 
no  very  great  thickness.  These  lower  sandstones  are  best  seen  on 
the  south  side  of  Wills  Creek  at  the  east  end  of  the  jSTarrows. 

jSTear  the  top  of  the  formation  there  is  a  light  gray  massive  sand- 
stone generally  about  ten  feet  thick.  This  is  well  shown  along  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  about  forty  rods  west  of  Brady,  where 
the  thickness  is  a  little  less  than  ten  feet,  and  where  the  sandstone  is 


90 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


overlain  by  a  six-inch  bed  of  hematitic  iron  ore,  known  as  the  upper 
Clinton  iron  ore.  A  sandstone  which  apparently  corresponds  to  the 
above-mentioned  sandstone  was  seen  on  the  National  Road  northeast 
of  Cumberland,  a  little  west  of  the  Sixmile  House,  one  hundred  yards 
west  of  the  junction  of  the  Johnston  Road  with  the  National  Road. 

The  limestones  of  the  formation  are  seldom  six  inches  in  thickness, 
and  are  much  inclined  to  occur  in  layers  about  two  inches  thick, 
interbedded  with  shale  bands  of  similar  thickness.  The  limestones 
are  almost  always  highly  fossiliferous. 

The  shales  occupy  most  of  the  lower  part  of  the  formation,  besides 
a  considerable  space  in  the  middle  and  upper  portions.  These  also 
frequently  contain  fossils.  In  color,  they  are  usually  a  yellowish 
green  or  olive  where  freshly  broken,  but  the  flat  exposed  surfaces 
frequently  have  a  marked  scarlet  color.  Near  the  bottom  of  the 
formation  the  shales  have  more  of  a  dull  grayish  brown  appearance 
and  are  less  fossiliferous. 

The  lower  Clinton  iron  ore  includes  two  beds  separated,  where 
best  seen,  by  six  feet  of  greenish  calcareous  shale.  The  thickness  of 
the  lower  bed  averages  about  four  and  one-half  feet  and  is  160  feet 
above  the  bottom  of  the  formation,  as  shown  on  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  Railroad  southeast  of  Cresap  between  the  two  small  Tuscarora 
exposures.  The  other  bed,  six  feet  higher,  not  fully  exposed,  shows 
a  thickness  of  eight  feet  where  observed  southeast  of  Cresap,  and  is 
ten  feet  thick  at  Cumberland,  north  of  the  cement  mill,  where  it  is 
cut  through  by  Wills  Creek.  All  of  the  iron  ore  beds  are  fossilifer- 
ous, the  upper  bed  of  the  lower  ore  being  sometimes  excessively  filled 
with  the  various  Clinton  fossils. 

The  following  partial  section  was  measured  on  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  Railroad  southeast  of  Cresap: 

Feet. 

Red  iron  ore  band.    (Not  exposed  to  the  top)   8 

Calcareous  grreenish  shale    6 

Red  iron  ore  band    41/2 

Fine  brownish  red  and  preen  arenaceous  shale  with  several 

thin  but  compact  sandstones  or  quartzites  near  the  bottom,  160 

Clinton-Tuscarora  contact    

Total  amount  exposed    l"8Va 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  91 

Along  the  south  side  of  Wills  Creek,  at  the  east  end  of  the  Narrows, 
the  full  thickness  of  the  Clinton  shows  the  following  section: 

Feet. 

Shales  and  fossiliferous  limestone,  mostly  concealed   33 

Eeddish  shale  with  a  few  thin  limestone  bands  (more  or  less 
concealed  and  perhaps  containing  the  upper  Clinton  iron 

ore  near  the  top)    29 

Fcssiliferoiis  gray  shale  and  blue  limestone,  with  five  and  one- 
half  feet  of  shaly  sandstone  near  the  bottom   28 

Concealed    57 

Eeddish  olive  fossiliferous  shale    2-i 

Concealed    238 

Fossiliferous  iron  ore  (Lower  Clinton  ore)    10 

Rusty  olive  shale    17 

Fossiliferous  olive-colored  shale    85 

Eusty  shale  at  top.    Uneven  bands  of  gray  sandstone  at  bot- 
tom interstratified  with  olive  shales    36 

Olive-colored  shnles  with  thin  beds  of  brownish  gray  quartzite,  27 

Clinton-I'uscarora  contact    ■ 

Total  thickness  of  Clinton    584 


THE  NIAGARA  FORMATION. 

The  Niagara  formation,  the  name  of  which  is  derived  from  Niagara 
Falls,  New^  York,  where  excellent  exposures  of  these  rocks  have  given 
opportunity  for  their  careful  study,  lies  conformably  on  the  Clinton 
and,  surrounding  the  outcroj^s  of  that  formation,  occupies  areas 
closely  related  to  them  in  size,  in  shape,  and  in  geographical  distribu- 
tion. 

The  westernmost  area  lies  as  a  narrow  belt  around  the  base  of 
Wills  Mountain  and  extends  southward  to  the  Potomac  river  near 
Potomac  Station.  The  second  area  lies  as  a  sharp  loop  around  the 
southern  end  of  Evitts  Mountain  with  a  narrow  projection  southward 
along  its  pitching  anticline,  while  the  third  area  is  similarly  situated 
about  Tussey  Moimtain. 

In  Allegany  county  the  Niagara  is  pretty  much  concealed,  the 
areas  about  Evitts  and  Tussey  mountains  affording  no  satisfactory 
exposures,  while  the  Wills  Mountain  area  shows  only  one  complete 
section.  This  is  on  the  Potomac  river  just  west  of  the  cement-mill 
near  Potomac  Station.  The  formation  is  made  up  almost  wholly  of 
thin  limestones  with  shale  partings.    The  shale  partings  become  of 


92 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


considerable  thickness  in  the  upper  portions  where  they  predominate 
over  the  limestones.  In  the  lower  portions  the  limestones  predom- 
inate and  the  partings  are  very  thin.  A  few  thin  sandstones  are  found 
near  the  top  interbedded  with  the  shales  and  limestones. 

The  thickness  of  the  formation  as  measured  along  the  south  side  of 
Wills  Creek  in  Cumberland  is  260  feet.  The  rocks  are,  however, 
mostly  concealed  and  the  upper  and  lower  limits  of  the  formation 
cannot  be  accurately  determined.  In  the  Potomac  Station  section 
the  formation  Avas  found  to  be  317  feet  thick,  but  owing  to  the  con- 
siderable folding  here  the  measurement  may  not  be  exact.  The  true 
thickness  certainly  approximates  300  feet,  and  this  may  with  propriety 
be  considered  as  the  thickness  for  the  county.  The  section  as  meas- 
ured by  E.  B.  Rowe  along  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  near 
Potomac  Station  is  as  follows: 

Fett. 

Niagara-Salina  contact   

Black  shales  Avith  layers  of  sandstone  and  an  occasional  layer 

of  limestone    22 

iMostlj-  dark  blue  limestone  with  shale  partings.  Verj-  fossil- 
iferous  at  top,  less  fossiliferous  near  the  bottom.  Some 
folding,  but  the  measurement  is  believed  to  be  fairlj' 
accurate    225 

Dark  blue  limestone  with  thin  shale  partings.    So  much  folded 

that  the  thickness  can  be  onh'  estimated   70 

Is'iagara-Clinton  contact    

Total  thickness  of  formation    317 

THE  SALINA  FOEMATTON. 

The  Salina  formation  receives  its  name  from  Salina,  IS^ew  York, 
where  it  is  typically  developed.  The  rocks  of  this  formation  follow 
those  of  the  Niagara  conformity  and  are  distributed  about  Wills 
Mountain,  Evitts  Mountain  and  Tussey  Mountain  in  much  the  same 
manner  as  the  two  preceding  formations.  Along  the  eastern  base  of 
Wills  Mountain  the  Salina  has  been  cut  through  by  the  meanderings 
of  the  Potomac,  thus  throwing  portions  of  the  outcrop  on  the  West 
Virginia  side. 

The  formation  is  composed  of  sandstones,  shales  and  limestones. 
The  sandstones  predominate  near  the  bottom  and  the  limestones  in 
the  upper  portions,  while  the  shales  are  rather  abundant  throughout 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE 


Fig.  2.— hard  strata  in  helderberg  formation,  devil's  backbone. 
GEOLOGICAL  SECTIONS   IN  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


ilAKYLAKD  GEOLOGICAL  STJEVEY 


93 


the  formation.  Cement  rock  of  importance  is  found  in  the  lower 
part.  The  location  of  the  four  cement  beds  of  commercial  value  is 
given  in  the  section  below. 

The  rocks  of  this  formation  are  not  well  exposed  except  along 
Wills  Creek  in  Cumberland,  along  the  Potomac  river  near  Potomac 
Station,  and  along  Flintstone  Creek  at  Plintstone.  Much  of  the 
"Wills  Creek  section  can  be  made  out  only  with  difficulty,  but  the 
Potomac  section  is  well  shown.  AVest  of  the  cement  mill  in  Cumber- 
land the  red  sandstone  beds  at  the  bottom  of  the  formation  can  be 
readily  seen,  as  can  also  considerable  portions  of  the  shales  and  lime- 
stones, including  the  cement  series.  Immediately  north  of  Flint- 
stone,  along  Flintstone  Creek,  various  lower  beds  are  fairly  well 
exposed.  Around  Evitts  Mountain  the  rocks  are  almost  wholly  con- 
cealed. The  Potomac  section,  the  best  exposed  section  of  Salina  in 
the  county,  measures  as  follows:' 

Feet. 

Saliiia-IIelderberg  contact   

Gray  papery  shales,  dark  drab  magnesian  limestone,  dark  blue 


limestone  and  yellowish  and  green  sandstones  in  various 
relations   to  each   other  and   all   thin   bedded.  Fossils 

(Ostracods)  are  present,  especially  near  the  bottom   450 

"  Fourth  "  cement  rock.    A  twelve-inch  band  of  limestone  is 

found  about  five  feet  from  the  bottom    IT 

Bluish  gray  sbaly  rock  with  some  thin  arenaceous  and  cal- 
careous beds    lOVg 

"  Third  "  cement  rock   12 % 

Light  greenish,  fossiliferous  shales  with  some  calcareous  and 

arenaceous  layers    54 

"  Second  "  cement  rock   15 

Massive  fossiliferous  limestones  alternating  with  thin  cement 

layers   15 

"  First  "  cement  rock   G 

Bluish  green  shale  with  three  and  one-half  feet  of  darker 

shale  at  the  top.    Fossiliferous    15 

Greenish  gray  sandstone    314 

Light  brown  disintegrated  rock,  probably  limestone  originallj'  8 

Greenish  gray  massive  sandstone    7 

Bright  j-ellow  sandstone   % 

Thinly  bedded  greenish  gray  sandstone    2i/^ 

Dark,  fine-grained  shale    131/2 

Salina-Niagara  contact    

Total  thickness  of  Salina    639 


'  Section  of  R.  B.  Rowe. 


94 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


The  Devonian. 

THE  HELDERBEBG  FORMATION. 

The  Helderberg  formation,  so  called  from  its  typical  locality,  the 
Helderberg  Mountains  of  N'ew  York,  is  considered  by  some  ge<ilogists 
as  the  lowest  Devonian  formation,  while  others  regard  it  as  the 
highest  Silurian  formation.  It  follows  the  Salina  of  the  Silurian 
with  perfect  conformity  and,  like  all  of  the  preceding  formations,  is 
exposed  only  in  the  central  and  west-central  portions  of  the  county. 
The  easternmost  and  largest  area,  shaped  like  a  much  constricted 
letter  W,  lies  to  the  east,  west  and  south  of  Tussey  Mountain,  and 
by  its  prominent  double  bifurcation  makes  up  a  large  part  of  Warrior 
Mountain  and  Martin  Mountain.  On  the  state  line  east  of  Tussey 
Mountain  the  Helderberg  belt  is  less  than  one-half  mile  wide,  while 
the  width  of  the  correspoiKling  outcrop  on  the  Avestern  side  is  con- 
siderably greater.  Southward,  owing  to  the  pitching  of  the  Tussey 
Mountain  anticline,  these  bands  gradually  approach  each  other  until,  at 
a  point  near  Rush,  the  two  coalesce.  Within  less  than  one  mile  south- 
ward the  area  again  becomes  bifurcated,  but  this  time,  owing  to  the 
synclinal  nature  of  the  fold,  the  projecting  parts  are  separated  by 
the  Oriskany  formation,  which  immediately  follows  the  Helderberg. 
Of  the  two  southern  Helderberg  projections,  the  one  furthest  east 
is  the  more  extensive,  and  includes  within  it  Flakes  Knob,  the  highest 
point  in  the  county  east  of  the  Alleghany  Front.  This  part  of  the 
area  narrows  southward,  but  caps  Warrior  Mountain  to  Avithin  almost 
a  mile  of  where  the  mountain  ceases  to  be  a  distinct  topographic 
feature.  The  projection  lying  further  west  is  much  narrower  than 
the  one  to  the  east,  but  continues  almost  as  far  south  and  acts  as  a 
capping  for  Collier  Mountain. 

The  next  area  of  Helderberg  lies  further  Avest  and  flanks  the  out- 
crop of  Salina  around  Evitts  Mountain  in  much  the  same  way  that 
the  first  area  does  the  Salina  around  Tussey  Mountain.  The  bifur- 
cation at  the  north  caused  by  the  Evitts  Mountain  anticline  is  quite 
like  that  produced  by  the  Tussey  Mountain  anticline.  The  forma- 
tion continues  southward  in  one  long,  continually  narrowing  band  to 
within  one  and  one-half  miles  of  the  Potomac,  where  the  Helderberg 


JIAEYLAJTD 


GEOLOGICAL 


SURVEY 


95 


ending  in  a  sharp  point  passes  beneath  the  Oriskany  to  appear  again 
at  the  roadside  by  the  canal,  where  the  Potomac  has  cut  entirely 
through  the  overlying  Oriskany  and  into  the  Helderberg  for  a  dis- 
tance of  fully  a  hundred  feet  The  eastern  part  of  this  area  forms 
much  of  the  crest  and  western  slope  of  Nicholas  Mountain,  while  the 
contact  line  along  the  western  side  is  clearly  marked  by  a  row  of 
hills  extending  from  the  state  line  southward.  This  row  of  hills 
reaches  almost  as  far  south  as  does  the  Helderberg  outcrop,  but 
finally  coalesces  with  IN^icholas  Mountain. 

East  of  AYills  Mountain  a  belt  of  Helderberg  averaging  less  than 
one-half  mile  in  wddth  comes  into  the  county  from  the  north,  and 
extending  southward  along  the  western  slope  of  Shriver  Ridge,  passes 
through  the  western  part  of  Cumberland  and  across  the  Potomac  into 
West  Virginia.  The  Potomac  in  its  ver}'  perceptible  eastward  bend 
nearly  three  miles  above  Cumberland,  and  again  in  the  more  promi- 
nent eastward  bend  about  six  miles  above  Cumberland,  has  carved 
out  two  small  portions  of  this  belt  from  the  West  Virginia  area. 
These  patches  are  mostly  concealed,  but  their  contact  with  the  Salina 
is  fairly  well  shown.  Northward  the  Helderberg-Salina  contact  is 
largely  concealed,  but  the  limestone  quarries  which  occur  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  Helderberg  along  the  western  base  of  Shriver  Ridge 
afford  a  convenient  means  of  judging  the  approximate  western  out- 
crop of  the  Helderberg.  Shriver  Ridge  marks  the  eastern  limit,  as 
the  contact  lies  on  its  western  slope  a  short  distance  below  the  top. 

West  of  Wills  Mountain  there  is  a  band  of  Helderberg  correspond- 
ing in  position  to  the  eastern  belt,  but  by  reason  of  the  perpendicular 
attitude  of  the  strata,  this  belt  is  considerably  narrower  than  the  one 
on  the  eastern  side.  Following  closely  the  general  direction  of  Wills 
Mountain,  it  crosses  the  Potomac  river  at  Potomac  Station.  Along 
the  belt  north  of  the  National  Road  the  Helderberg-Salina  contact  is 
usually  not  well  sho^vn,  but  the  Helderberg-Oriskany  contact  is 
prominent,  the  latter  being  represented  by  the  steep  ridges  to  the 
north  and  south  of  Corriganville.  South  of  the  National  Road 
neither  contact  is  well  shoMii,  although  slight  topographic  features 
usually  indicate  their  positions  with  reasonable  accuracy. 


96 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Another  Helderberg  area  of  considerable  extent  is  exposed  south 
of  RaAvlings.  This  forms  the  body  of  the  steep  isolated  ridge  known 
as  Fort  Hill,  which  extends  southward  along  the  Potomac  for  a  dis- 
tance of  about  four  miles. 

In  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  areas,  two  very  slight  expos- 
ures may  be  seen  along  the  West  Virginia  Central  Railroad  on  the 
north  and  south  sides  of  Monster  Rock  near  Keyser,  West  Virginia. 
They  are  of  little  importance  except  in  so  far  as  they  are  of  value  in 
helping  to  work  out  the  structure  in  that  part  of  the  county. 

Lithologically,  the  Helderberg  is  pre-eminently  a  limestone  forma- 
tion. Argillaceous  materials  occur  as  impurities  in  some  of  the  beds, 
but  these  are  not  important,  and  sandstones  are  almost  wholly  lacking. 
Thin  bands  of  chert,  which  are  white  or  yellowish-white  in  color, 
occur  sparingly  throughout  the  upper  part  of  the  formation.  Most 
of  the  limestone  in  the  upper  part  is  heavily  bedded,  and  much  of  it 
is  highly  fossiliferous.  The  lower  part  of  the  Helderberg  is  a  dark 
blue  thin-bedded  limestone  which  in  breaking  gives  a  decided  ring. 
This  corresponds  to  the  Tentaculite  limestone  of  Xew  York,  which 
in  Maryland  is  over  400  feet  thick.  In  the  field  the  contact  between 
the  Salina  and  the  Tentaculite  limestone  is  very  marked  because  of 
the  different  weathering  qualities  of  the  two  rocks.  The  Salina 
rock  weathers  into  soil  very  completely,  while  the  Tentaculite  lime- 
stone leaves  innumerable  small,  thin,  dark  blue  slabs  upon  the  surface. 

In  Western  Maryland  the  Tentaculite  limestone  is  mapped  as  a 
part  of  the  Helderberg  formation.  This  is  done  because  the  litho- 
logical  break  between  it  and  the  Salina  is  very  marked  and  can  be 
followed  in  the  field,  as  sho\vn  above,  while  there  is  no  lithological 
break  between  the  Tentaculite  and  Lower  Pentamerus  subformations, 
and  the  division  for  mapping  purposes  cannot  be  made  here.  Pro- 
fessor James  Hall  of  the  Xew  York  survey  always  insisted  that  the 
Tentaculite  should  be  considered  as  a  portion  of  the  Helderberg, 
while  Professor  James  D.  Dana  considered  it  as  a  portion  of  the 
Waterlime  (Salina)  formation.  Since  Professor  Hall's  death,  even 
the  geologists  of  the  ^\ew  York  survey  have  been  inclined  towards 
Dana's  view.    The  Tentaculite  limestone  of  Western  Maryland  has 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SrRVEY 


97 


not  onlv  a  greater  thickness  Init  also  a  more  abundant  fauna  than 
that  of  the  !N"ew  York  region. 

This  fauna,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  more  complete  systematic 
reports,  belongs  to  the  Silurian  and  Devonian.  It  is  too  premature, 
at  least,  to  assign  all  of  the  Helderberg  of  Maryland  to  either  the 
Devonian  or  Silurian  systems. 

The  thickness  of  the  formation  is  nearly  eight  hundred  feet.  The 
two  partial  sections  given  below  are  believed  to  represent  the  full 
thickness  as  well  as  a  duplication  of  some  of  the  middle  beds  as 
indicated.  The  Potomac  section  extends  from  the  bottom  of  the 
formation  to  and  includes  a  few  inches  of  the  coralline  ledge.  The 
thirty-six  foot  massive  Stromatopora  bed  of  the  Devil's  Backbone 
section  is  believed  to  come  in  immediately  above  this,  the  other  beds 
of  the  section  continuing  upward  in  the  order  named  to  the  top  of 
the  formation. 

The  Devil's  Backbone  section,  measured  along  the  Huntingdon  and 
Broadtop  Railroad  east  of  Wills  Creek  is  as  follows : 

Feet. 


Helderberg-Oriskany  contact  

Concealed    42 

Light  gray  fossiliferous  limestone  ■with  numerous  layers,  a 

verj'  light-colored  chert    22 

Light  gray  massive  fossiliferous  limestone.    Breaks  into  rec- 
tangular blocks    16 

Shaly  limestone   II/2 

Bluish   graj'   limestone,   breaking   into   shaly  fragments. 

Weathering  indicates  much  argillaceous  material   IS 

Massive  Stromatopora  beds    36 

Shaly  limestone,  somewhat  nodular    10 

Light  gray  massive  limestone  with  upper  part  containing 

layers  of  light-colored  chert    45 

Thinly  bedded  limestone,  the  weathered  surface  covered 

with  small  bryozoans   16 

Dark  blue  massive  limestone,  very  hard  and  difficult  to 

break..  .Upper  part  filled  with  Pentamerus  galeatus   36 

Fine  shalj'  fossiliferous  limestone    16 

Massive  dark  blue  fossiliferous  limestone    40 

Slightly  argillaceous,  thinlj'  bedded,  fossiliferous  limestone.  14 
Graj^   arenaceous   fossiliferous   limestone   with   laj-ers  of 

chertj'  material    16 

Concealed  to  bottom  of  formation   

Total  thickness  of  exposure  at  this  place   3281/2 


98 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


The  measurements  made  at  Potomac  Station  are  as  follows: 

Feet. 


Upper  beds  concealed.    Very  massive  light  gray  limestone 

with  a  few  feet  of  nodular  limestone  near  the  top. 

Coralline  layer  near  the  top    95 

Mostly  concealed,  but  sufficiently  exposed  to  show  that  the 

beds  are  generally  made  up  of  thin  grayish  limestones. 

Some  massive  beds  are  present   240 

Generally  thin-bedded,  dark  blue  limestone,  but  with  some 

heavy  beds.  Fossiliferous   148 

Thinly   bedded,   dark   blue   fossiliferous  limestones  with 

occasional  papery  shales    92 

Helderberg-Salina  contact    

Total  thickness  of  exposed  Helderberg    575 


THE  OEISKANY  FORMATION. 

Tlie  Oriskanv  formation  receives  its  name  from  Oriskany  Falls, 
New  York,  at  which  place  it  is  well  shown.  In  middle  and  western 
Allegany  county  the  Oriskany,  although  thin  compared  with  most  of 
the  other  Paleozoic  formations,  on  account  of  its  zigzag  course  and 
usually  more  or  less  inclined  position,  covers  a  not  insignificant  part 
of  the  surface.  To  speak  definitely,  the  Oriskany-Romney  contact 
is  more  than  one  huiulred  miles  in  length,  being  considerably  greater 
than  that  of  any  other  contact  line  in  the  county.  Coming  in  across 
the  Maryland-Pennsylvania  state  line  near  Flintstone  and  going  south- 
ward, the  Oriskany  constitutes  the  eastern  slope  of  Warrior  Mountain. 
Ketuming  northward  near  Big  Spring  Run,  it  forms  much  of  the 
western  slope  of  Warrior  Mountain.  It  enters  quite  largely  into  the 
structure  of  Martin  Mountain  and  completely  covers  the  central  and 
sotithern  portions  of  Collier  Mountain,  including  the  two  projections 
near  the  Potomac.  It  also  constitutes  the  western  slope  of  the  north- 
ern part  of  Martin  Mountain  continuing  beyond  the  state  line. 
Branching  south  of  the  state  line,  one  part  returns  southward  and 
forms  much  of  the  eastern  slope  of  Nicholas  Mountain.  It  continues 
to  the  Potomac,  but  turning  northward  once  more  it  helps  to  form 
the  line  of  hills  that  flank  Nicholas  Mountain  on  the  west,  then  again 
passes  beyond  the  state  line. 

A  little  further  to  the  west  a  narrow  strip  along  Shriver  Ridge 
cuts  across  the  county  in  a  northeast-southwest  direction  through 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


99 


Cumberland.  "West  of  Wills  Mountain  a  still  nan-ower  strip  comes 
in  from  the  north,  runs  approximately  parallel  with  considerable  por- 
tions of  AVills  Creek  and  Braddock  Run,  then  bending  to  the  east 
takes  a  more  nearly  north  and  south  direction  and  passes  across  the 
Potomac  near  Potomac  Station.  Another  area  extends  from  Raw- 
lings,  southwestward  through  Keyser,  "West  "\^irginia.  Geologic- 
ally, the  outcrop  is  not  discontinuous  between  these  points,  but  a 
small  part  of  it  has  been  cut  off  from  the  county  by  a  bend  in  the 
Potomac  river  north  of  Monster  Rock.  A  very  small  area  is  also 
found  near  the  bend  of  the  river  east  of  Monster  Rock,  a  short 
distance  from  Keyser,  "West  Virginia,  but  this  is  greatly  obscured  by 
the  comparatively  recent  river  deposits. 

Tji  addition  to  the  above-mentioned  areas,  there  are  tAvo  others 
well  shown  east  and  northeast  of  Oldtown,  besides  one  or  more  obscure 
patches  in  the  bed  of  a  ravine  west  of  Corriganville.  The  smaller  of 
the  Oldtown  areas  covers  less  than  half  a  square  mile  and  outcrops 
immediately  north  of  the  Potomac  and  just  west  of  the  mouth  of  the 
South  Branch.  The  other  area  forms  Stratford  Ridge,  lying  just 
west  of  the  lower  course  of  Town  Creek.  These  last  two  areas  are 
minor  extensions  or  spurs  of  the  much  higher  ridge  south  of  the 
Potomac  in  "West  Virginia. 

The  Oriskany  formation  in  Allegany  county  consists  of  two  well- 
marked  lithological  divisions  which  grade  into  each  other.  The  lower 
part,  resting  conformably  upon  the  Helderberg,  is  a  blue-black  chert 
in  nodules  and  layers,  separated  by  thin  beds  of  dark  gray  arenaceous 
shale.  This  is  the  chert  lintel  "  of  the  Piedmont  folio.'  The  upper 
part  of  the  formation  is  a  greenish  gray,  bluish  gray,  brownish  gray  or 
white  sandstone,  which  is  often  calcareous. 

The  chert  in  an  imweathered  condition  is  in  hard,  deep  blue-black 
masses  and  shows  a  gi-eat  tendency  to  break  into  small-sized  nodular 
or  angular  blocks  with  smooth  conchoidal  fractures.  The  unweath- 
ered  surfaces  have  at  times  a  pearly  white  appearance  and  the 
weathered  specimens  are  almost  invariably  light  colored.  Specimens 
in  which  weathering  has  been  carried  on  to  an  extreme  degree  usually 

'  Geologic  Atlas  of  U.  S.  Piedmont  Folio,  No.  28. 


100 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


show  a  yellowish  l)rown  color  and  are  more  or  less  arenaceous  and 
spongy.  The  Helderberg-Oriskany  contact  line  can  often  be  easily 
followed  by  these  chert  fragments  even  if  all  other  traces  of  the 
contact  are  gone.  So  numerous  are  the  fragrments  in  many  places 
that  in  some  well-cultivated  fields  they  lie  sufficiently  close  together 
to  almost  completely  hide  the  surface  of  the  ground.  This  is  par- 
ticularly noticeable  in  some  of  the  fields  near  the  tops  of  Warrior 
Mountain,  Martin  Mountain  and  Xicholas  Mountain.  In  tlio  vicinity 
of  Flakes  Knob  on  Warrior  Mountain  the  chert  beds  have  been  worn 
entirely  through,  and  on  the  top  of  this  highest  point  the  underlying 
limestone  is  exposed.  Surrounding  this  high  knoll  is  a  heavy  talus 
of  the  chert  blocks.  Xear  the  top  of  Martin  Mountain  on  the 
National  Road  a  good  exposure  shows  the  chert  weathered  to  spongy 
blocks  sufficiently  soft  to  be  easily  cut  with  a  knife.  The  same  thing 
may  be  observed  in  other  places,  although  usually  it  is  not  so  well 
shown.  West  of  Wills  Mountain  on  the  Georges  Creek  and  Cumber- 
land Railroad  and  on  the  Eckhart  branch  of  the  Cumberland  and 
Pennsylvania  Railroad  the  same  alteration  has  taken  place,  but  some 
of  the  beds  here  show  a  more  or  less  bright-colored  banded  structure. 
This  is  apparently  due  to  a  rearrangement  of  the  ferruginous  contents, 
thus  leaving  some  portions  with  a  peculiar  bluish  gray  color,  while 
other  portions  show  yellowish,  brownish  or  reddish  parallel  bands. 
Xo  outcrop  in  the  northern  part  of  tlie  county  shows  the  full  thick- 
ness of  the  chert,  but  the  outcrop  at  the  Devil's  Backbone  compared 
with  outcrops  near  Keyser,  AVest  Virginia,  and  near  Xorth  Branch 
seems  to  indicate  pretty  conclusively  that  these  beds  thicken  rapidly 
southward. 

The  upper  portion,  or  sandstone  member,  of  the  Oriskany  when 
wholly  unweathered  is  usually  hard  and  compact,  and  is  at  times 
rather  inclined  to  resemble  a  very  arenaceous  limestone.  The  texture 
is  sometimes  fine,  but  the  rock  is  more  often  coarse-grained,  and  in 
the  upper  part  of  the  formation  one  or  more  bands  of  conglomerate 
are  always  present.  In  the  exposures  near  Keyser,  West  Virginia, 
the  lower  part  of  the  formation  is  shaly,  while  the  middle  and  upper 
portions  apparently  contain  a  greater  percentage  of  coarse  matei'ial 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XI. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


101 


than  elsewhere.  Generally  fossils  are  extremely  abundant,  occurring 
in  irregular  bands  varying  in  thickness  from  one  or  two  inches  to 
several  feet.  The  sandstone  easily  losing  its  calcareous  cement, 
weathers  readily  to  a  very  friable,  dirty-buff,  porous  rock,  in  which 
condition  large  blocks  can  be  easily  shattered  by  a  single  blow  of  the 
hammer.  In  many  places  protected  from  denudation,  the  rock  has 
completely  disintegrated,  leaving  beds  of  dirty  brownish-yellow  sand. 
In  this  loose  sand,  under  favorable  conditions,  well-preserved  fossils 
may  be  procured.  Pockets  are  frequently  found  in  the  less  weathered 
rocks  in  which  fossils  free  from  the  matrix  are  also  beautifully  pre- 
served. It  is  to  these  pockets  that  many  collectors  owe  their  finest 
cabinet  specimens. 

Excellent  exposures  of  the  Oriskany  are  frequent,  but  the  full 
thickness  is  not  often  shown.  The  thickness  as  measured  on  the 
south  side  of  ^Monster  Eock  near  Keyser,  "West  Virginia,  is  three 
hxmdred  feet,  and  at  21st  Bridge,  three  hundred  and  forty  feet;  on 
the  Williams  Eoad,  two  and  one-half  miles  east  of  Ciimberland, 
only  one  himdred  and  fifty-five  feet  are  exposed.  On  the  eastern 
slope  of  Warrior  !Moimtain  no  good  measurement  could  be  obtained,, 
but  apparently  the  thickness  there  where  best  shown  is  less  than  at 
Cumberland.  The  following  section  was  obtained  along  the  West 
Virginia  Central  Eailroad  at  the  base  of  Monster  Eock,  opposite 
Keyser,  West  Virginia: 

Feet. 


Oriskany-Eomney  contact   

Fine-grained  fossiliferous  conglomerate    12 

Coarse  sandstone  with  few  fossils    6 

Fine-grained  fossiliferous  conglomerate    4 

Coarse  but  slightlj-  shaly  sandstone    414 

Coarse-grained  fossiliferous  sandstone    8 

Fossiliferous  conglomerate    1 

Coarse  fossiliferous  sandstone    314 

Verj-  fossiliferous  coarse  conglomerate   l^ 

Coarse-grained  fossiliferous  sandstone    12 

Fossiliferous  sandstone,  mostly  coarse-grained    156 

Coarse  shaly,  almost  non-fossiliferous,  sandstone    25l^ 

Black  nodular  chert   67 

Concealed   

Total  thickness  measured    300 


102 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COCXTY 


On  the  Williams  Eoad,  two  and  one-half  miles  east  of  Cumberland, 
the  Oriskany  section  is  as  follows: 

Feet. 


Oriskany-Romney  contact   

Coarse  sandstone,  almost  black  and  non-fossiliferous   2 

Much-decomposed  yellowish  sandstone  with  many  fossils...  16 

Concealed    C 

Slightly  fossiliferous  conglomerate,  the  individual  particles 

being  of  characteristic  wheat-grain  size   4 

Concealed    71/2 

Very  fossiliferous  conglomerate    % 

Concealed    2 

Blue  calcareous  fossiliferous  sandstone    1^^ 

Coarse,  much-weathered,  fossiliferous  sandstone   214 

Concealed    141/2 

Very  coarse  fossiliferous  brown  sandstone    3 

Fossiliferous  conglomerate  much  like  the  wheat-grain  con- 
glomerate above   1 

Brown  fossiliferous  sandstone    29 

Concealed    42 

Sandstone  and  concealed,  mostly  concealed    30 

Concealed   

Total  thickness  measured    156 


The  Oriskanv-Helderberg  contact  i«  not  shown  here,  and  there  is 
at  least  00  feet  of  chert  still  to  add  to  the  thickness. 

In  the  well-weathered  TVilliams  Eoad  exposure  the  conglomerate 
bands  are  easily  distinguished  from  the  intervening  finer  material, 
but  in  the  Monster  Rock  section,  where  the  present  face  of  the  rock 
has  been  exposed  only  a  few  years,  the  lines  of  separation  are  much 
less  clearly  marked.  This  indistinctness,  which  is  one  of  appearance 
rather  than  reality,  is  largely  due  to  the  bluish-gray  color  of  many 
of  the  pebbles,  as  well  as  to  the  calcareous  cement  which  is  present  in 
the  conglomerate  bands  and  in  the  finer  sandy  portions. 

In  general,  the  individual  pebbles  of  the  conglomerate  are  fairly 
well  rounded,  usually  of  approximate  wheat-grain  size,  and  seldom 
larger  than  peas.  In  many  places  the  rocks  are  densely  crowded  with 
fossils.  This  is  particulai-ly  true  of  the  formation  in  the  vicinity  of 
Cumberland,  the  locality  from  which  Professor  Hall  has  described 
so  many  fonns.  Frequently  the  conglomerate  bands  partake  of  this 
fossiliferous  nature,  but  the  fossils  are  usually  more  abundant  in  the 


MAKYLAIS'D  GEOLOGICAL  SDRVEY 


103 


finer  portions.  In  Warrior  Mountain  the  exposures  are  usually  not 
good,  and  where  exposed  the  fossils  are  less  abiandant,  the  sandstone 
there  being  less  calcareous  and  highly  compact. 

The  Oriskany  sandstone,  although  playing  an  important  part  in  the 
composition  of  the  mountains  of  Allegany  county,  owes  much  of  its 
prestige,  especially  in  the  more  calcareous  areas,  to  the  protection  of 
the  less  easily  disintegrating  Oriskany  chert-  beds. 

THE  ROSrNEY  FOEMATIOX. 

The  Eomney  formation,  corresponding  in  the  main  with  the  Mar- 
cellus  and  Hamilton  formations  further  north,  takes  its  name  from 
Eomney,  West  Virginia,  where  it  is  extensively  developed.  The 
passage  from  the  Oriskany  to  the  Eomney  is  particularly  abrupt,  a 
distinct  lithologic  difference  existing  within  a  space  of  two  inches. 
This  contact  is  admirably  shown  on  the  Williams  Eoad  near  the 
church  two  and  one-half  miles  east  of  Cumberland,  as  well  as  on  the 
north  and  south  sides  of  Monster  Eock  along  the  West  Virginia  Cen- 
tral Eailroad.  It  is  also  seen  to  good  advantage  on  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  Eailroad  one-fourth  of  a  mile  south  of  Eawlings,  and  on  the 
same  railroad  about  two  miles  northeast  of  Keyser,  West  Virginia. 
In  various  places  along  the  east  side  of  Wamor  Mountain  the  con- 
tact is  disclosed,  but  the  opportunities  for  studying  it  are  not  so  good 
here  as  elsewhere. 

Xext  to  the  Jennings  the  Eomney  is  the  most  widely  distributed 
formation  in  the  county.  The  largest  area  lies  along  the  Potomac 
river  in  the  vicinity  of  Oldtown.  It  includes  the  valleys  of  Big 
Spring  Evm  and  Saw  Mill  Eun  and  much  of  the  lower  course  of  Town 
Creek  and  sends  a  narrow  belt  northward  along  the  eastern  side  of 
Warrior  Mountain  beyond  the  state  line  into  Pennsylvania.  Further 
west  along  either  side  of  the  southern  end  of  Martin  Mountain  there 
are  small,  elongated  Eomney  areas  which  coincide  approximately 
with  the  narrow  valleys  of  Collier  Eun  and  Martin  Spring  Eun. 
In  the  Evitts  Creek  valley  a  belt  of  considerable  width  comes  into  the 
county  from  Pennsylvania  and  passing  southward  is  divided  by  a  large 
Jennings  area,  the  two  Eomney  bands  thus  formed  passing  along 


104 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


down  on  the  higher  slopes  of  the  valley  and  continuing  southward 
help  to  cover  the  Maryland  projection  west  of  the  southern  end  of 
Nicholas  Mountain.  At  the  foot  of  Alleghany  Front  another  area  is 
shown  which,  like  several  of  the  succeeding  formations,  stretches  as 
a  somewhat  narrow  belt  entirely  across  the  county.  Xear  Rawlings 
a  prominent  offshoot  projects  from  this  belt  across  the  Potomac  into 
West  Virginia.  On  the  eastern  side  of  Monster  Rock  a  slight,  syn- 
clinal fold  has  preserved  a  very  small  area,  but  this  is  almost  wholly 
concealed. 

In  general  the  formation  is  an  argillaceous  fissile  shale,  intensely 
black  and  papery  near  the  base,  but  more  often  of  a  drab  color  above, 
the  upper  part  weathering  into  fine  angular  fragments.  Owing  to  a 
lack  of  hard  material,  the  formation  is  prominent  in  the  valleys,  where 
it  forms  low  ridges  or  rounded  hills. 

The  sandstones  and  sandy  shales  of  the  formation  are  comparatively 
unimportant.  However,  on  the  "Williams  Road  two  and  one-half 
miles  east  of  Cumberland  near  the  middle  of  the  formation,  there  is 
a  bed  of  brownish-gray  sandstone  weathering  readily  into  irregular 
rhombs  or  lozenges,  the  whole  being  fifty  feet  thick.  Thin  irregular 
streaks  of  sandy  shale  are  shown  at  various  horizons  below  the  middle 
of  the  formation  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  in  the  cut  im- 
mediately north  of  2l5t  Bridge  on  the  West  Virginia  Central  Rail- 
road. Xortheast  of  Cumberland,  between  Shriver  Ridge  and  Evitts 
Creek,  there  is  a  series  of  well-defined  parallel  ridges  which  appar- 
ently owe  their  presers  ation  largely  to  shaly  r-andstone.  In  the  Town 
Creek  valley  east  and  Avest  of  Saw  Mill  Run  the  various  Romney 
ridges  there  appear  to  be  quite  free  from  sandstone.  Most  of  these 
ridges  show  to  good  advantage  the  characteristic  weathering  of  the 
upper  shales.  On  the  ridge  west  of  Saw  MjII  Run  two  miles  north- 
west of  Oldtown,  the  exposed  shales  have  completely  broken  up  into 
fine  irregularly  angular,  almost  cubical  blocks  of  various  sixes  usually 
considerably  smaller  than  walnuts.  These  small  fragments  at  this 
place  are  in  such  extreme  abundance  that  they  lie  upon  the  surface 
of  the  ridge  just  within  the  angle  of  rest  and  in  beds  so  deep  and  so 
frequently  subject  to  gravitational  movement  that  vegetation  is  lim- 
ited almost  wholly  to  stunted  pines. 


MABYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


105 


The  intensely  black  shales  at  the  bottom  are  very  carbonaceous 
but  do  not  contain  coal  seams.  However,  along  Collier  Run,  where 
the  lower  beds  can  be  easily  reached,  as  well  as  along  the  road  near 
the  Warm  Spring  iron  bridge  one  mile  south  of  Flintstone,  the  shales 
have  been  fruitlessly  worked  with  the  idea  that  they  might  prove  to 
be  coal-bearing. 

About  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  fomiation 
there  are  several  bluish-gray  fossiliferous  limestone  bands.  These 
are  apparently  never  absent,  although  in  the  well-exposed  "Williams 
Road  section  none  of  them  can  be  seen.  This  is  perhaps  due  to  the 
effect  of  weathering,  as  certain  evidences  indicate  their  probable  pres^ 
ence.  These  bands  are  individually  rarely  three  feet,  usually  less 
than  one  foot  thick,  but  the  total  thickness  in  the  best  exposed  sec- 
tions is  more  than  twenty  feet.  They  are  shown  to  good  advantage  in 
the  West  Virginia  Central  Railroad  cut  at  21st  Bridge,  one  mile 
northeast  of  Keyser,  West  Virginia.  They  are  found  less  clearly 
shown  on  the  county  road  along  the  lower  course  of  Martin  Spring 
Branch  east  of  the  Oriskany  fork  at  the  south  end  of  Martin  Moun- 
tain, where  a  little  of  the  limestone  has  been  burned  for  fertilizing 
purposes.  In  various  other  places  more  or  less  limestone  is  shown 
but  the  exposures  are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  demand  special 
mention. 

One  of  the  ttpper  beds,  about  six  inches  thick,  known  as  the  l^Tauti- 
lus  Ledge,  shows  great  pemstence,  having  been  found  at  several 
widely  separated  localities.  Another  bed,  usually  from  two  to  two 
and  one-half  feet  thick,  is  honeycombed  with  concretionary  nodules. 
These  nodules,  which  are  from  one-half  inch  to  four  inches  in  diam- 
eter and  generally  more  or  less  ferruginous,  gradually  weather  free 
from  their  matrix  and  may  be  found  in  many  localities  scattered  about 
in  considerable  numbers  over  the  ground. 

Iron-ore  pockets  have  been  found  in  various  localities  along  the 
eastern  base  of  Warrior  Motmtain  near  the  bottom  of  the  Romney 
formation.  Iron  ore  may  also  be  seen  between  and  slightly  to  the 
west  of  the  two  Oriskany  outcrops  northeast  of  OldtoAvn.  There  are 
indications  of  the  ore  elsewhere,  but  in  no  case  can  the  exact  horizon 


106 


tup:  geology  of  allegaxy  coixty 


be  definitely  located,  nor  can  the  full  thickness  at  any  place  be  learned. 
It  is  evidently  very  near  or  at  the  bottom  of  the  Romney,  and  the 
theory  has  been  advanced  '  that  its  presence  indicated  a  possible  local 
unconformity  between  the  Oriskany  and  the  Romney  formations. 

THE  JEXMNGS  FORMATION. 

The  Jennings  formation,  closely  related  to  the  Chemung  and 
Portage  of  the  Pennsylvania  and  the  Xew  York  Geological  Sur\-eys, 
is  so  called  from  its  typical  development  in  Jennings  Gap  and  along 
Jennings  Branch,  Virginia.  It  follows  the  Romney  with  perfect 
conformity  and  has  a  considerably  greater  areal  distribution  than  any 
other  formation  in  the  county.  It  occurs  in  four  large  areas. 
Farthest  east  is  the  much  dissected  strip  east  of  Town  Hill  running 
from  the  state  line  southward  beyond  the  Potomac  river.  A  long 
irregularly  shaped  area  west  of  Green  Ridge  extends  entirely  across 
the  county;  it  is  scarcely  more  than  a  mile  in  width  in  the  southern 
part,  but  in  the  northern  part,  on  the  state  line,  it  is  about  seven 
miles  wide.  Polish  Mountain  lies  in  the  northwestern  part  of  this 
area.  In  the  lower  part  of  the  Evitts  Creek  valley  and  in  the  big 
bend  of  the  Potomac  immediately  south,  there  are  two  good-sized 
areas  which  for  our  pui*pose  here  may  be  considered  as  one.  There 
is  also  a  strip  nearly  a  mile  wide  and  about  twenty-five  miles  long 
stretching  northeast-southwest  across  the  widest  part  of  the  county  on 
the  eastern  slope  of  Alleghany  Front. 

The  deposits  of  this  formation  are  almost  wholly  arenaceous.  In 
the  lower  and  middle  parts  the  thin  layers  of  sandy  shales  and 
quartzose  sandstones  are  interbedded  with  no  regularity  of  sequence 
or  of  thickness.  In  the  upper  part  heavy  quartzitic  sandstones  pre- 
dominate, but  even  here  the  sandy  shales  are  in  considerable  abund- 
ance. In  connection  with  the  heavy  quartzitic  beds  there  are  sev- 
eral more  or  less  important  beds  of  conglomerate,  some  of  which  are 
fossiliferous.  Fossils  also  occur  in  the  sandstones  at  various  horizons, 
the  fossiliferous  beds  being  densely  crowded,  usually  sharply  defined 

'  Darton,  N.  H.  Notes  on  the  Stratiffraphy  of  a  portion  of  Central  Appalachian 
Virginia,  Amer.  Geol.,  vol.  x,  Jul}-.  189'2,  p.  16. 


MARYLAND   GEOLOGICAL  SUKVEY 


107 


and  seldom  more  than  a  few  inches  in  thickness.  The  lower  shales 
of  the  Jennings  are  thin  and  black,  somewhat  resembling  those  at 
the  base  of  the  Eomney  formation.  The  upper  part  of  the  Jennings 
is  lithologicallj  indefinite.  The  paleontological  evidence  indicates 
that  the  formation  extends  about  six  hundred  and  fifty  feet  above  the 
heaviest  conglomerate.  This  conglomerate  is  prominent  in  many 
parts  of  the  county  and  from  its  situation  so  near  the  top  of  the 
formation  can  be  vised  advantageously  as  a  guide  in  tracing  the  upper 
contact.  This  conglomerate  in  Jennings  Run  is  thirty-five  feet  thick, 
the  lower  six  feet  of  which  is  flaggy  and  contains  only  scattered  peb- 
bles. The  remainder  is  massive  and  is  highly  charged  with  flattened 
or  rounded  white  quartz  pebbles  of  various  sizes  up  to  one  inch  or 
more  in  diameter.  This  conglomerate  is  apparently  continuous  over 
the  county.  It  is  well  marked  by  a  line  of  hills  along  the  eastern 
slope  of  Alleghany  Front  and  near  the  southern  end  of  this  line  of 
hills  four  and  one-half  feet  of  the  bed  is  shown.  Whether  or  not 
this  represents  the  entire  thickness  at  this  poiiit  could  not  be  learned. 
At  various  intermediate  points  the  conglomerate  does  not  show,  but 
this  is  thought  to  be  due  not  so  much  to  its  thinness  as  to  more  com- 
plete concealment.  Remnants  of  the  same  conglomerate  are  seen 
along  the  top  of  Polish  Mountain.  It  is  not  well  shown  on  Green 
Ridge,  although  there  is  abundant  evidence  of  its  presence,  but  along 
the  eastern  flank  of  Town  Hill  it  appears  to  be  of  considerable  thick- 
ness. Along  the  Little  Orleans-Oronoko  Road  near  the  western  end 
of  the  big  bend  of  the  Potomac  about  three  miles  west  of  Little 
Orleans  the  abundance  of  loose  conglomerate  boulders  indicates  a 
considerable  thickness  there.  The  individual  pebbles  are  quite  large, 
equaling  the  largest  found  in  Jennings  Run.  Above  this  big  con- 
glomerate, as  well  as  below  it,  there  are  thinner  conglomerates  which, 
although  they  may  be  of  very  varying  thickness,  are  nevertheless 
generally  present.  They  are  usually  greatly  iron-stained,  but  when 
not  so  they  much  resemble  some  of  the  Carboniferous  conglomerates. 
However,  to  one  accustomed  to  observing  them,  the  more  flattened 
nature  of  the  pebbles  and  the  very  characteristically  smooth  fracture 
across  both  matrix  and  pebbles  at  once  distinguish  the  Jennings 
from  the  Carboniferous  conglomerates. 


108 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTT 


The  thickness  of  the  formation  appears  to  varv  within  rather  wide 
limits.  Along  Jennings  Run  it  is  thought  to  be  between  thirty-five 
hundred  and  four  thousand  feet,  although  no  good  measurement 
could  be  made.  Along  the  Potomac  near  the  mouth  of  Town  Creek 
it  is  approximately  five  thousand  feet. 

THE  HAMPSHIRE  FORMATION. 

The  Hampshire  frmiiation,  njiproxiniatcly  equivalent  to  the  Cats- 
kill  of  the  Xorth,  receives  its  name  from  Hampshire  county,  "West 
Virginia,  where  it  is  extensively  developed.  In  Allegany  county 
these  rocks  are  exposed  in  three  areas  as  follows:  First,  in  the  eastern 
part  where  Sideling  Hill  Creek  and  the  Potomac  river  have  carved 
out  small  portions  of  the  wide  belt  which  underlies  Sideling  Hill 
further  east.  Since  these  several  small  patches  are  closely  related 
structurally,  they  may  here  be  considered  tc^ether  as  one  area. 
Second,  a  belt  nearly  three  miles  wide  which  runs  northeast-southwest 
across  the  county  forming  the  base  of  Town  Hill.  Third,  a  strip 
averaging  perhaps  one-half  a  mile  in  width  which  lies  along  the 
eastern  face  of  Alleghany  Front  and  stretches  entirely  across  the 
county.  The  patches  included  under  the  first  area  are  largely  con- 
cealed by  their  own  detritus.  The  rocks  in  the  second  area  are  well 
exposed  only  along  the  Potomac  river  and  in  the  gap  of  Fifteenmile 
Creek.  In  the  western  area  the  rocks  are  shown  to  good  advantage 
along  Jennings  Run.  They  are  shown  to  less  advantage  along  Brad- 
dock  Run,  and  in  the  Potomac  gorge  they  are  largely  concealed. 

In  composition  the  Hampshire  is  an  extensive  monotonous  series 
of  cross-bedded,  flaggy  and  massive  sandstones  and  fine-grained  very 
fissile  sandy  and  argillaceous  shales.  The  shales  are  usually  bright 
red  or  brownish  red,  although  some  gray  and  green  or  even  yellowish 
shales  are  seen.  These  latter  colors  occur  more  frequently  near  the 
top  of  the  formation,  and  this  is  particularly  noticeable  just  outside 
of  the  county  immediately  east  of  the  mouth  of  Sideling  Hill  Creek. 
The  sandstone  beds  near  the  bottom  are  heavy,  being  in  several  in- 
stances more  than  twenty  feet  in  tliickness.  The  shales  and  sand- 
stones frequently  merge  graduiilly  into  each  ctlior.  I'otli  laterally  and 


MARVLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SCKVEY 


109 


vertically,  and  are  interbedded  without  any  constant  order  of  suc- 
cession. 

The  thickness  of  the  Hampshire  along  Jennings  Run  is  nineteen 
hundred  feet.  Along  the  Potomac  river  in  the  Town  Hill  syncline  a 
measurement  of  nineteen  hundred  'twenty-five  feet  was  obtained. 
The  Jennings  Run  measurement  is  believed  to  be  quite  accurate  and 
the  measurement  in  the  Town  Hill  svncline  approximately  so. 

The  Carboniferous. 

THE   POCOXO  formation. 

The  Pocono  formation,  named  from  Pocono  Plateau,  Pennsyl- 
vania, where  it  is  well  developed,  is  the  basal  member  of  the  Car- 
boniferous and  lies  conformably  upon  the  Hampshire  formation  of 
the  Devonian.  Of  these  rocks  there  are  only  three  naiTOw  areas 
shown  in  the  county.  One  occupies  a  position  along  the  eastern 
slope  of  Alleghany  Front,  capping  a  line  of  knobs  which  extend 
across  the  county.  The  other  two,  separated  by  the  Fifteenmile 
Creek  gorge,  form  the  crest  of  Town  Hill. 

Little  study  of  the  formation  could  be  made  on  Town  HiU,  but  it 
is  known  to  consist  largely  of  a  very  massive  conglomerate  in  which 
the  milky  quartz  pebbles  are  pretty  well  rounded.  The  size  of  the 
pebbles  varies  much,  ranging  up  to  three-fourths  of  an  inch  in  diam- 
eter or  even  larger.  In  the  western  part  of  the  county  the  litho- 
logical  character  of  the  formation  is  very  different.  The  entire 
thickness  is  shown,  although  to  poor  advantage,  on  the  Cumberland 
and  Pennsylvania  Railroad  in  the  first  tunnel  east  of  Eckhart,  where 
the  thickness  is  two  hundred  and  fifty-eight  feet.  In  the  Potomac 
gorge  between  Westernport  and  Keyser,  TVest  Virginia,  there  is  an 
exposure  of  only  thirty  feet,  but  this  may  represent  the  entire  thick- 
ness of  the  formation  at  that  point.  It  has  been  so  considered  in 
the  Piedmont  folio.' 

In  the  Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  Railroad  section  the  bottom 
of  the  formation  extends  sixty  feet  east  of  the  east  end  of  the  tunnel, 

•Geologic  Atlas  of  the  United  States,  Piedmont  Folio,  Washington,  18!t6. 


110 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


while  the  top  extends  ninety  feet  west  of  the  west  end.  The  lower 
part  of  the  formation  here  is  a  coarse,  cross-bedded,  grayish-green, 
micaceous  sandstone.  About  one  hundred  feet  above  the  bottom 
there  is  a  four-  or  five-foot  band  of  grayish,  impure,  friable  sandstone 
frequently  showing  a  prominent  bluish  coating.  Scattering  pebbles 
of  various  sizes  up  to  two  inches  in  longest  direction  are  present. 
These  are  angular,  siibangular  or  well-rounded  and  of  clear  or  smoky 
quartz,  but  seldom  milky  as  in  the  conglomerate  of  the  same  fonna- 
tion  on  Town  Hill.  At  various  horizons  above  this  there  are  thin 
bands  of  fine  conglomerate,  the  pebbles  of  which  are  inclined  to  be  of 
the  nature  of  milky  quartz.  Xear  the  middle  of  the  section  there  is  a 
space  of  nearly  thirty  feet  which  is  largely  taken  up  with  shales,  some 
of  which  bear  slight  traces  of  plant  remains.  The  upper  part  of  the 
section  shows  mostly  grayish-green  or  reddish-green  micaceous,  flaggy 
sandstones  with  some  interbedded  grayish,  greenish,  yellowish  or 
reddish  shales. 

In  the  Potomac  gorge  section  the  formation  is  made  up  of  gray, 
cross-bedded  sandstone  with  only  a  few  widely  scattered  pebbles. 

THE  GREENBRIER  FORMATION. 

The  Greenbrier  formation,  so-called  from  Greenbrier  county,  "West 
Virginia,  lies  conformably  upon  the  Pocono  and  outcrops  in  Alle- 
gany county  only  in  a  single  narrow  band  extending  high  up  along 
the  eastern  face  of  the  Alleghany  Front  from  the  Maryland-Pennsyl- 
vania state  line  southward  through  the  county,  cutting  across  tlie 
Potomac  river  almost  midway  between  Westemport,  Maryland,  and 
Keyser,  West  Virginia. 

The  formation  consists  mainly  of  limestone  strata.  Sandstones  and 
arenaceous  limestones  are  most  prominently  developed  in  the  lower 
part.  Shales  preponderate  near  the  middle  while  the  upper  part  is 
mostly  composed  of  highly  fossiliferous  and  more  nearly  pure  lime- 
stones. Many  of  the  lower  arenaceous  beds  show  a  peculiar  banding 
on  the  weathered  surfaces  apparently  as  if  they  were  highly  cross- 
bedded. 

The  formation  is  well  shown  in  only  one  place  in  the  county,  viz., 


maryla:xd  geological  survey  111 

at  the  mouth  of  Stony  Run  below  the  water-tank  on  the  West  Virginia 
Central  Eailroad,  two  miles  southeast  of  "Westernport.  Even  here 
some  of  the  beds  are  hidden.  In  the  only  other  places  in  the  county 
where  one  might  hope  to  get  good  sections,  viz.,  along  Braddock  Run 
and  along  Jennings  Run,  the  formation  is  largely  concealed  by  soil 
and  by  talus  from  the  heavy  Pottsville  sandstones  and  conglomerates 
above.  As  a  result  no  measurements  can  be  made  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  county,  but  judging  from  measurements  in  various  places 
outside  of  the  state,  it  seems  quite  certain  that  the  formation  gTows 
continually  thinner  northward  from  Stony  Run.'  Much  interest 
is  attached  to  this  formation  because  it  is  in  gTeat  measure  the  Appa- 
lachian representative  of  the  great  Carboniferous  limestones  of  the- 
Central  Mississippi  states. 

At  the  mouth  of  Stony  Run  the  following  section  was  made : 

Feet.  Inches. 

Greenbrier-Mauch  Chunk  contact   

Heavy  dark  bluish  gray  fossiliferous  limestone   4  6 

Argillaceous  shale.  Fossiliferous,  especially  in  the  upper 
part.  Drab  colored  on  fresh  surface,  but  inclined  to 
show  as  a  dull  red  shale  on  account  of  its  prominent 

ferruginous  surface  coating   8 

Massive  bluish  fossiliferous  limestone   7 

Concealed   10 

Massive  bluish  fossiliferous  limestone   1  6 

^Massive  bluish,  highly  fossiliferous  limestone,  weathers 

very  irregularly    3  6 

Thinlj-  bedded  fossiliferous  limestone  with  thin  bands  of 

olive-green  fossiliferous  shale   10  10 

Concealed    9 

Keddish  brown,  much  disintegrated  sandstone   9 

Concealed   20 

Heavy,  pinkish  green,  mottled,  slightly  fossiliferous  lime- 
stone   2  6 

Concealed   11 

Eed  sand}-  shale  with  thin  green  laj-ers  near  top  and 

bottom    3 

Greenish  red  shaly  arenaceous  limestone   1 

Concealed    3 

Eed  sandy  shale  with  a  few  thin  shaly  defined  green  argil- 
laceous bands  32 


'  Lesley,  J.  P.  A  Summar}-  Description  of  the  Geolosry  of  Pennsylvania  in  Three 
Volumes,  vol.  iii,  part  i,  page  1791,  Harrisburg,  1895.  See  also  the  Geologic  Atlas'of 
the  United  States,  Piedmont  and  Franklin  Folios. 


112 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Feet.  Inches. 

Concealed    6 

Ked  shaly  sandstone     1  0 

Massive  sandstone  in  streaks  or  layers  of  pink,  green  and 

white    6 

Red  arenaceous  shale  10 

Red  shalj-  sandstone   9 

Calcareous,  pinkish  gray  sandstone    2  6 

Concealed    7 

Shalj'  sandstone    1  6 

Mostly-  concealed,  some  shaly  sandstone  showing  20 

Very  arenaceous  pinkish  green  limestone  26 

Concealed    5 

Bluish  arenaceous  limestone    7 

Concealed    8 


Below  this  comes  a  coarse  grayish  sandstone  which  is  considered 
as  marking  the  top  of  the  Pocono,  thus  giving  for  the  total  thickness 
of  the  Greenbrier  at  this  place  two  hundred  and  twentv-seven  feet. 

THE  MAUCH  CHtnfK  FOEMATIOX. 

The  Mauch  Chunk  formation,  which  is  verv  similar  to  the  Canaan 
formation  of  the  Piedmont  quadrangle,  receives  its  name  from  Mauch 
Chunk,  Pennsylvania,  where  the  formation  is  well  shown.  Like  the 
preceding  formation,  it  is  exposed  in  Allegany  county  only  along  the 
eastern  face  of  the  Alleghany  Front.  This  formation,  together  with 
the  imderlying  Greenbrier,  lies  obscurely  in  the  depressions  extend- 
ing in  a  line  across  the  county  between  the  heavy  crest  of  Alleghany 
Front  and  the  Pocono  knobs  a  little  lower  down  on  the  eastern  face. 

The  Mauch  Chiuik  is  composed  chiefly  of  red  arenaceous  and  argil- 
laceous shales,  the  argillaceous  shales  being  a  bright  red  and  par- 
ticularly prominent  in  the  lower  part.  A  little  above  the  middle  of 
the  formation  there  lies  in  one  almost  continuous  body  about  one 
hundred  feet  of  soft,  flaggy,  fine-grained,  reddish-green  to  brownish- 
red  sandstone.  The  sandstones  are  very  generally  micaceous,  as  are 
also  many  of  the  middle  and  upper  shales. 

Between  the  Mauch  Chunk  and  the  Greenbrier  there  is  a  greenish 
brocciated  sandstone  which  near  the  mouth  of  Stony  Run  is  four  feet 
thick.  At  the  top  of  the  Mauch  Chunk  there  is  also  a  four-foot  transi- 
tion band  of  highly  brecciated  reddish  arenaceous  limestones  above 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XII. 


Fig.  1. -exposure  OF  JENMNCS  S.\NDSTONE,  COKRIGA.W  I  LLE. 


Fig.  2.— exposure  of  POTTSVILLE  SANDSTONE,  WESTERNPORT. 
GEOLOGICAL  SECTIONS   IN  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


113 


whicli  lie  the  lower  flags  of  the  succeeding  Pottsville  formation.  This 
brecciated  limestone  can  be  seen  to  best  advantage  on  the  Cumber- 
land and  Pennsylvania  Eailroad  one  hundred  twenty  rods  east  of 
Barrelville.  It  is  apparently  continuous  southward;  since  a  similar 
brecciated  limestone  at  the  same  horizon  may  be  seen  outcropping  on 
the  Keyser-Piedmont  wagon  road  on  the  "\^est  Virginia  side  of  the 
Potomac  about  one  and  one-half  miles  below  Piedmont. 

The  total  thickness  of  the  formation  in  the  Potomac  gorge  east  of 
"Westemport  is  about  eight  hundred  feet.  Along  Jennings  Run, 
twenty-five  miles  to  the  northeast,  the  space  occupied  by  the  Mauch 
Chunk  and  Greenbrier  combined  is  approximately  nine  hundred 
and  thirty  feet  or  about  one  hundred  feet  less  than  the  oombined 
thickness  of  the  two  formations  in  the  Potomac  gorge. 

THE  POTTSVILLE  FOEMATIOX. 

The  Pottsville  formation,  which  is  approximately  equivalent  to  the 
Blackwater  formation  of  the  Piedmont  quadrangle,  receives  its 
name  from  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania,  near  which  place  it  is  exten- 
sively developed.  It  is  this  formation  which,  at  its  easternmost  out- 
crop in  the  county,  makes  the  bold  crest  of  Alleghany  Front,  and  dip- 
ping westward  passes  beneath  the  surface  and  fonns  the  massive 
floor  of  the  Cumberland-Georges  Creek  coal  district.  It  is  to  this 
formation  more  than  to  any  other  that  is  due  the  preservation  of  the 
present  area  of  the  coal-field.  By  its  resistance  to  erosion  it  has 
governed  the  position  of  Alleghany  Front,  and  although  its  eastern 
edge  is  greatly  notched  by  Jenning-s  Run,  by  Braddock  Run  and  by 
the  Potomac  river,  the  latter  having,  indeed,  cut  into  the  formation 
westward  across  the  synclinal  axis,  the  formation  nevertheless  retains 
its  full  thickness  throughout  almost  all  of  the  area  in  Allegany 
county  west  of  the  easternmost  Pottsville  outcrop.  The  formation 
is  slightly  cut  into  by  Georges  Creek  near  the  southern  end  of  the 
coal  basin,  but  passes  beneath  the  creek  bed  a  few  yards  north  of  the 
Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  car-shops  in  the  northern  suburbs 
of  "Western port. 

Messrs.  X.  H.  Darton  and  Joseph  A.  Taff,  in  their  general  de- 

8 


114 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


scription  of  the  Blackwater  formation  with  which  the  Pottsville  so 
closely  agrees,  mention  the  following  important  characteristics  of  the 
area  in  the  northeastern  part  of  the  Piedmont  quadrangle:  "In 
the  vicinity  of  Piedmont  the  uppermost  and  lowest  sandstone  beds 
are  congloraeritic  and  are  one  hundred  and  ten  and  thirty  feet  thick 
respectively,  while  the  medial  sandstone  is  fine-grained  and  only 
fourteen  feet  thick."  '  The  triple  character  of  the  formation  can 
be  readily  made  out  by  means  of  the  many  extensive  outcrops  of 
sandstone  and  conglomerate  ledges;  nevertheless  there  is  no  really 
good  exposure  of  the  whole  formation  found  in  the  county,  the 
softer  strata  being  very  largely  concealed.  Furthermore  this,  like  most 
of  the  other  Carboniferous  formations,  shows  exceedingly  rapid 
changes  within  short  distances,  so  that  a  measurement  in  one  locality, 
even  if  favorable  conditions  prevail,  will  but  poorly  suffice,  so  far  as 
details  are  concerned,  for  an  area  only  a  short  distance  away. 

It  is  perhaps  for  this  reason  alone  that  such  wide  discrepancy  is 
obsen^ed  in  the  details  of  all  published  sections  made  near  the  Potomac 
in  the  southern  part  of  the  Georges  Creek  basin.  The  following  sec- 
tion, constructed  from  measurements  made  at  various  places,  is  be- 
lieved to  represent  with  reasonable  accuracy  the  general  character  of 


the  Pottsville  formation  in  that  vicinity: 

Feet.  Inches. 

Pottsville-Allegheny  contact   

Massive  sandstone    20 

Coal,  Irequentlj-  impure  or  accompanied  by  black  or  graj- 

shales  [Westernport  or  "  Two-foot  "  coal]   2 

Shale  and  heavy  sandstone   85 

Shale  with  coal  streaks    30 

Flaggj-  sandstone  and  shale    12 

Coal    1  6 

Impure  fire-clay    8 

Flagg\-  sandstone   14 

Coal  [Bloomington  or  "'Railroad"  coal]   ^  6 

Shale    2 

Shale,  flaggy  sandstone  and  concealed    80 

Coal  and  coalj'  shale    3 

Black,  yellow  and  gray  ai'enaceous  shales   7 

Greenish  flaggy  sandstone    30 

Pottsville-Mauch  Chunk  contact    

Total  thickness  of  Pottsville  296 


'Geologic  Atlas  of  the  United  States,  Piedmont  Folio,  Wasbington,  1896. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


115 


Iso  good  measurement  of  the  Pottsville  can  be  obtained  in  the 
northern  part  of  Allegany  county,  but  the  following  section  has  been 
measured  a  little  north  of  the  state  line  near  "Wellersburg,  Somerset 
county,  Pennsylvania,  in  the  gap  of  Gladdens  Eim  through  Little 
Allegheny  Mountain:  ^ 

Feet.  Inches. 


Massive  sandstone    75 

^Nfount  Savage  coal   4 

Mount  Savage  fire-claj-   7  6 

Conglomerate  sandstone   125 

Dark,  shaly  sandstone    10 

Shale   1 

Coal  and  shale    8 

Impure  lire-clay    10 

Dark  shales  with  iron  ore    20 

Massive  sandstone    35 


Total  thickness   288  2 


Along  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  west  of  Piedmont,  "West 
Virginia,  is  a  coal  seam  popularly  known  as  the  Railroad  Seam,  which 
has  been  named  the  Bloomington  coal,  and  near  the  top  of  the  forma- 
tion is  a  two-foot  seam  named  the  Westernport  coal. 

THE  ALLEGHENY  FORMATION. 

The  Allegheny  formation,  identical  with  the  Allegheny  river  series 
of  Pennsylvania,  immediately  follows  the  Pottsville,  and  like  it, 
underlies  most  of  the  Georges  Creek  basin.  It  outcrops  on  the  east- 
ern side  of  the  basin  high  up  on  the  western  slope  of  Dans  and  Little 
Allegheny  mountains.  In  a  similar  manner  its  western  edge  shows 
along  the  eastern  slope  of  Savage  Mountain,  but  of  this  last  outcrop 
Allegany  county  includes  only  a  small  portion  near  the  Maryland- 
Pennsylvania  line.  The  entire  thickness  of  the  formation  is  shown 
in  the  southern  part  of  the  basin  on  the  hillsides  along  the  Potomac 
but  northward  the  formation  disappears  beneath  the  bed  of  Georges 
Creek  one  mile  below  Barton. 

The  formation  consists  mainly  of  irregularly,  interbedded  shales 
and  sandstones  with  several  coal  seams  of  greater  or  less  importance. 

1  White,  I.  C.  Stratigraphy  of  the  Bituminous  Coal  Fields  of  Pennsylvania,  Ohio 
and  West  Virginia,  U.  S.  G.  S.  Bull.  No.  65,  p.  186,  Washington,  1891. 


116 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF   ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


At  the  base  is  the  poorly  exposed  Bluebaugh  seam  wliich  has  been 
opened  at  Warrior  Run.  About  35  feet  above  this  is  the  Parker  seam 
shown  in  various  parts  of  the  coal  basin  and  supposed  to  be  the  equiva- 
lent of  the  Clarion  coal  of  Pennsylvania.  About  the  center  of  the 
formation  is  the  Davis  or  Six-foot  coal,  the  most  important  of  all  the 
coals  in  this  formation.  It  is  supposed  to  be  the  equivalent  of  the 
Lower  Kittanning  of  Pennsylvania.  About  30  feet  beneath  it  streaks 
of  coal  may  usually  be  found  which  together  compose  the  unworked 
Split-six.  At  the  top  of  the  formation  is  the  Thomas  or  Three-foot 
seam. 

Most  of  the  sandstones  are  thinly  bedded  and  disintegrate  easily, 
so  that  the  face  of  the  outcrop  is  generally  hidden  by  a  gently  sloping 
cover  of  loose  shale  and  soil  delimited  by  the  more  massive  Potts- 
ville  sandstone  below  and  the  heavy  Mahoning  sandstone  above. 

The  following  section  was  measured  near  the  Franklin  gravity 
plane  a  short  distance  from  the  mouth  of  Savage  river: 


Keet. 

Sandstone,  apparently  the  Mahoning  

Concealed    25 

Sandy  ferruginous  shale    60 

Sandstones  and  concealed    50 

Sandstone,  flaggy  near  top    60 

Shale    6 

Coal  [Davis  or  "  Six-foot  "]    6 

Concealed    30 

Flaggy  and  shaly  sandstone  61 

Coal  [Parker]    1 

Shale    19 

Conglomeritic  sandstone  of  I'ottsville    

Total  thickness  of  Allegheny-  formation  318 


A  more  detailed  section  was  obtained  as  follows  near  Franklin 
village  on  Georges  Creek. 

Feet. 

Massive  sandstone,  apparently  the  Mahoning  

Greenish  shalj-  sandstone.     A  coal  vein   near  the  top 


[Thomas]    55 

INfassive  sandstone    24 

Ferruginous  shale,  showing  spheroidal  weathering   3 

Fine  black  and  brown  shales   8 

Grayish  green,  slightly  nodular  shale   10 

Fine  grayish  green  shale   4 

Arenaceous  shale    9 

Greenish  sandstone  and  shale   26 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  117 

Feet. 

Shaly  sandstone    6 

Fine  shale  and  concealed   9 

Shaly  sandstone    131/2 

Concealed    30 

Coal  [Davis]    6 

Sandstone,  shale  and  concealed    7 

Flaggj"  sandstone   16 

Massive  sandstone    4 

Shale    2 

Coal  ["  Split-six  "]    3 

Concealed    90 

Total  thickness  of  Allegheny-  foi-mation  325Va 


Professor  I.  C.  White,  in  Bulletin  65  of  the  United  States  Geo- 
logical Survey,  gives  the  follo'^ing  measurements  for  the  vicinity  of 
Westernport: 

Feet.  Inches. 


C  Coal  2 

Coal,  Upper  Freeport  [Thomas].  .  J  Shale  and  bone.  ...  1 

[  Coal  2  5 

Concealed    10 

Shale,  bluish    10 

Coal,  Lower  Freeport   2 

Fire-clay    2 

Concealed    10 

Sandstone,  hard    2 

Sandstone,  shalj'   5 

Shales,  sandstones  and  concealed   55 

f  Bituminous  slate  . .  5 
Coal,  Upper  Kittanning   <  Coal  2  7 

Dark  shales  and  concealed    10 

Massive  sandstone,  gray    50 

Shales,  drab    5 

'  Coal,  slaty  1 

)  Coal,  bony   8 

Coal,  Upper  Kittanning  [Davis] .  <  Coal,  good  ....  1  4 

Slate,  hard  

\  Coal,  good   2     6    5  61/2 

Fire-clay,  sandy    3 

Shales,  with  nodular  iron  ore    2 

Fire-clay,  impure    4 

Flaggy  sandstone    20 

Concealed    25 

Fire-clay,  sandy    10 

Flaggy  sandstone  and  sandy  shales   25 

Concealed  and  sandj'  shales    40 


Total   307  61/2 


118 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXV  COUNTY 


In  the  northern  part  of  the  coal  basin  the  thickness  cannot  be 
learned,  nor  is  there  a  good  exposure  anywhere  along  the  lines  of 
outcrop  on  the  eastern  and  western  borders  of  the  basin. 

Near  the  mouth  of  Georges  Creek,  as  seen  beneath  Mr.  Merrill's 
mine,  there  is  a  coal  seam  almost  thirty  feet  below  the  "six-foot." 
The  section  obtained  at  Mr.  Merrill's  mine  for  this  part  of  the  forma- 
tion is  as  follows: 

Feet. 


Coal  [Davis]   

Shale    9 

Sandstone  and  shale   11 

Shale    4 

Shalj'  sandstone    1 

Shale    4 

Coal  ["  Split-six  "]    3 


THE  COXEMAUGH  FORMATIOX. 

The  Conemaugh  formation,  so-called  from  Conemaugh  river.  Pa., 
follows  the  Allegheny  in  regular  order  and  lies  within  the  area  out- 
lined by  that  formation.  In  the  northern  part  of  the  basin  the  Alle- 
gheny has  been  cut  deeply  by  J ennings  Run  and  its  tributaries,  while 
at  the  southern  end  Georges  Creek  has  made  a  long  incision  into  it, 
the  bifurcation  extending  northward  to  within  one  mile  of  Barton. 

The  Conemaugh,  formerly  called  the  "  Barren  Measures,"  is  largely 
a  shale  formation.  A  sandstone,  sometimes  rather  massive,  is  gen- 
erally found  near  the  bottom.  This  is  apparently  equivalent  to  the 
Mahoning  sandstone  of  Pennsylvania.  A  second  sandstone  occa- 
sionally quite  massive,  is  found  twenty'  or  thirty  feet  below  the  top. 
The  latter  sandstone  is  generally  not  less  than  twenty  feet  thick  and 
is  sometimes  conglomeritic,  especially  in  the  lower  parts.  Two  hun- 
dred yards  east  of  the  Hofman  mine  opening  an  exposure  al>ove 
and  below  the  railroad  switch  gives  a  thickness  of  thirty-eight  feet 
with  neither  the  top  nor  bottom  shown.  A  few  rods  east  of  Eckhart 
on  the  National  Eoad  near  the  Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  Rail- 
road, thirty  feet  of  the  sandstone  is  exposed,  but  here  also  the  top 
and  bottom  are  concealed.  Likewise,  immediately  east  of  the  long 
railroad  bridge  near  Detmold  Run,  fourteen  feet  is  exposed,  and  in 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


119 


the  village  of  Miller,  east  of  Lonaconing,  twenty-five  feet  is  shown, 
but  in  each  case  the  top  and  bottom  are  hidden.  This  sandstone  is 
flaggy  near  the  top  and,  like  most  of  the  other  Coal  Measures  sand- 
stones, is  highly  charged  with  iron,  contains  much  mica  and  is  highly 
cross-bedded. 

A  sandstone  which  is  frequently  conglomeritic  is  found  a  little 
below  the  middle  of  the  formation.  Thirty-six  feet  of  this  conglom- 
eritic sandstone  is  shown  to  good  advantage  at  Barton  on  the  hillside 
south  of  the  Potomac  tramway. 

The  shales  are  chiefly  argillaceoiTS,  and  the  coals,  of  which  there 
are  several,  are  usually  impure;  one  coal  seam  of  some  importance 
known  as  the  "Four-foot"  or  Barton  coal  is  approximately  250  feet 
above  the  bottom  of  the  formation.  Irregular  beds  of  iron  ore  are 
frequent  and  two  or  three  limestones  are  present.  A  limestone  bed, 
perhaps  the  thickest  limestone  of  the  formation,  is  poorly  exposed  on 
the  Potomac  gravity  plane  about  235  feet  below  the  top  of  the 
formation.  It  is  bluish-black  in  color,  slightly  fossiliferous  and  six 
feet  thick.    It  measures  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 


Massive  limestone   1  6 

Shaly  limestone    6 

Massive  limestone    8 

Shaly  limestone    4 

Massive  limestone    3 


Another  limestone  was  found  in  a  ravine  at  the  roadside  one  mile 
west  of  Mount  Savage.  This  is  apparently  about  one  hundred  feet 
higher  than  the  limestone  at  the  Potomac  Plane.  The  measurement 
of  the  entire  exposure  here  is  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 


Concealed   

Black  shale   10 

Very  coaly  shale    3 

Black,  somewhat  coaly  shale    1  8 

Impure  coal   2  8 

Black  shale  with  very  thin  coal  streaks   4 

Coalj'  shale   1  1 

Coal,  apparenth^  all  good    2  4 

Shale,  dark  above,  gray  in  lower  part    1  5 

Clay    7 

Massive,  bluish  gray,  argillaceous  limestone    2  1 


120 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Feet.  Inches. 


Massive  light  gray  argillaceous  brecciated  limestone   1  9 

Yery  argillaceous  limestone   4  6 

Soft  weathered  shale    4 

Iron-ore  band   4 

Black  coaly  shale   2 

Concealed   


Thirty  feet  below  this  section  there  is  a  thin  highly  ripple-marked 
sandstone  exposed  in  the  road-bed  two  hundred  yards  west  of  the  coal 
outcrop. 

For  a  complete  section  of  the  entire  formation  no  more  detailed 
section  can  be  given  than  that  published  by  Professor  P.  T.  Tyson  ' 
many  years  ago,  as  obtained  from  measurements  made  on  the 
eastern  side  of  Dug  Hill  near  Lonaconing,  the  hill  having  received 
this  name  on  account  of  the  excavations  made  especially  for  these 
measurements  on  Laiirel  Run  and  on  Mill  Kun.  It  is  not  easy  to 
decide  just  which  stratimi  of  Professor  Tyson's  section  coincides  with 
the  lower  limit  of  the  Conemaugh,  b\it  the  section  as  given  below  is 
believed  to  have  its  lowest  measurement  -within  a  few  feet  of  the 
contact.  Although  on  account  of  the  variability  of  the  strata  the 
measurements  may  seem  to  have  been  taken  more  in  detail  than  nec- 
essary and  less  attention  given  to  recording  the  degree  of  purity  of 
the  various  coal  seams  and  iron-ore  bands  than  may  be  desirable  for 
economic  ptirposes,  nevertheless  the  section  will  perhaps  always  re- 
main an  important  one  for  this  division  of  the  Coal  Measures  at  Lona- 
coning.  In  the  absence  of  good  exposiires  elsewhere  it  has  in  the 
past  been  largely  depended  upon  as  a  guide  for  other  parts  of  the  coal 
basin. 

The  section  is  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 

"  Big  Vein  "  coal  [from  Dug  Hill  measurements]  


Shale  with  iron  ore  at  the  top   12 

Fire-clay    3 

Limestone    1  6 

Shale    15  6 

Sandstone,  fine-grained    20 

Shale    27  6 


'  Proc.  Amer.  Philos.  Soc.  xi,  1871,  pp.  9-13. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XIII. 


marvla:xd  geological  survey  121 

Feet.  Inches. 

Coal    2  6 

Shale    4 

Shale  with  iron  ore  at  the  top                                               16  8 

Shale,  ferruginous   1 

Coal    3  9 

Shale    1 

Coal   1 

Shale,  with  three  bands  of  iron  ore   2  6 

Fire-cla^'  with  iron  ore   3 

Shale    6 

Coal    1 

Shale  with  iron  ore   7 

Fire-claj-  with  iron  ore  nodules   3 

Shale   6 

Coal    1  (> 

Shale    2  6 

Fire-claj-  with  two  bands  of  iron  ore   5  6- 

Sandstone    1  6 

Shale  with  four  bands  of  iron  ore   6  6 

Shale  with  two  bands  of  iron  ore  nodules   6  6 

Iron  ore    7 

Shale  with  iron  ore   4  3 

Coal    & 

Shale  with  iron  ore    6 

Coal    1  6 

Shale    2 

Coaly  shale   2  3 

Shale  with  iron  ore   2  2 

Coal    2  1 

Shale    6 

Fire-clay  with  iron  ore   2  8 

Shale  with  iron  ore   4  10- 

Shale,  ferruginous    2  6 

Tron  ore    1  6 

Coal    3 

Shaly  sandstone    3 

Shale    4  & 

Coal      2  6- 

Limestone    3 

Fire-clay    3  & 

Coal    8 

Shale    1  6 

Shale,  ferruginous    1  6 

Shale   1 

Coal    1  3 

Shale    1  3 

Coal    1  6 

Shale    1  6- 


122  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

Feet.  Inches. 

Coal    1  f, 

Shale,  brown    2  8 

Shale,  arenaceous  and  nodular    5 

Shaly  sandstone    8 

Shale    4  6 

Coal    1  6 

Fire-clay    7  4 

Shale,  ferruginous   5 

Shale  with  nodules   7 

Shale,  ferruginous    2 

Shale   1 

Sandstone    39 

Shale    15 

Fire-clay  with  iron  ore    3 

Limestone   6 

Fire-clay  with  iron  ore    2 

Shale   10 

Sandstone  [from  measurements  on  Laurel  Eun]   44 

Coal    8 

Shale    10 

Limestone    2  2 

Sandstone    23  6 

Shale    6 

Hard  black  band    6 

Shale,  very  ferruginous    6 

Shale  [from  measurements  on  Mill  Run]   4  6 

Coal,  shaly,  hard,  good   5  8 

Fire-clay,  sandy    4 

Ore  in  shaly  fire-clay    6 

Limestone   C 

Sandstone    33 

Shale   9  6 

Fossiliferous  ferruginous  shale    11 


Total  thickness  of  strata  now  considered  as  Conemaugh,  495  C 

An  excellent  section  recently  obtained  bv  Professor  Charles  S. 
Prosser  of  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey  gives  the  thickness  of  the 
Conemaugh  on  Phoenix  Hill  two  miles  below  Barton  as  approximately 
630  feet.    This  section  is  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 


"  Big  Vein  "  coal   

Black  shales  with  thin  layers  of  sandstone   41  C 

Concealed  in  part   93  6 

Thin-bedded  sandstone  with  coal  streak  at  base   10 

Black  clay  shales   4  C 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUKVEV  123 

Coal    21/2  in.  \  Feet.  Inches. 

Black  clay  shale.  . .         IV2  i 

Coal    T  J 

Black  clay  shale.  . .  2  ft.  0  / 
Coal    11 

Black  clay  shale.  . .         7  The  Franklin  or  so-called 

Coal    3  '■  Dirty  >'ine-foot "  10  4 

Black  clay  shale.  . .         5  V 

Coal    5  I 

Black  clay  shale.. .  2  4  I 
Coal   2      6  / 

Fire-clay  and  shales    24 

Brownish  sandstone    2  6 

Concealed    23 

Coal    3 

Concealed    15 

Drab  to  yellowish  shales   16  6 

Coal    9 

Sandy  shales  with  iron  nodules   14  9 

Mostly  concealed    38 

Shales    17  6 

Bituminous  shale    1  6 

Shales  with  limestone  concretions   21 

Concealed    25 

Shales  and  sandstone    28  9 

Brownish  gray  compact  sandstone    1 

Concealed,  probably  containing  Barton  or  "  Four-Foot  '' 

coal    37  6 

Yellowish  gray  shales    2 

Coal    4 

Shales  and  thin-bedded  sandstones    28  C 

Thin-bedded  sandstones  and  shales    C 

Impure  fire-claj-  and  shales    10 

Yellowish  sandy  shales   20 

Bluish  to  yellowish  shales   23 

Massive  sandstone    12 

Concealed    20 

Coal    1  9 

Fire-clay    2  6 

Yellowish  shales  with  iron  nodules   15  6 

ilassive  sandstone    1 

Concealed    20  3 

Olive  to  yellowish  shales   11  6 

Concealed,  with  sandstone  blocks    8  9 

Massive  sandstone    ^  9 

Concealed  and  sandy  shales   21 

Conemaugh-Allegheny  contact   


Total  thickness  of  Conemaugh  630-|- 


124 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF   ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


THE  MONOXGAHELA  FORMATION. 

The  Monongahela  formation  received  its  name  from  the  Monon- 
gahela  river,  along  which  stream  it  is  well  developed.  The  floor  of 
the  Big  Vein  "  coal  distinctly  marks  the  base  of  the  formation, 
while  its  npper  limits  in  the  few  small  areas  where  the  full  thickness 
still  remains  is  marked  by  the  roof  of  the  Koontz  ("Waynesburg)  coal. 

The  formation  has  been  much  dissected  by  erosion  and,  retaining 
only  a  minor  proportion  of  its  former  distribution,  is  broken  into 
many  distinct  areas.  The  most  extensive  of  these  lies  around  and 
largely  to  the  south  of  Frostburg.  Its  northern  end  lies  upon  and 
helps  to  make  the  high  transverse  divide  which  separates  the  drainage 
of  Jennings  and  Braddock  nms  from  that  of  Georges  Creek,  and  has 
thus  survived  the  cutting  that  has  so  seriously  affected  the  northern 
and  southern  portions  of  the  basin.  This  area  is  very  irregular  in 
outline.  It  extends  southward  to  Lonaconing,  and  one  narrow  area 
reaches  northward  to  within  almost  half  a  mile  of  Mount  Savage. 
Three  of  its  prominent  westerly  projections  extend  across  the  county 
line  into  Garrett  county.  An  oval  area  of  small  extent  lies  upon  the 
county  line  about  one  and  one-half  miles  southwest  of  Frostburg  as 
an  outlier  of  the  above-mentioned  larger  area  from  which  it  has  been 
cut  off  by  the  branches  of  "Winebrenner  Run,  a  tributary  of  Georges 
Creek.  Xorth  of  Frostburg  and  west  of  the  Cumberland  and  Penn- 
sylvania Railroad  there  is  an  area  of  considerable  size  which  is  sepa- 
rated from  the  larger  area  to  the  south  by  the  headwaters  of  Jennings 
Rim.  A  rapidly  disappearing  remnant  of  Monongahela,  covering 
perhaps  twenty  acres,  caps  a  prominent  hill  north-northwest  of  Mount 
Savage,  one-half  mile  south  of  the  state  line.  The  area  is  oval  in 
shape  and  the  greatest  thickness  above  the  "  Big  Vein  "  is  less  than 
seventy-five  feet. 

In  the  southeni  part  of  the  basin  east  of  Georges  Creek  there  are 
several  isolated  areas.  The  largest  of  these,  lying  southeast  of  Lona- 
coning, covers  less  than  three  square  miles  and  retains  the  full  thick- 
ness of  the  formation.  Xone  of  the  others  reach  an  area  of  two 
square  miles  and  none  show  the  full  thickness.  Several  areas  lie 
west  of  Georges  Creek  south  of  Koontz  Run,  but  only  one  of  these, 


MARYLAND   GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


125 


the  small  one  west  of  Moscow,  is  wliolly  within  Allegany  coiintv.  That 
just  west  of  Lonaconing  is  one  of  the  largest  and  retains  the  full 
thickness  of  the  formation. 

The  Monongahela  formation  is  composed  almost  wholly  of  easily 
disintegrating  materials.  Only  rarely  do  the  sandstones  become 
suflBciently  thick  and  massive  to  form  noticeable  topogi-aphic  features, 
although  in  Washington  Hollow  near  Eckhart  and  on  the  hillsides  east 
of  the  village  of  Miller  many  loose  sandstone  boulders  were  found 
which  are  quite  massive  and  conglomeritic.  The  surface  of  the  hill- 
sides covered  by  the  Monongahela  is  smooth  and  gently  sloping.  The 
characteristic  topographic  feature  commonly  known  as  the  "  bench/' 
which  is  so  frequently  seen  above  the  Big  Vein,  is  due  generally  to 
the  relatively  easy  weathering  properties  of  the  coal  and  to  the  hard- 
ness of  the  heavy  underlying  sandstone. 

Xear  the  top  of  "Westernport  Hill  above  the  Franklin  tramroad 
is  a  micaceous  sandstone  about  twenty-five  feet  thick.  This  is  near 
the  middle  of  the  formation  and  apparently  varies  greatly  in  char- 
acter. Other  thinner  sandstones  are  interbedded  among  the  shales, 
but  their  exact  location  is  generally  not  easy  to  determine. 

The  shales  of  the  Monongahela  are  arenaceous  and  argillaceous  and 
vary  in  color  from  a  light  gray  through  green  and  brown  to  an  intense 
black.  Iron-ore  bands  are  not  infrequent,  and  in  the  lower  part  of 
the  formation  they  are  sometimes  of  considerable  thickness. 

The  number  of  persistent  limestones  is  not  definitely  known.  Some 
of  those  which  in  places  show  good  exposures  are  evidently  so  len- 
ticular in  character  that  they  can  seldom  be  safely  correlated  with 
those  in  distant  areas.  In  the  mine  shaft  sunk  by  the  Borden  Min- 
ing Company  three  miles  south  of  Frostburg,  two  limestones  were 
found  about  forty  and  fifty  feet  above  the  Big  Vein  "  coal.  In  the 
■Consolidation  Coal  Company's  pumping  shaft  not  far  distant  two 
limestones  were  also  found,  one  thirty-three  feet  above  the  "  Big 
Vein,"  while  the  other  was  more  than  two  hundred  feet  above.  An 
additional  limestone  bed  is  exposed  near  by  but  a  few  feet  above  the 
mouth  of  the  shaft.  One  mile  north  of  Frostburg  along  the  upper 
railroad  track  near  the  Xew  York  mine,  loose  boulders  of  a  massive 


120 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


limestone  are  shown  which  indicate  a  stratum  not  more  than  fifty 
feet  above  the  "  Big  Vein  "  coal.  Likewise,  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Koontz  mine,  a  variable  limestone  is  fonnd  about  forty  feet  above 
the  Big  Vein,"  and  one-half  mile  west  of  Vale  Summit  in  a  ravine 
on  the  west  side  of  the  Georges  Creek  and  Cumberland  Railroad  a 
limestone  is  found  at  about  the  same  horizon.  Xear  the  new  furnace, 
one-half  mile  west  of  the  Xew  Detmold  mine,  a  three  and  one-half 
foot  bed  is  shown  one  hundred  and  five  feet  above  the  "  Big  Vein," 
while  near  the  top  of  Westernport  Hill  loose  limestone  boulders  indi- 
cate a  bed  there  occupying  about  the  same  position. 

The  limestones  frequently  appear  brecciated  on  weathered  sur- 
faces, are  usually  slightly  fossiliferous  and  are  almost  invariably  dark 
in  color  when  fresh. 

Owing  to  the  detritus  ^vhich  covers  the  well-weathered  hillsides  in 
the  northern  and  in  the  southern  ends  of  the  basin,  good  sections  of 
the  !Monongahela  can  be  obtained  only  near  the  central  part.  Meas- 
urements made  by  Professor  Tyson  near  Louaconiug,  and  by  the 
Consolidation  Coal  Company  at  their  pumping  shaft,  include  all  of 
the  strata  now  considered  as  Monongahela,  and  since  the  Borden 
Mine  shaft  has  passed  through,  the  lower  half  of  the  formation,  we 
have  three  good  measurements  in  as  many  different  places.  The 
measurements  obtained  at  Borden  Shaft  are  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 


Top  of  shaft 


  6 

61/2 

Shale  

  12 

6 

Coal  [Tyson]   

  3 

4 

Shale   

  8 

51/, 

o 

4 

2 

Shale   

  7 

o 

Shale  

9 

8 

Shale   

  8 

  8 

3 

  1 

MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  127 

Feet.  I  nches. 

Shale                                                                                         2  7 

Elkgarden  or  "Big  Vein"  coal                                          12  614 

Total  thickness  exposed  110  9% 


In  the  Consolidation  Coal  Company's  shaft,  which  is  situated  about 
two  miles  south  of  Frostburg,  the  measurements  are: 


Feet.  Inches. 

Top  of  shaft  

Unconsolidated  surface  material                                              8  5 

Limestone  with  boulders                                                         5  7 

Siliceous  fire-clay                                                                    3  11 

Sandstone    10 

Shale                                                                                      4  10 

Sandstone                                                                                1  8 

Shale    20 

Coal    5 

Shale                                                                                       5  8 

Sandstone                                                                               14  2 

Shale   38 

Coal    1   10 

Shale  I   [Tyson]    3 

Coal    ]                                                                                     1  8 

Shale    16 

Sandstone    4 

Shale    25 

Sandstone    1 

Coal                                                                                         2  6 

Shale    18 

Sandstone    10 

Shale                                                                                       9  6 

Limestone                                                                                5  6 

Shale                                                                                       7  8 

Coal  and  shale  [Redstone]                                                       7  4 

Shale                                                                                     18  9 

Sandstone                                                                                1  3 

Coal  and  shale                                                                        3  7 

Elkgarden  or  "  Big  Vein  "  coal                                                  9  G 


Total  thickness  exposed   239  4 

Professor  Tyson's  measurements  are  as  follows: 

Feet.  Inches. 

Shale  above   

Coal    6 

Limestone  ■with  shale   12 

Fire-claj'    13  9 

Concealed    3  & 


128  THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

Feet.  Inches. 

Shale  with  iron  nodules   27  3 

Shale    27  9 

Fine-grained  sandstone    3  6 

Shale    2  6 

Coal  with  two  inches  of  shale   4  3 

Fire-clay    10 

Coal    3  6 

Fire-claj-    3 

Coarse  shalj',  micaceous  sandstone   51 

Shale    42  0 

Coal    4  0 

Shale    2 

Coal    1 

Shale    4  9 

Coal    10 

Shale    1  3 

Shalj-  sandstone    1 

Ferruginous  shale    4  8 

Elkgarden  or  "  Big  Vein  "  coal   14 


Total  thickness  of  ^lonongahela  at  Lonaconing  238  9 


THE  PERMIAX. 

THE  DUNKAED  FORMATION. 

Several  of  the  highest  hills  near  the  central  part  of  the  coal  basin 
are  capped  bv  strata  which  are  equivalent  to  the  Dimkard  series  of 
Pennsylvania.  The  largest  of  these  areas,  on  which  Frostburg  is  situ- 
ated, caps  the  irregularly  shaped  divide  which  separates  the  head- 
waters of  Georges  Creek,  Braddock  Eun  and  Jennings  Run.  An  area 
of  considerable  size  lies  to  the  north  of  Lonaconing  and  another  lies 
to  the  west.  Both  extend  into  Garrett  county.  A  much  smaller 
area  lies  to  the  south.  A  dumbbell-shaped  area  lies  west  of  Ocean 
and  a  small  oval  patch  lies  north  of  Upper  Ocean.  A  fair-sized  area 
lies  also  between  Ocean  and  Vale  Summit. 

Stratigraphically  the  Dunkard  formation  conformably  follows  and 
includes  everything  above  the  Monongahela.  The  higher  slopes  of 
the  hills  on  which  the  formation  lies  are  in  every  case  well  rounded 
and  show  almost  no  natural  outcrops.  Shales  and  limestones  are 
known  to  be  prominent,  sandstones  are  present  but  apparently  not 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


129 


important,  and  coal-beds,  although  shown  in  some  places,  seem  to  be 
of  little  consequence.  The  shales  have  a  dull  reddish-green  color,  but 
were  seen  only  where  considerably  weathered.  The  lowest  limestone 
observed  is  exposed  in  the  Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  Railroad 
cut  near  the  Consolidation  Coal  Company's  pumping  shaft  two  miles 
soxith  of  Frostburg.  This  is  composed  of  an  upper  dark  massive  fossil- 
iferous  layer  twenty-eight  inches  thick  and  a  lower,  somewhat  shaly 
bluish-gray  stratum  forty-three  inches  thick.  About  300  feet  above 
this,  on  the  hill  east  of  the  pumping  shaft,  there  is  an  abandoned 
limestone  quarry  in  which  the  partially  exposed  limestone  containing 
small  scattering  fossils  seems  to  have  a  thickness  of  about  six  feet. 
Fifteen  feet  higher  there  is  another  thinner  limestone  as  indicated 
by  loose  blocks  on  the  surface.  A  very  argillaceous  limestone  seven 
and  one-half  feet  thick  is  exposed  about  250  yards  north  of  the  Frost- 
burg tunnel.  This  seems  to  be  several  feet  above  the  bottom  of  the 
Dunkard  formation  and  possibly  lies  at  the  same  horizon  as  the  one 
seen  in  the  railroad  cut  near  the  pumping  shaft. 

But  little  can  be  said  of  the  coal  seams  in  the  Dunkard  formation, 
and  so  far  as  known  none  are  more  than  twelve  inches  thick.  One 
bed  having  this  thickness  is  exposed  a  few  feet  above  the  limestone 
north  of  the  Frostburg  tunnel.  Others  were  seen  at  this  place,  but 
they  were  of  much  less  thickness.  Xear  the  pumping  shaft  two  coal 
seams  are  known  to  lie  more  than  300  feet  above  the  bottom  of  the 
formation,  but  their  thickness  could  not  be  learned. 

Xo  detailed  section  of  the  formation  can  be  given,  but  its  greatest 
thickness  is  about  four  hundred  feet. 

The  Permian  character  of  these  strata  has  been  maintained  by  some, 
and  they  are  classified  as  Permian  in  Volume  One  of  The  Maryland 
Geological  Survey  in  conformity  with  the  results  obtained  by  Pro- 
fessors Fontaine  and  White  in  their  study  of  similar  strata  in  Penn- 
sylvania and  West  Virginia.  Their  work  in  the  higher  strata  there 
has  shown  a  gradual  decrease  and  final  disappearance  of  coal,  a  gi-eat 
change  in  plant  life  and  important  changes  in  physical  conditions. 
Lithologically,  in  Maryland,  the  Dunkard  appears  but  little  different 
from  the  higher  Coal  Measures  except  in  the  lesser  importance  of  its 


130 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF   ALLEGANY  Cf)UXTY 


coal  seams  and  possibly  in  the  ^eater  abundance  of  its  limestones. 
The  fossils  thus  far  found  in  the  formation  are  not  numerous  and 
have  not  yet  been  described.  All  of  those  collected  have  been  confined 
wholly  to  minute  forms  found  in  the  limestones.  The  plant  form 
Pecopteris  elliptica  described  by  Bunbury,  is  thought  to  have  come 
from  the  Dunkard  formation,  but  this  is  not  certain.* 

The  Pleistoceite. 

the  alluvial  and  other  late  deposits. 

Well-rounded  boulders  and  coarse  gravels  of  quartzite  and  con- 
glomerate are  found  in  the  western  part  of  tbe  coimty  scattered 
loosely  upon  the  hillsides,  extending  at  Cumberland  as  much  as  300 
feet  above  the  Potomac  river,  or  a  little  more  than  900  feet  above 
tide.  At  Piedmont,  West  Virginia,  where  the  river  bed  is  300  feet 
higher,  similar  boulders  have  been  found  as  much  as  lOfiO  feet  above 
sea-level.  These  and  other  deposits  of  like  nature  have  been  de- 
scribed and  discussed  by  Professors  J.  J.  Stevenson  and  I.  C.  White, 
both  of  whom  consider  them  of  glacial  or  post-glacial  age.' 

At  a  considerably  lower  level  in  several  places  along  the  Potomac 
river  deposits  of  clay,  coarse  gravels  and  boulders  are  found  which 
sometimes  show  coarse  stratification.  This  is  particularly  notice- 
able in  the  vicinity  of  Cumberland  and  in  some  of  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  and  West  Virginia  Central  Railroad  cuts  between  Cum- 
berland and  Westemport,  as  well  as  along  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Railroad  near  the  eastern  part  of  the  eoimty  between  Paw  Paw,  West 
Virginia,  and  the  moutb  of  Sideling  Hill  Creek.  The  gravels  and 
boulders  are  usually  well-rounded  and  polished  and  consist  for  the 
most  part  of  fragments  of  Paleozoic  materials  such  as  are  foimd  in 

'  Fontaine,  Wm.  M.,  and  White,  I.  C.  The  Permian,  or  Upper  Carboniferous,  Flora 
of  West  Virginia  and  S.  W.  Pennsylvania.  Second  Geoloffical  Survey  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, Report  PP,  p.  iii,  Harrisburg,  ISSO. 

■Stevenson,  .lohn  J.  On  the  Surface  Geology  of  Southwest  Pennsylvania  and  ad- 
joining portions  of  Maryland  and  West  Virginia.    A.  J.  S.,  vol.  xv,  1878,  pp.  245-2.50. 

White,  I.  C.  Rounded  Boulders  at  high  altitudes  along  some  Appalachian  Rivers. 
A.  J.  S.,  vol.  .x.xxiv,  1887,  pp.  .374-381. 


M-VKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVKV 


131 


the  immediate  vicinity.  ISTear  the  railroad  tunnel  just  north  of 
Paw  Paw  the  stratification  may  be  seen  to  excellent  advantage,  the 
deposits  there  extending  upwards  as  much  as  sixty  feet  above  the  bed 
of  the  Potomac  river.  Some  of  the  materials  found  here  have  evi- 
dently been  carried  a  considerable  distance,  since  among  them  are 
chert  fragments,  evidently  from  the  Helderberg  formation,  the  near- 
est outcrop  of  which  is  more  than  ten  miles  distant.  Distinct  strati- 
fication may  also  be  seen  in  a  few  favorable  places  between  Cimiber- 
land  and  Westemport. 

It  may  be  of  interest  to  describe  in  this  connection  a  fossiliferous 
limestone-chert  breccia  found  by  the  author  between  Cumberland 
and  Westernport.  Professor  I.  C.  White  has  described  an  appar- 
ently similar  deposit  along  Patterson  Creek  in  West  Virginia,  but 
does  not  mention  the  presence  of  fossils.'  The  two  deposits  possibly 
have  the  same  origin.  The  breccia  is  made  up  of  small  angular, 
slightly  water-worn,  frequently  flattened  fragments  of  chert  and 
limestone,  evidently  derived  from  the  Helderberg  formation  on  which 
it  is  found.  The  cementing  material  is  lime.  It  is  hard  but  vesicular 
and  forms  no  little  portion  of  the  entire  mass. 

As  yet  only  a  small  collection  of  this  breccia  has  been  examined, 
but  among  the  fossils  thus  far  found  the  following  have  been  identified 
by  Professor  H.  A.  Pilsbry : 

Pupa  (Bifidaria)  armifera,  Say. 

Zenitoides  minusculns,  Binn. 

Sfi-obilops,  probably  rirgo.  Pils.  or  affinis,  Pils. 

Helicina  occulta,  Say. 

Ilelicodiscus  lineatus,  Say. 

Polygyra  hirsuta. 

Polygyra  albocabris,  Say  (?). 

Polygyra,  species  undetermined. 

The  breccia  is  apparently  of  quite  recent  origin,  and  there  is  some 
reason  for  believing  that  it  may  be  forming  at  the  present  time. 
Professor  Pilsbry  says  that  Helicina  occulta  is  one  of  the  most  abun- 

'  White,  I.  C.  Rounded  Boulders  at  high  altitudes  alouic  some  Ajipalacbinn  rivers. 
A.  J.  S.,  od  series,  vol.  xxxiv,  1887,  pp.  374-.381. 


132 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


daiit  and  characteristic  fossils  of  the  Iowa  loess  and  is  now  almost 
extinct,  being  confined  to  a  few  very  restricted  though  widely  sepa- 
rated areas,  and  that  it  has  not  hitherto  been  known  to  occur  in  Mary- 
land, either  recent  or  fossil.  The  other  species  have  been  previoiisly 
recognized  as  living  in  Maryland. 

STRUCTUEE. 

THE  ORLEANS  ANTICLINE. 

The  Orleans  anticline,  known  in  Pennsylvania  as  the  Whip  Cove 
anticline,  enters  Allegany  county  from  the  north  near  the  point  where 
Sideling  Hill  Creek  crosses  the  state  line.  It  may  be  considered  as 
including  the  area  covered  by  the  Jennings  formation  east  of  Town 
Hill.  The  several  small  patches  of  Hampshire  that  have  been  carved 
out  by  the  meanderings  of  the  Potomac  river  and  Sideling  Hill 
Creek  along  the  eastern  side  may  also  be  considei-ed  with  this  anti- 
cline, although  the  easternmost  parts  of  the  areas  might  perhaps  be 
more  conveniently  considered  with  the  Sideling  Hill  syncline  outside 
of  the  county. 

The  exact  position  of  the  main  anticlinal  axis  on  the  state  line  is 
concealed,  Init  it  is  apparently  east  of  Sideling  Hill  Creek  and  the 
Second  Geological  Sur\ey  of  Pennsylvania  from  data  collected  in 
that  state  has  so  indicated  it.  West  of  the  creek  the  dip  was  ob- 
served in  various  places  in  the  bottom  of  the  ravine  which  runs  nearly 
parallel  with  the  state  line.  Two  hundred  yards  west  of  the  creek 
there  is  a  very  perceptible  anticline,  although  the  exact  position  of  the 
axis  is  concealed.  The  west  limb  of  this  anticline  dips  quite  regu- 
larly 27°  to  28°  W.  East  of  the  axis  the  dip  is  complicated.  At  a 
point  one  hundred  yards  west  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  38°  E.  This 
rapidly  decreases  eastward  to  almost  zero,  then  as  rapidly  increases 
again  to  50°  E.,  which  in  turn  quickly  decreases  to  zero,  this  last 
measurement  having  been  obtained  in  the  bed  of  Sideling  Hill  Creek. 
East  of  the  creek  along  the  state  line  the  rocks  are  concealed. 

The  anticline  running  nearly  parallel  with  Town  Hill  extends  en- 
tirely across  the  county,  including  the  two  larger  West  Virginia  areas 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


133 


that  have  been  carved  out  by  the  sinuosities  of  the  Potomac  river. 
In  general  the  fold  is  composite,  as  is  indicated  by  the  presence  of 
various  small  anticlines  situated  near  where  the  main  axis  evidently 
lies. 

On  the  i^ational  Road,  about  one  mile  soiith  of  the  state  line,  the 
various  attitudes  of  the  strata  are  well  shown  and  tln-ee  anticlines  are 
there  disclosed.  The  evidence  seems  to  indicate  that  the  main  axis 
crosses  the  National  Eoad  about  one  mile  west  of  Sideling  Hill 
Creek.  At  this  point  there  is  a  very  perceptible  anticline,  the  west 
limb  diiipine  43°  W.,  the  east  limb  dipping  14°  E.  This  last  dip 
changes  within  one-half  mile  east  to  21°  W.,  and  this  a  little  further 
east  is  followed  by  an  anticline,  the  eastem  limb  of  which  dips  52°  E. 
At  the  edge  of  the  county,  where  the  road  crosses  the  creek  near  the 
Hampshire-Jennings  contact,  the  dip  is  36°  E.  West  of  the  main 
anticlinal  axis  as  located,  the  dip  rapidly  swings  aroimd  from  43°  W. 
through  zero  to  46°  E.,  but  one-half  mile  west  there  is  another  anti- 
cline with  the  west  limb  dipping  4°  W.  Continuing  westward  the 
dip  is  slight  until  the  Jennings-Hampshire  contact  four  miles  west  is 
reached,  near  which  place  there  is  a  small  anticline  with  east  and  west 
limbs  dipping  60°  E.  and  41°  W.  respectively.  This  is  followed  by 
strata  dipping  more  and  more  gently  westward. 

SoutliAvard  from  the  iSTational  Eoad  the  anticline  turns  a  little  more 
to  the  east,  passing  only  a  few  rods  west  of  the  great  bend  in  Sideling 
Hill  Creek,  where  the  east  limb  dips  48°  E.  and  the  west  limb  61° 
to  85°  W.  Continuing  soiithward  the  axis  crosses  Eifteenmile  Creek 
three-fourths  of  a  mile  west  of  Little  Orleans,  the  village  which  sug- 
gested the  name  here  used  in  describing  the  anticline.  Where  the 
axis  crosses  the  creek  the  east  limb  of  the  anticline  dips  14°  E.,  the 
west  limb  50°  W.  The  dip  of  the  east  limb  gTadually  increases  east- 
ward until  at  the  mouth  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  90°.  On  the  Potomac 
river,  one-fourth  mile  north  of  Little  Orleans,  a  dip  of  54°  W.  is 
shortly  followed  to  the  east  by  a  dip  of  78°  W.  Beyond  this,  east- 
ward, the  dip  passes  somewhat  rapidly  through  zero  to  57°  E.,  near 
which  attitude  the  strata  remain  until  within  two  hundred  yards  of 
the  mouth  of  Sideling  Hill  Creek.    Here  there  is  a  small  syncline 


134 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAKT  COUNTY 


with  west  limb  dipping  44°  E.  and  east  limb  dipping  53°  W.  At 
the  moTith  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  34°  W.  On  Fifteenmile  Creek, 
west  of  the  main  anticlinal  axis,  the  strata  dip  on  an  average  about 
40°  W.  \mtil  near  the  Jennings-Hampshire  contact,  where  there  is 
a  syncline  wnth  east  and  west  limbs  dipping  40°  W.  and  38°  E.  respec- 
tively. 

South  of  Fifteenmile  Creek  the  axis  extends  in  a  more  southerly 
direction  and  cuts  across  the  West  Virginia  projection  about  one  mile 
west  of  Doe  Gully  tunnel  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  and 
almost  parallel  with  it.  Where  the  anticline  is  first  crossed  by  the 
Potomac  south  of  Fifteenmile  Creek  its  limbs  dip  82°  W.  and  63°  E. 
Along  the  river  west  of  the  axis  the  dip  of  the  strata  changes  gradu- 
ally, decreasing  to  47°  W.  at  the  Jennings-Hampshire  contact  near 
the  big  bend  in  the  river.  East  of  the  axis  also  the  dip  is  pretty 
regular,  passing  gradually  through  74°  E.,  54°  E.,  44°  E.,  54°  E., 
42°  E.  to  56°  E.,  the  last  measurement,  56°  E.,  having  been  made 
one  mile  east  of  Doe  Gully  at  the  end  of  the  bend  in  the  river.  The 
strata  through  which  Doe  Gully  tunnel  is  cut  dip  53°  E.  near  the 
north  end  and  54°  E.  near  the  south  end,  the  strike  being  34°  E.  in 
a  line  with  the  tunnel.  In  the  West  Virginia  area  west  of  the  tun- 
nel, as  well  as  in  most  of  the  Maryland  peninsular  area  immediately 
to  the  south,  the  dip  is  not  shown.  However,  going  up  the  Potomac 
from  the  south  end  of  the  tunnel,  the  dip  can  be  pretty  frequently 
made  out.  The  anticlinal  axis  having  turned  considerably  to  the 
west  of  its  usual  direction,  crosses  the  river  about  one  mile  below 
Bairds  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Pailroad,  where  the  limbs  of  the 
anticline  dip  74°  W.  and  45°  E.  Along  this  east  and  west  section  of 
the  river,  as  in  the  one  near  Doe  Gully  Station,  no  secondary  folding 
can  be  observed.  The  dip  of  74°  W.  gradually  increases  to  82°  W., 
then  slowly  decreases  to  61°  W.  at  the  bend  of  the  river  near  Bairds. 
East  of  the  axis  the  dip  gradually  passes  through  42°  E.,  54°  E.,  43° 
E.,  36°  E.,  39°  E.,  and  54=  E.,  the  latter  dip,  54°  E.,  being  shown 
at  the  Jennings-Hampshire  contact  as  well  as  farther  east  at  the  bend 
in  the  river. 

Apparently  taking  more  nearly  its  general  course  of  S.  25°  W., 


MAEYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


135 


the  axis  passes  across  the  next  West  Virginia  area  where  its  position 
is  hidden  but  is  shown  again  on  the  Potomac  between  Bairds  and  ^lag- 
nolia  in  a  much  confused  condition.  Here  five  anticlines  appear. 
The  main  axis  is  situated  somewhere  west  of  the  canal  tunnel  north 
of  Paw  Paw  and  apparently  crosses  the  river  about  one-half  mile  west 
of  the  tunnel.  West  of  the  axis  the  dip  oscillates  rapidly,  69°  being 
the  dip  of  the  steepest  strata  observed.  East  of  the  axis  the  dip  is 
less  changeable,  although  considerable  fluctuation  occurs.  Imme- 
diately above  the  opening  at  the  northern  portal  of  the  canal  tunnel 
a  small  asymmetric  anticline  is  exposed  which  dips  44°  W.  and  28°  E. 
The  tunnel,  which  is  three  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty  feet  long, 
runs  nearly  with  the  strike,  but  at  the  south  end  this  anticline  is  not 
seen,  the  dip  being  36°  E.  At  the  north  end,  where  a  very  large 
amount  of  rock  has  been  removed  in  order  to  provide  a  suitable  ap- 
proach to  the  tunnel,  a  most  magnificent  slickenside  surface  of  more 
than  one  thousand  square  yards  is  exposed.  The  surface  has  a  slant 
of  52°  W.  and,  although  uncovered  more  than  half  a  century  ago,  it 
is  everywhere  marked  by  the  usual  slickenside  striation  and  still 
retains  a  high  polish. 

In  the  Hampshire  formation  at  the  bend  in  the  river  at  Magnolia 
the  dip  is  78°  E.  Going  westward  the  dip  gradually  grows  less  until 
it  reaches  21°  E.  at  a  point  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  west  of  the 
easternmost  part  of  the  bend.  On  the  Maryland  side  of  the  river  op- 
posite the  north  end  of  the  Paw  Paw  tunnel  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Railroad  there  is  a  strong  anticline,  the  east  line  of  which  dips  30°  E. 
The  dip  of  the  west  limb  could  not  be  determined.  At  each  end  of 
the  tunnel  the  dip  is  41°  E.  Across  the  river  from  Paw  Paw  at  the 
edge  of  the  canal  a  small  anticline  is  exposed.  It  is  also  shown  a 
short  distance  further  north  at  the  canal,  and  is  presumably  identical 
with  the  one  seen  at  the  north  end  of  the  canal  tunnel. 

Almost  three-fourths  of  a  mile  west  of  Paw-  Paw  on  the  county  road 
there  is  a  fold  which  apparently  locates  the  axis  of  the  main  anti- 
cline. The  west  limb  has  a  dip  of  80°,  which  gradually  decreases  to 
40°  one-fourth  of  a  mile  further  west.  The  dip  of  the  east  limb  is 
71°  and  this  decreases  to  40°  within  a  distance  of  eighty  rods.  South 


136 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  AI.LEGAXY  COUNTY 


of  the  county  road  the  anticlinal  axis  apparently  becomes  much  de- 
flected to  the  west,  althotigh  this  cannot  be  definitely  proven. 

Along  the  river  on  the  south  side  of  the  county  only  one  obscure 
anticline  was  detected  and  this  is  about  one  hundred  rods  west  of  the 
point  where  Little  Cacapon  river  enters  the  Potomac.  The  west 
limb  dips  66°  W.,  but  gradually  and  uninterruptedly  grows  less 
steep.  The  dip  of  the  east  limb  is  not  known,  but  opposite  the  mouth 
of  Little  Cacapon  the  dip  is  32°  E.  In  the  absence  of  other  evidence 
the  Orleans  anticline  is  considered  as  passing  across  the  river  and  out 
of  the  county  along  the  position  of  this,  the  only  obsen-ed  anticline 
in  the  region. 

THE  TOWX   HILL  SYNCLINE. 

The  Town  Hill  syncline,  extending  entirely  across  the  county,  has 
the  general  direction  of  X.  25°  E.,  and  may  be  considered  to  embrace 
the  area  covered  by  the  two  long  narrow  belts  of  Pocono  at  the  top 
of  Town  Hill,  the  flanking  area  of  Hampshire  in  the  hollow  of  which 
the  Pocono  rests,  together  with  that  part  of  the  Jennings  included  in 
the  western  slope  of  Green  Eidge.  So  far  as  can  be  observed,  this 
syncline  is  but  little  complicated,  being  particularly  simple  and  sym- 
metrical where  cut  through  by  the  Potomac  river.  On  the  National 
Eoad  near  the  eastern  Pocono-Hampshire  contact  the  dip  is  24°  W. 
Going  eastward  the  dip  slowly  increases  to  48°  W.,  this  observation 
having  been  made  near  the  fork  in  the  road  about  one  mile  west  of 
Piney  Grove.  Xear  here  the  dip  quickly  changes  through  zero  to 
52°  E.,  which  position  the  strata  retain  a  few  rods  west  of  Pincy 
Grove  post-office.  From  this  point  eastward  the  strata  rapidly  regain 
their  westerly  dip  and  at  the  post-office  the  dip  is  57°  AV.  One-fourth 
of  a  mile  further  east  the  dip  is  23°  W.  This  is  soon  followed  by 
a  fold,  the  presence  of  which  is  indicated  by  the  position  of  the  strata 
one-half  mile  east  of  the  post-office  where  the  dip  is  25°-30°  E. 
Beyond  this  the  influence  of  the  Orleans  anticline  becomes  paramount. 

On  the  National  Eoad,  west  of  the  top  of  Town  Hill,  one  small 
symmetrical  anticline  is  seen  with  limbs  dipping  28°.  This  is  one- 
half  mile  west  of  the  Pocono-Hampshire  contact.    Continuing  west- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY.  PLATE  XIV. 


Fig.  1.— faulted  anticline  in  SILLRIAN  strata,  five  miles  southwest  of  CUMBERLAND. 


Fig.  2.-SHARP  FOLDS  IN  DEVONI.W  SANDY  SH.\LES,  NEAR  LITTLE  ORLEANS. 


GEOLOGICAL  SECTIONS   IN"  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


J(ARYLA>"D   GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


137 


ward  this  is  followed  by  a  regular  easterly  dip,  gradually  changing 
through  28°  E..  3S=  E..  4:5=  E..  32=  E..  53=  E..  35=  E.,  and  50=  E. 
The  dip  of  38=  E.  was  measured  at  the  side  of  the  creek  between 
Town  Hill  and  Green  Ridge,  that  of  32=  E.  is  shown  on  the  summit 
of  Green  Ridge  near  the  Hampshire-Jennings  contact,  while  the 
measurement  of  50=  E.  was  obtained  near  the  bridge  over  Fifteen- 
mile  Creek.  A  few  yards  west  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  70=  E.,  and 
further  west  the  strata  are  more  and  more  influenced  by  the  Pratt 
Valley  folds. 

Along  Fifteenmile  Creek,  as  well  as  along  the  coimty  road  which 
nms  nearly  parallel  with  it.  good  exposures  are  frequent.  TTest 
from  the  axis,  which  is  in  the  center  of  the  Town  Hill  Gap,  the  strata 
gradually  become  more  steeply  inclined  tmtil  at  the  top  of  Green 
Ridge,  where  the  creek  road  enters  the  ridge  road,  the  dip  is  -10=  E. 
Two  miles  south  of  this  point  attitudes  of  50=  to  51=  were  found  on 
the  western  slope  of  the  ridge.  East  of  the  axis  the  dip  of  the  strata 
is  more  complex.  Within  three-fotirths  of  a  mile  from  the  center  of 
the  gap  the  dip  changes  from  zero  to  44:=  ^Y.  Between  this  point  and 
the  Hampshire-Jennings  contact  further  east,  two  secondary  anticlines 
appear.  As  a  result  of  these  the  dip  changes  from  44°  W.  to  55  = 
E.,  then  to  35=  W.  and  again  to  32=  E..  the  latter  dip  indicating  the 
position  of  the  strata  near  the  Hampshire-Jennings  contact.  A  few- 
rods  east  of  this  contact  line  the  dip  is  38=  E.,  after  which  the  influ- 
ence of  the  synclinal  axis  ceases  to  be  felt. 

Xear  the  southern  end  of  Town  Hill  various  observations  were 
made  which  compare  favorably  with  measurements  obtained  further 
north.  On  the  Okonoko-Orleans  road  one  and  one-half  miles  north 
of  the  southern  limit  of  the  Pocono  a  dip  of  56=  W.  was  observed. 
Three-fourths  of  a  mile  south  and  a  few  rods  west  of  this  exposure  a 
dip  of  49  =  YT.  is  shown.  One  hundred  and  twenty-iive  yards  further 
west  the  dip  is  21=  W.  Along  the  county  road  leading  from  Town 
Hill  to  Green  Ridge  there  are  various  exposures.  One  in  the  bed 
of  the  ravine  shows  a  dip  of  61=  E.,  and  a  few  rods  further  west  a  dip 
of  49°  E.  was  seen.  This  quickly  decreases  to  38°  E.,  but  at  the  top 
of  Green  Ridge  the  strata  dip  52=  E.    Continuing  northwestward 


138 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


down  to  and  along  Town  Creek  the  dip  is  generally  quite  steep, 
being  much  of  the  time  considerably  more  than  50°  E.  and  in  several 
places  90°. 

THE  STBATFOBD  BIDGE  ANTICLINE. 

This  anticline  clearly  asserts  itself  in  the  two  Oriskany  exposures 
east  ajid  northeast  of  Oldtown,  and  a  good  e.xposure  locates  the  posi- 
tion of  the  axis.  About  one  mile  east  of  Oldtown  on  the  canal  near 
the  water  level,  the  dip  on  the  west  side  of  the  axis  is  30°  W.  The 
strata  here  are  bent  into  a  nearly  symmetrical  arch  almost  one  hun- 
dred feet  high,  although  on  the  east  side  near  the  canal  level  the 
strata  quickly  become  steeper  and  phmge  beneath  the  surface  with  a 
dip  of  63°  E.  In  the  long  narrow  strip  of  Oriskany  to  the  northeast 
of  this  the  position  of  the  area  corresponds  to  that  of  the  axis  of  the 
anticline.  Here  the  rocks  of  the  Oriskany  formation  being  largely 
free  from  covering,  show  the  anticlinal  natiire  of  the  ridge  distinctly. 
Almost  at  the  extreme  northern  limit  of  the  area  where  the  coimty 
road  and  a  small  tributary  of  Town  Creek  cut  across  the  ridge  a  dip 
of  12°  was  measured  on  the  west  side  of  the  axis.  Farther  east  where 
Town  Creek  cuts  into  the  eastern  side  of  the  Oriskany  the  strata 
have  an  apparent  overturned  dip,  the  attitude  there  being  70°  W. 
This  seems  to  swing  back  through  90°  very  soon,  as  only  a  few  rods 
further  east  a  good  exposure  shows  a  dip  of  44:°  E.  Continuing  eaSt 
along  the  creek  toward  Green  Eidge  the  strata  wherever  exposed  show 
a  strong  dip,  but  at  some  places  where  the  rocks  are  concealed  there  is 
an  undoubted  undulation,  this  fact  being  rendered  evident  by  a  dip 
of  70°  "\V.,  observed  near  the  angle  formed  by  the  creek  as  it  turns 
west-northwestward  from  Green  Ridge.  Two  miles  south  of  this, 
where  Town  Creek  makes  an  abi-upt  turn  to  the  east,  the  dip  near  the 
Jennings-Romney  contact  is  53°  E.  This  gradually  increases  east- 
ward to  62°  E.,  which  observation  was  made  where  the  creek  turns 
southward.  Along  the  West  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac,  both  east 
and  west  of  the  Stratford  Ridge  axis  minor  folds  are  shown,  but  on  the 
^Maryland  side  the  strata  are  worn  down  and  concealed  in  such  a 
manner  that  these  minor  folds  are  not  very  apparent  and,  indeed,  their 


MARTLAiro  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


139 


influence  seems  to  die  out  almost  immediately  after  passing  across  the 
river  into  Allegany  county.  A  few  yards  east  of  the  moutli  of  tlie 
South  Branch  the  dip  is  15°  E.,  but  this  gradually  increases  without 
serious  interruption  to  90°  near  by,  at  which  attitude  the  strata  remain 
for  much  of  the  distance  between  the  mouth  of  South  Branch  and 
the  Jennings-Eomney  contact.  Between  this  contact  and  the  mouth 
of  Town  Creek  the  dip  is  about  55°  E.  Nearly  one-half  mile  west 
of  the  main  axis  a  fold  of  some  importance  is  seen  on  the  West  Vir- 
ginia side,  but  it  is  concealed  in  Maryland.  The  limbs  dip  15°  E. 
and  25°  W. 

One-half  mile  south  of  the  north  end  of  the  Stratford  Ridge  area 
along  the  county  road  running  parallel  to  and  west  of  the  axis  a  dip  of 
21°  W.  was  found.  North  of  this  area,  where  the  creek  cuts  across 
the  Jennings-Eomney  contact  zone,  the  dip  is  65°  E.  This  increases 
to  81°  E.  about  one-fourth  of  a  mile  nearer  Green  Ridge,  but  de- 
creases to  22°  E.  near  where  the  creek  tui'ns  south  parallel  to  Green 
Ridge. 

The  effects  brought  about  in  the  formation  of  the  Stratford  Ridge 
anticline  are  no  doiibt  felt  considerably  further  north  than  the  Oris- 
kany  area  extends,  possibly  even  reaching  for  a  considerable  distance 
north  of  the  creek,  but  owing  to  the  paucity  of  exposures  the  true 
conditions  cannot  be  made  out. 

THE  OLDTOWIf  AND  PRATT  VALLEY  FOLDS. 

In  the  extensive  area  of  Eomney  shales  east,  west  and  north  of 
Oldtown  the  extreme  poverty  of  exposures  prevents  any  precise  de- 
scription of  the  stnictural  details,  but  such  definite  observation  as  can 
be  made  shows  that  the  strata  are  considerably  folded.  Whether  or 
not  these  folds  are  A^ery  persistent  or  important  in  any  way  is  not 
known.  As  a  consequence,  therefore,  the  structure  sections  for  this 
part  of  the  county  have  been  made  upon  data  that  is  necessarily 
somewhat  conjectural,  but  the  general  condition  of  the  strata  is  evi- 
dently that  of  gentle  and  frequent  undulation  and  they  have  been 
so  represented. 

Pratt  Valley  may  be  roughly  considered  as  including  the  compara- 


140 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


tively  low  area  lying  between  Polish  Mountain  and  Green  Ridge  north 
of  the  lower  course  of  Town  Creek.  With  the  exception  of  the  ex- 
posures along  the  National  Road  the  conditions  for  studying  the 
exact  features  of  the  structure  in  this  area  are  even  more  meagre  than 
in  the  Oldtown  area.  The  valley  is  very  densely  wooded,  and  over  a 
considerable  portion  of  the  area  the  only  means  of  gaining  any  knowl- 
edge of  the  underlying  formation  is  to  examine  the  loose  shales  lying 
in  the  cavities  left  by  uprooted  trees.  On  the  National  Road  three 
hundred  yards  east  of  Pratt  post-office  a  beautiful,  almost  symmetrical, 
anticline  is  seen.  The  west  limb  dips  40°  TV.  and  the  east  limb  dips 
44°  E.  For  nearly  one-half  mile  west  of  this  the  dip  gradually  de- 
creases, finally  reaching  as  low  as  6°  W.  at  a  point  about  four  hun- 
dred yards  west  of  Pratt  post-office.  West  of  this  point  the  dip 
increases  more  and  more  under  the  influence  of  the  Polish  Mountain 
syncline.  About  one-third  of  a  mile  east  of  the  axis  an  exposure 
shows  the  strata  dipping  30°  E.,  but  two  hundred  and  fifty  yards 
further  east  they  dip  8.3°  W.  Beyond  this  for  nearly  a  mile  the  strata 
are  concealed.  When  next  seen  the  dip  is  to  the  east.  South  of  the 
National  Road  no  distinct  traces  of  these  anticlines  can  be  found, 
although  various  measurements  on  Town  Creek  and  northward  on 
some  of  its  branches  indicate  much  variation  of  dip  with  the  probable 
presence  of  several  folds. 

At  a  point  two  miles  west  of  Pratt  two  anticlines  near  each  other 
are  poorly  shown  on  the  National  Road.  Their  limbs,  so  far  as  can 
be  observed,  dip  nearly  symmetrically  at  30°  to  40°.  At  a  point 
almost  one-half  mile  west  of  this  the  dip  is  45°  E.,  but  three  hundred 
yards  further  west  the  dip  has  decreased  to  35°  E.  East  of  the  two 
anticlines,  which  in  fact  may  be  considered  as  flexures  of  one  main 
anticline,  the  dip  changes  rapidly  until  Fifteenmile  Creek  is  reached. 
Starting  with  a  dip  of  30°  E.  the  dip  undulates  througli  90°,  50°  E., 
40°  E.,  87°  W.,  35°  W.,  70°  E.,  50°  E.,  45°  E.,  the  last  measure 
ment  being  one  hundred  fifty  yards  west  of  Fifteenmile  Creek.  The 
dip  of  35°  W.  and  70°  E.  shows  a  crumpled  anticline  about  five  hun- 
dred yards  west  of  the  creek.  We  thus  have  at  least  three  separate 
and  distinct  positions  along  the  National  Road  in  Pratt  Valley  where 
anticlines  are  developed. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


141 


By  comparing  this  valley  with  the  corresponding  area  north  of  the 
state  line  in  Pennsylvania,  it  will  he  observed  that  the  positions  of 
the  Pratt  Valley  anticlines  corresjiond  quite  closely  to  the  positions 
of  important  anticlines  in  Bedford  connty  as  worked  out  by  the  Second 
Geological  Survev  of  Pennsvlvania/  Beffinning  with  the  eastern- 
most,  these  anticlines  are  known  as  the  Broad  Top  anticline,  the 
Snyders  Ridge  anticline  and  the  Shavers  Creek  anticline.  In  the 
absence  of  opposing  evidence  it  seems,  with  the  infonnation  at  hand, 
that  we  may  say  without  probability  of  serious  error  that  the  above- 
named  anticlines  as  traced  out  in  Pennsylvania  extend  into  Marjdand 
and,  crossing  the  Xaticnal  Road  at  or  near  the  points  suggested,  con- 
tinue an  indefinite  distance  southward,  being  apparently  seriously  de- 
flected and  possibly  entirely  dissipated  by  other  more  or  less  important 
folds  before  reaching  the  Potomac  river. 

THE  POLISH  MOTJlSTTAIIs^  SYXCLIXE. 

This  syncline  follows  the  trend  of  Polish  Mountain  and  is  the 
gradually  shallowing  prolongation  of  the  much  more  prominent 
Clearsville  syncline  of  Pennsylvania.  On  the  Jfational  Road  the 
dip  on  the  east  side  of  the  synclinal  axis  approximates  20°  W.,  while 
on  the  west  side  it  is  about  40°  E.  On  the  Williams  Road,  about 
two  miles  south  of  the  Xational  Road,  the  strata  on  the  east  side  of 
the  syncline  are  concealed;  but  on  the  west  side  between  Town  Creek 
and  the  crest  of  the  mountain  the  dip  varies  from  22°  E.  to  30°  E. 
Xear  the  south  end  of  the  mountain  various  observations  were  made, 
hut  only  those  on  the  western  side  of  the  axis  are  trustworthy.  They 
indicate  the  average  dip  to  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  shown 
on  the  Williams  Road.  Further  south  the  syncline  becomes  lost 
amidst  the  confusion  of  other  folds.  Xo  rocks  higher  than  those  of 
the  Jennings  formation  are  contained  within  this  syncline  in  Alle- 
gany county.  Along  the  top  of  the  mountain  a  heavy  conglomerate 
is  shown  soiith  of  the  Williams  Road,  but  where  the  moimtain  is 
crossed  by  the  Xational  Road  the  conglomerate  has  apparently  been 

'Stevenson,  J.  J.  Geology  of  Bedford  and  Fulton  Counties,  Report  TiJ,  Second 
Geological  Survey  of  Pennsylvania,  Harrisburg,  1882. 


142 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


worn  completely  away,  although  its  former  position  is  shown  by  a 
few  scattering  but  much  weathered  boulders.  This  conglomerate 
capping  is  apparently  the  same  as  the  heavy  conglomerate  seen  in 
many  other  places  in  the  county  near  the  top  of  the  Jennings,  and  in 
Pennsylvania  where  the  opportunities  for  studying  the  rocks  of  this 
syncline  are  better  thiui  in  Maryland,  the  Pennsylvania  Geological 
Survey  has  similarly  located  it  and  has  correlated  it  with  the  Che- 
mung Upper  Conglomerate.' 

THE  TUSSEY  MOUNTAIN  ANTICLINE. 

Within  that  structural  division  of  the  Appalachian  system  of  which 
Allegany  county  forms  a  part,  the  folds  of  predominating  importance 
are  usually  those  long  anticlines  which  are  of  sufficient  magnitude  to 
bring  up  the  Silurian  rocks.  Of  such  anticlines  Allegany  county 
has  three  that  are  well  developed.  All  of  these  enter  the  county 
from  Pennsylvania,  but  in  each  case  the  position  of  the  anticline  be- 
comes entirely  obliterated  or  very  much  disturbed  before  reaching  the 
Potomac  river.  The  Tussey  Moimtain  anticline  is  the  easternmost 
and  most  quickly  obliterated  one  and  at  the  state  line  occupies  the 
position  of  Tussey  Moimtain.  Continuing  nearly  southward  across 
the  Xational  Road  and  then  more  nearly  southwest  the  anticline 
bifurcates,  one  branch  following  the  direction  of  Warrior  Mountain, 
the  other  that  of  Martin  Mountain. 

Near  the  state  line  where  the  Tuscarora  of  Tussey  Mountain  is  cut 
through  by  Flintstone  Creek  the  dip  on  the  west  side  of  the  anticline 
is  18°  W.  Although  not  well  known,  it  is  apparently  about  the  same 
on  the  east  side.  Further  east  the  strata  where  not  concealed  show  a 
varying  dip,  the  Clinton  being  much  folded  there.  Along  Flintstone 
Creek  northward  from  Flintstone  for  half  a  mile  or  more  the  general 
dip  is  40^  to  50°  E.  One  and  one-half  miles  west  of  Flintstone 
Creek  on  the  National  Road  a  dip  of  40°  E.  is  shown.  One-half 
mile  further  west  the  dip  is  5°  W.,  the  intervening  area  apparently 
representing  the  position  of  the  main  anticline.    Further  west,  as  far 

'Stevenson,  J.  J.  Geolosry  of  Bedford  and  Fulton  Counties,  Keport  T2,  p.  31, 
Second  Geolpgical  Survey  of  Pennsylvania,  Ilarrisburg,  1882. 


GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


14:3 


as  the  abandoned  limekiln  in  the  Helderberg  formation,  three  miles 
west  of  Flintstone,  the  dip  varies  from  20°  to  30°  W.,  but  the  ex- 
posures are  not  good.  Along  a  small  ravine,  about  one  mile  south 
of  the  National  Eoad  and  running  nearly  parallel  with  it,  various 
measurements  indicate  the  general  attitude  of  the  strata  to  be  much 
the  same  as  along  the  Jfational  Road.  However,  fiu-ther  east  along 
the  Murley  Branch  road  considerable  confusion  of  dip  exists  and  this 
is  foimd  to  be  due  to  the  presence  of  a  minor  fold  running  parallel 
with  Murley  Branch.  The  exact  position  of  the  axis  of  this  minor 
fold  is  best  seen  a  little  more  than  half  a  mile  east  of  Rush  on  the 
Williams  Road.  A  few  feet  of  the  red  sandstone  near  the  bottom 
of  the  Salina  is  there  shown  in  a  small  anticline  whose  limbs  have  a 
dip  of  15°.  The  same  anticline  with  a  similar  exposure  of  Salinn  is 
broiight  to  view  on  the  ravine  two  hundred  yards  south  of  this.  It 
cannot  be  traced  further  south.  The  anticline  is  not  well  shown 
northward  from  the  Williams  Road,  but  its  presence  is  sufficiently 
indicated  to  enable  one  to  trace  it  for  a  distance  of  more  than  two 
miles.  The  Tussey  anticline  bifurcates  in  the  vicinity  of  Rush,  and 
the  Murley  Branch  fold  is  no  doubt  one  expression  of  the  beginning 
of  bifurcation. 

On  the  county  road  leading  west-northwest  from  Rush,  various  out- 
crops indicate  a  much  disturbed  condition  of  the  strata.  At  least 
four  anticlinal  flexures  cross  the  road  within  a  mile  of  Rush.  The 
positions  of  the  axes  of  these  folds  cannot  be  actually  seen,  but  their 
presence  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  various  exposures  along  the  road. 
The  dip  at  Rush  near  the  iron  bridge  over  Murley  Branch  is  55° 
to  75°  E. 

In  the  double  southern  extensions  of  the  Tussey  anticline  but  few 
measurements  of  the  attitude  of  the  strata  can  be  obtained.  The 
Warrior  Mountain  branch  can  be  easily  traced  to  within  a  mile  of  the 
Potomac.  Along  the  eastern  side  on  the  county  road  running  near 
the  Oriskany-Romney  contact  the  dip  varied  but  slightly,  27°  E. 
being  the  greatest  dip  obsei-ved  and  17°  E.  the  lowest.  The  dip 
along  the  western  side  is  much  the  same. 

In  the  vicinity  of  Twiggtown  the  western  projection  of  the  Tussey 


144 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Mountain  anticline  in  turn  becomes  bifurcated,  the  western  projection 
of  this  bifurcation  forming  the  Collier  Mountain  anticline  with  east 
and  west  dips  of  about  40°. 

THE  MARTIN  MOUNTAIN  AND  COLLIER  MOUNTAIN  ANTICLINES. 

The  Martin  Mountain  anticline  occupies  the  position  of  that  moun- 
tain and  has  been  formed  bv  a  bifurcation  of  the  larger  anticline 
south  of  Rush  Ridge.  The  dip  varies  from  35°  to  50°,  the  two  limbs 
having  approximately  the  same  inclination.  Xear  the  Potomac  the 
dip  is  less,  scarcely  reaching  25°  on  either  side. 

THE  BIG  SPRING  RUN  SYNCLINE. 

This  syncline,  which  is  formed  by  the  gradually  separating  branches 
of  the  Tussey  Mountain  anticline,  occupies  the  triangular  Romney 
area  west  of  the  southorn  end  of  Warrior  Mountain  and  includes 
within  it  a  considerable  portion  of  the  valley  of  Big  Spring  Run. 
The  rocks  are  almost  wholly  concealed,  but  along  the  Potomac  river 
the  observations  indicate  that  the  strata  are  considerably,  although  not 
deeply,  plicated. 

THE  MARTIN  SPRING  BRANCH  SYNCLINE. 

This  is  a  narrow  syncline  lying  between  Martin  Mountain  and 
Collier  Mountain,  and  extends  from  the  Potomac  river  northward 
to  within  about  two  miles  of  Twiggtown.  It  occupies  the  position 
of  the  long  narrow  Romney  area  in  which  Martin  Spring  Branch 
lies,  and  is  in  general  appearance  much  like  the  Collier  Run  syncline 
which  lies  to  the  west  of  Collier  Mountain.  The  dip  on  cither  side 
vai'ies  between  20°  and  45°. 

THE  COLLIER  RUN  SY^sCLINE. 

Collier  Rim  syncline  stretches  across  the  county  in  a  general  north- 
east-southwest direction.  In  its  southern  and  middle  portions  it  is 
flanked  by  Collier  Mountain  and  Xicholas  ^[ountain  and  is  marked 
by  a  long  narrow  strip  of  Romney  shales  within  which  Collier  Run 
lies.  Xear  the  headwaters  of  Collier  Run,  Xicholas  ^lountain  and 
IMartin  Mountain  gradually  coalesce  and  become  one  synclinal  ridge. 


MAKYLA>^D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


145 


Xicliolas  Moimtain  losing  its  identity  and  its  name.  Martin  Moun- 
tain, still  capped  by  Oriskany  rocks,  continues  northward  beyond 
the  state  line. 

Along  Collier  Run  the  dip  of  the  syncline  on  either  side  is  steep 
and  seldom  less  than  30°  near  the  Romney-Oriskany  contact.  It  is 
generally  more  than  40°.  More  varying  measurements,  as  might  be 
expected,  were  obtained  in  the  Eomney  exposures,  but  since  the 
measurements  usually  express  only  unimportant  local  conditions  they 
need  not  be  given  here.  On  the  Potomac  at  the  Eomney-Oriskany 
contact  on  the  east  side  of  the  syncline  the  dip  is  39°  W.  At  the 
corresponding  point  on  the  western  side  it  is  only  20°  E.,  but  in- 
creases farther  west.  The  synclinal  nature  of  Martin  Mountain, 
where  crossed  by  the  Xational  Eoad,  is  well  indicated  by  the  many 
measurements  obtained,  the  dip  on  the  east  side  being  from  60°  AV.  to 
80°  W.,  while  on  the  western  side  the  dip  is  much  less,  it  being  not 
more  than  35°  E. 

THE  EVITTS  ilOUKTAIX  ANTICLINE. 

This  anticline  enters  the  county  from  Pennsylvania  and  is  dis- 
tinctly marked  for  a  short  distance ,  by  Evitts  Mountain.  On  the 
Xational  Road,  and  for  three  or  four  miles  further  south,  it  is  not 
well  marked  topographically,  but  south  of  the  Williams  Road  the  axis 
of  the  anticline  gradually  takes  the  position  occupied  by  Nicholas 
Mountain. 

Xear  the  southern  end  of  Evitts  Mountain  a  branch  of  Evitts 
Creek  has  cut  deeply  across  the  Tuscarora  quartzite  and  has  disclosed 
to  good  advantage  both  limbs  of  the  anticline.  On  the  west  side  of 
the  Tuscarora-Clinton  contact  the  dip  is  54°  W.  On  the  eastern  side 
at  the  corresponding  point  it  is  18°  E.  On  the  county  road  running 
around  the  southern  end  of  the  mountain  a  measurement  of  50°  W. 
was  obtained  on  the  west  side  and  22°  E.  on  the  east  side.  On  the 
Xational  Road  the  position  of  the  axis  seems  to  be  just  east  of  where 
the  Johnson  Road  enters  the  Xational  Road  from  the  south.  Imme- 
diately at  this  point  of  union  the  dip  is  39°  W.  One  hundred  yards 
further  west  in  the  outcrop  of  red  sandstone  near  the  bottom  of  the 

10 


14C 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Salina  the  dip  is  67°  TV.  Continuing  westward  the  dip  in  the  Hel- 
derberg  limestone  undulates  through  54°  "\V.,  70°  E.,  and  72°  TV. 
Fifty  yards  east  of  the  Johnson-Xational  road  fork  the  dip  is  21°  E. 
Xearly  one-half  mile  further  east  the  Hinckle  Road  enters  the  Na- 
tional Road  from  the  south,  at  which  point  the  dip  is  32°  E.  One- 
half  mile  east  of  this  where  a  county  road  from  the  north  enters  the 
Xational  Road  the  dip  is  17°  E.  Still  further  east,  in  the  lower  part 
of  the  Salina,  the  dip  is  25°  E.,  but  increases  shortly  to  35°  E.,  then 
rapidly  to  78°  E.,  then  decreases  to  30°  E.  near  the  middle  of  the 
Helderberg.  East  of  this  the  dip  gradually  increases  imtil  near  the 
position  of  the  Collier  Run  syncline.  On  the  Hinckle  Road  near 
the  bottom  of  the  Salina  the  dip  is  18  E.,  gradually  increasing  south- 
eastward to  36°  near  the  Romney-Oriskany  contact.  Three-fourths 
of  a  mile  south  of  the  Xational  Road  on  the  Johnson  Road  the  dip  is 
42°  E.,  while  further  south,  near  the  fork  in  the  road,  it  is  34°  E. 
East  of  this  for  half  a  mile  the  prevailing  dip  is  less  than  15°.  On 
the  Williams  Road  the  anticlinal  axis  appears  to  be  almost  in  the 
bottom  of  the  valley  on  the  western  side  of  Nicholas  Mountain.  Here 
a  small  sharp  anticline  is  exposed.  East  of  this  anticline,  as  far  as 
Collier  Run,  all  of  the  outcrops  show  an  easterly  dip  of  the  strata, 
the  dip  varying  from  7°  to  34°.  TVest  of  the  anticline,  as  far  as 
Evitts  Creek,  all  of  the  outcrops  show  a  westerly  dip  of  the  strata, 
the  dip  varying  from  50°  to  72°.  Along  the  Potomac  river  the  dip 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  axis  varies  from  20°  E.  to  42°  E.,  while  on 
tlie  western  side  the  range  of  dip  is  from  15°  TV.  to  54°  TV. 

THE  EVITTS   CREEK  SYNCLINE. 

The  Evitts  Creek  valley,  together  with  the  low-lying  TVest  Virginia 
and  Maryland  areas  to  the  south,  practically  includes  all  of  the  Evitts 
Creek  syncline.  It  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  a  row  of  Oriskany 
hills  which  extend  from  the  state  line  southward  to  near  the  Potomac 
river,  where  the  hills  become  gradually  absorbed  by  Nicholas  Moun- 
tain. Shriver  Ridge,  in  Maryland,  and  Knobly  Mountain,  in  TT^'est 
Virginia,  both  protected  by  Oriskany  sandstone,  lie  along  the  western 
side. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


147 


111  that  part  of  the  syiicline  which  lies  north  of  the  Potomac  river 
outcrops  are  frequent.  Along  the  K^ational  Road,  and  along  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  this  is  particularly  true.  In  addition 
to  these  a  county  road  about  one  mile  south  of  the  aSTational  Road 
discloses  the  attitude  of  the  strata  in  many  places,  and  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  syncline  along  the  Williams  Road  a  good  series  of  ex- 
posures is  also  shown.  In  addition  to  these,  many  other  more  scat- 
tering and  less  easily  located  exposures  were  found.  With  but  rare 
exception  these  exposures  all  show  that  the  axis  of  the  syncline  is 
thrown  far  toward  the  eastern  part  of  the  valley,  as  is  also  Evitts 
Creek  in  much  of  its  course,  i^'ortli  of  the  National  Road  and  west 
of  Evitts  Creek  the  dip  is  to  the  east  in  every  place  observed  and  in 
some  instances  the  easterly  dip  continues  a  considerable  distance  east 
of  the  creek.  Along  the  eastern  side  of  Shriver  Ridge  the  dip  is 
30°  E.  to  35°  E.,  although  about  one  and  one-half  miles  south  of  the 
state  line  a  measurement  of  44°  E.  was  obtained.  One  mile  south 
of  the  state  line  on  Evitts  Creek  the  strata  stand  upright,  as  they  were 
observed  to  do  also  two  miles  south  of  the  state  line.  On  the  Na- 
tional Road  about  one-half  mile  east  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  also  90", 
but  this  may  be  a  very  local  feature,  since  between  this  point  and 
Evitts  Creek  there  are  two  anticlines.  Where  Evitts  Creek  crosses 
the  National  Road  the  dip  is  27°  W.  East  of  Evitts  Creek  on  the 
Williams  Road  at  the  Jennings-Romney  contact  the  dip  is  70°  W. 
Continuing  eastward  the  dip  varies  through  .50°,  65°,  72°,  and  59°, 
the  last  measurement  having  been  obtained  near  the  Romney-Oris- 
kany  contact.  Going  sovith  from  Cumberland,  then  east  along  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  the  dip,  with  insignificant  exceptions, 
remains  from  15°  E.  to  20°  E.  until  within  about  one-fourth  of  a 
mile  of  the  mouth  of  Evitts  Creek,  where  a  small  amount  of  folding- 
is  observed.  Just  west  of  the  creek  the  dip  is  16°  E.,  but  the  only 
observations  in  this  locality  east  of  the  creek  show  a  considerable 
dip  to  the  west.  In  view  of  these  facts  it  seems  quite  evident  that  the 
main  axis  of  the  syncline  crosses  the  Potomac  river  at  or  near  the 
point  where  Evitts  Creek  enters  it. 

In  that  part  of  the  syncline  which  is  occupied  by  the  large  west- 


148 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF   ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


wardly  projecting  area  west  of  the  southern  end  of  Nicholas  Mountain 
no  good  outcrops  were  seen,  the  surface  there  being  almost  wholly 
covered  by  river-washed  materials. 

THE  WILLS  MOrXTAIX  AXTICLHTE. 

Tliis  anticline,  like  the  E\'itts  Mountain  and  Tussey  Mountain 
anticlines,  is  distinctly  marked  by  a  ridge  of  Tuscarora  quartzite.  It 
enters  Allegany  county  from  the  north  and  continues  in  an  approxi- 
mate S.  30°  W.  direction  as  a  prominent  topographic  feature  for  a 
distance  of  more  than  ten  miles.  The  eastern  limb  of  the  anticline 
has  a  moderate  dip.  The  west  limb  dips  steeply.  Near  the  Tus- 
carora-Clinton  contact  line  along  the  east  side  the  prevailing  dip  is 
less  than  30°  and  shows  but  very  little  variation,  while  along  the 
corresponding  contact  line  on  the  west  the  dip  approaches  and  some- 
times exceeds  70°. 

The  structure  of  the  moimtain  is  most  admirably  shown  in  the 
Wills  Creek  gorge  known  as  "  The  Xarrows,"  where,  acting  like  a 
veritable  saw  and  keeping  pace  with  the  gradually  rising  strata,  the 
creek  has  cut  for  itself  a  narrow  passage  across  the  mountain  and  has 
thus  disclosed  on  either  side  a  rocky  arch  of  magnificent  proportions. 
Here  immense  talus  slopes  extending  upward  more  than  five  hundred 
feet,  are  overhung  by  high  precipitous  walls  of  massive  white 
quartzite.  Toward  the  east  end  of  the  gorge,  where  the  talus  is  less 
prominent,  the  strata  may  be  seen  to  descend  slowly,  the  dip  increas- 
ing to  24°  E.  at  the  Tuscarora-Clinton  contact.  At  the  western  end 
of  the  gorge  the  dip  is  precipitous,  the  well-exposed  Tuscarora  strata 
there  plunging  beneath  the  surface  with  a  dip  of  72°  "W. 

South  of  the  National  Eoad,  Wills  Mountain  becomes  gradually 
deflected  from  its  general  course  of  S.  30°  W.,  and  for  some  distance 
before  reaching  Cresap  rims  nearly  due  south.  At  Cresap  the  Tus- 
carora pa?ses  beneath  the  siu-faee,  and  with  its  disappearance  the 
mountain  becomes  obliterated. 

As  a  result  of  the  eastward  deflection  of  the  southern  end  of  Wills 
Mountain,  some  minor  folding  has  been  brought  about  along  the  Po- 
tomac river  southeast  of  Cresap,  where  the  upper  beds  of  the  Tus- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XV. 


W 

<: 
ei 
w 

o 
ij 
o 

o 

w 
►J 
> 

H 

O 

Si 

'O 

z 

6 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


149 


carora  are  raised  to  the  surface  in  two  sharp  anticlines.  One  of  these 
anticlines  has  exposed  almost  one  hundred  feet  of  the  Tuscarora  and 
can  be  traced  for  nearly  five  hundred  yards  in  a  general  south-south- 
west direction.  The  smaller  anticline  which  lies  a  short  distance 
southeast  of  this  is  not  sufficiently  individualized  to  be  distinctly 
traced  longitudinally  and  is  scarcely  more  than  sufficiently  prominent 
to  bring  the  Tuscarora  to  the  svirface. 

In  the  northern  part  of  the  coimty  east  of  the  Tuscarora-Clinton 
contact  line  east  of  Wills  Mountain  the  dip  increases  slightly  but 
rarely  reaches  more  than  40°  E.  "West  of  the  axis  the  dip  in  the 
Clinton  wherever  exposed  is  gTcat.  Fuither  west  in  the  Helderberg 
and  Oriskany  formations  several  excellent  exposures  give  a  prevail- 
ing dip  of  90°.  This  is  admirably  shown  at  the  "  Devil's  Backbone  " 
near  Corriganville,  as  well  as  at  eitlier  end  of  the  low  enlongated 
hill  lying  just  west  of  the  "  !N^arrows." 

Xear  the  state  line,  a  short  distance  west  of  the  long  narrow  Oris- 
kany area  there  is  a  slight  fold  which  in  some  low  places  brings  the 
Oriskany  to  the  surface  again.  Immediately  west  of  this  the  dip 
is  steep,  but  continuing  westward  it  gradually  grows  more  nearly  hori- 
zontal. 

South  of  Braddock  Eun  the  high  pitch  of  the  strata  is  fully  as 
prominent  as  further  north  and  the  excellent  exposure  at  Potomac 
Station  shows  the  strata  in  much  the  same  attitude  as  at  the  "  Devil's 
Backbone." 

THE  RAWLINGS  SYNCLINE. 

By  the  Rawlings  syncline  is  designated  that  small,  poorly  defined 
structural  region  which  lies  to  the  north  and  east  of  Rawlings  and 
which  is  marked  by  a  southward  projection  of  the  Romney  forma- 
tion across  the  Potomac  river  into  West  Virginia.  The  upright 
strata  of  the  Oriskany  and  tlie  Helderberg  may  be  considered  as  occu- 
pying the  eastern  side,  Avhile  on  the  west  the  limits  are  poorly  de- 
fined except  near  Rawlings,  where  the  rather  steeply  dipping  Oris- 
kany strata  are  well  shown.  Good  exposures  are  almost  wholly  lack- 
ing, but  a  study  of  the  areal  geology  in  connection  with  the  topogra- 


150 


THK  GKOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


phy  leads  at  once  to  correct  conclusions  as  to  the  general  synclinal 
nature  of  the  fold. 

THE  FORT  HILL  ANTICLINE. 

The  high  isolated  Oriskany-Helderberg  hill  extending  southward 
from  Rawlings  for  a  distance  of  more  than  four  miles  is  a  rapidly  dis- 
appearing remnant  of  the  Fort  Hill  anticline  which  extends  from 
Rawlings  to  Keyser,  West  Virginia.  The  anticline  has  been  much 
obscured  by  the  corrosive  action  of  the  Potomac  river  and  much  of  it 
now  lies  on  the  West  Virginia  side.  Along  the  western  side  the 
prevailing  dip  of  the  Oriskany  strata  is  from  70°  W.  to  90°  W., 
although  south  of  Monster  Rock,  in  an  exposure  near  the  West  Vir- 
ginia Central  Railroad  bridge,  an  overturned  dip  of  65°  E.  may  be 
clearly  seen.  Xear  Rawlings,  where  the  Oriskany  passes  beneath 
the  surface,  the  west  limb  dips  28°  W.,  while  a  little  further  south 
the  east  limb  dips  42°  E.  At  Monster  Rock  the  anticline  is  quite 
narrow  and  near  Rawlings  it  comes  to  a  point.  Midway  between  the 
two  the  width  is  considerably  more  than  a  mile. 

In  the  projecting  area  occupied  by  Monster  Rock  the  east  limb  of 
the  anticline  is  seen  to  dip  gently  to  the  east  for  a  short  distance,  but 
before  passing  beyond  the  river  the  strata  rise  again  with  a  dip  to  the 
west.  The  little  syncline  thus  produced  is  Avorthy  of  notice,  as  it  is 
apparently  the  prolongation  of  the  Rawlings  syncline  which,  passing 
along  down  the  western  side  of  Knobly  Mountain  in  West  Virginia, 
re-enters  Allegany  county  near  Monster  Rock  as  indicated. 

THE  GEORGES  CREEK  SYNCLINE. 

The  Frostburg  syncline  is  defined  on  the  east  by  the  Wills  !Moun- 
tain  and  Foot  Hill  anticlines  already  described.  The  western  limit 
is  west  of  Savage  Mountain  beyond  the  borders  of  Allegany  county, 
hence  need  not  receive  further  mention  here.  The  full  width  of  this 
syncline,  of  which  only  the  eastern  and  central  portions  lio  in  Alle- 
gany county,  remains  approximately  ten  miles  throughout  its  entire 
course  across  the  state.  This  measurement,  however,  is  not  to  be 
confused  with  the  width  of  the  high  valley  lying  between  Savage 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


151 


Mountain  and  Dans-Little  Allegheny  Mountain  which  occupies 
scarcely  more  than  one-half  of  the  synclinal  fold.  The  axis  of  the 
syncline  has  been  designated  with  considerable  detail  by  means  of 
the  yarious  mining  operations  in  the  coal  basin.  Its  general  direction 
is  X.  28°  to  30°  E.  passing  through  Franklin,  Barton,  Moscow  and 
Lonaconing.  It  lies  a  little  to  the  west  of  "Westemport  and  passes 
through  the  immediate  yicinity  of  Mount  Sayage. 

Steeply-dipping  Silurian  and  Deyonian  strata  occupy  the  eastern 
border  of  the  syncline,  but  gradually  gi-owing  less  steep  westward 
from  Wills  Mountain  they  disappear  one  by  one  beneath  the  high- 
lying  Carboniferous  strata  of  the  coal  basin. 

In  the  gap  through  which  Jennings  Run  flows,  where  many  of  the 
strata,  particularly  those  of  the  Hampshire  formation,  haye  an  excel- 
lent exposure,  the  gradually  decreasing  inclination  of  the  beds  may 
be  clearly  seen.  Xumerous  good  exposures  further  south  along 
Braddock  Run  and  still  fiirther  south  in  the  Potomac  gorge  also  aid 
materially  in  arriving  at  correct  conclusions  concerning  the  structure 
of  this  part  of  the  coimty. 

At  the  Jennings-Hampshire  contact  in  the  Jennings  Run  gap  the 
dip  is  68°  "W.  At  the  Hampshire-Pocono  contact  the  dip  has  gradu- 
ally decreased  to  28°  W.  At  the  Pocono-Greenbrier  contact  it  is 
17°  W.,  while  at  the  Mauch  Chunk-Pottsyille  contact  the  dip  is  only 
13°  W.    Further  west  the  dip  continues  to  gradually  grow  less. 

In  the  Potomac  gorge  and  along  Braddock  Run  the  favorable  places 
for  observation  cannot  be  concisely  described  but  the  measurements 
obtained  correspond  closely  to  those  made  along  Jenning-s  Run. 

These  measurements  were  all  obtained  near  the  level  of  the  streams 
mentioned,  hence  following  the  various  formations  upward  to  the  posi- 
tions which  they  occupy  in  the  higher  parts  of  the  Alleghany  Front 
the  dip  is  foimd  to  increase  slightly.  Opportunities  are  not  good  for 
learning  definitely  how  much  this  increase  is,  but  it  is  known  that 
the  Pottsyille  dips  from  16°  TV.  to  22°  W.  where  best  exposed  along 
the  high  crest  of  Dans-Little  Allegheny  Mountain. 

Outcrops  of  strata  in  Allegany  county  suitable  for  accurate  meas- 
urement of  the  dip  are  rare  west  of  the  synclinal  axis.  Southward 


152 


niE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALI.Er;AXY  COUNTY 


from  the  state  line  the  Allegany-Garrett  line  gradually  approaches 
the  position  of  the  synclinal  axis,  hence  the  western  limb  of  the  syn- 
cline  is  but  poorly  represented  in  Allegany  county.  It  seems,  how- 
ever, that  the  steepness  increases  somewhat  less  rapidly  west  of  the 
axis  and  the  prevailing  dip  of  the  Pottsville  in  the  northwest  comer 
of  the  county  is  thought  to  be  not  greater  than  12°  E.  to  15°  E. 

DIP,   STRIKE,   AND  PITCH. 

Certain  facts  of  prime  importance  in  the  study  of  Appalachian 
structure  which  have  abundant  illustration  in  Allegany  county  and 
which  have  been  brought  out  to  some  extent  in  the  description  of  the 
individual  folds  demand  particular  mention.  These  relate  to  dip, 
strike,  and  pitch.  It  was  observed  that  the  three  principal  anticlines 
in  the  county,  viz.,  the  Tusscy  Mountain  anticline,  the  Evitts  Moun- 
tain anticline  and  the  "Wills  ^^fountain  anticline  all  have  moderate 
easterly  dips.  The  same  is  not  true,  however,  of  their  westerly  dips. 
The  west  limb  of  the  Tussey  Mountain  anticline,  so  far  as  is  shown 
in  Allegany  county,  happens  to  have  apparently  about  the  same  dip 
as  the  east  limb,  but  the  west  limb  of  the  Evitts  ^Mountain  anticline 
has  a  dip  more  than  twice  as  great  as  the  east  lirnb,  while  the  dip  of 
the  west  limb  of  the  Wills  Mountain  anticline  is  almost  three  times 
as  great  as  the  dip  of  the  east  limb.  A  similar  condition  is  observed 
to  prevail  in  connection  with  many  of  the  less  important  folds,  hence 
we  may  say  that  the  Allegany  county  anticlines  tend  to  develop  limbs 
sloping  gently  to  the  east  and  steeply  to  the  west.  Expressed  in  terms 
of  synclines,  we  may  say  that  the  synclines  tend  to  develop  steeply- 
sloping  limbs  on  the  cast  side  of  their  axes  and  gently-sloping  limbs 
on  the  west  side.  These  facts  are  in  accord  with  observations  made 
throughout  almost  the  entire  Appalachian  region,  and  it  is  upon  these 
facts  that  manv  able  ffeoloaists  have  based  the  theorv  that  the  de- 
forming  force  which  produced  these  folds  came  from  the  southeast. 
These  facts  alone  seem  inadequate  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  theory, 
but  that  the  initial  force  did  really  originate  in  that  direction  has 
been  pretty  generally  accepted  by  geologists. 

The  strike  of  the  beds,  as  in  most  other  parts  of  the  Appalachian 


MARYLA^TD   GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


153 


region,  varies  within  rather  narrow  limits.  Tlie  Tnssey  Mountain 
anticline  and  the  Evitts  Mountain  anticline  extend  approximately  X. 
27°  E.,  while  the  Town  Hill  syncline,  the  Collier  Run  syneline,  the 
Wills  Mountain  anticline,  and  the  Georges  Creek  syncline  all  have 
a  direction  approximately  X.  30^  E.  Observations  in  many  other 
places  show  that  in  no  case  worthy  of  special  note  do  the  beds  lie  at 
great  variance  to  the  general  direction  given. 

Xearly  all  of  the  folds  show  more  or  less  axial  pitch  and  this  pitch 
is  downward  to  the  south  almost  without  exception.  The  exact  na- 
ture of  this  pitch  along  many  of  the  folds  cannot  be  easily  computed, 
but  from  field  observations  on  the  major  anticlines  it  seems  that  even 
in  extreme  cases  the  pitch  scarcely  reaches  five  degrees.  It  is  to  this 
pitching  of  the  folds  that  much  of  the  characteristic  structure  of  the 
Appalachian  Region  is  d\ie.  The  effect  of  the  pitch  on  the  areal 
distribution  of  the  formations  is  best  illustrated  in  Allegany  county 
by  the  Evitts  Mountain  anticline.  At  the  state  line  on  the  north  the 
axis  of  this  anticline  is  indicated  by  the  tongue-shaped  area  of  Tus- 
carora  quartzite.  Southward  the  Tuscarora  narrows  and  disappears 
beneath  the  later  Clinton  fonnation.  The  Clinton  continuing  soiith- 
ward  upon  the  axis  also  naiTOws  and  disappears  beneath  the  succeed- 
ing Niagara  formation.  This  in  like  manner  is  followed  in  regular 
order  by  the  Salina,  the  Helderberg  and  the  Oriskany.  The  pitch  in 
the  southern  part  of  the  county  is  slight,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  emer- 
gence of  the  Helderberg  again  where  the  Potomac  has  cut  across 
Nicholas  Mountain.  Similar  areal  distribution  of  formations  brought 
about  by  pitching  of  the  folds  may  be  observed  in  almost  every  fold 
west  of  Town  Hill.  In  much  of  the  Georges  Creek  syncline  this  is 
not  quite  so  apparent,  but  in  the  northern  part  of  the  coimty  the  up- 
ward pitch  to  the  north  becomes  perceptible,  and  as  a  result  the  coal 
measures  all  come  to  the  surface  within  some  fifteen  miles  noi'th  of 
the  state  line. 

FArLTS. 

Faulting  is  rare  and  the  amount  of  vertical  movement  is  never  great. 
Onlv  the  more  thinly  bedded  strata  present  instances  of  faulting 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF 


ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


worthy  of  note,  and  none  of  the  observed  faults  have  more  than  a 
local  extent. 

In  the  Jennings  formation  along  the  "Williams  Road  on  the  hillside 
near  the  eastern  edge  of  Cumberland  there  is  a  fault  whose  throw 
seems  to  be  considerable,  but  no  definite  idea  as  to  the  exact  amount 
of  displacement  could  be  gained. 

On  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  west  of  Cedar  Cliff,  about 
three  miles  south  of  Cumberland,  a  small,  clearly  faulted  anticline 
is  seen  in  the  red  shaly  sandstone  bands  near  the  bottom  of  the  Salinn 
formation.    The  throw  here  is  only  a  few  feet. 

Other  faults  occur,  but  so  far  as  observed  they  are  of  no  special 
moment  except  in  the  general  relation  which  they  bear  to  the  more 
important  structural  features  of  the  region. 

STRUCTURE  SECTIONS. 

On  the  structure-section  sheet  (Plate  XVI)  twelve  structure  sec- 
tions are  given.  They  represent  the  strata  as  they  would  appear 
along  the  sides  of  trenches  cut  across  the  coimty  on  the  section  lines 
and  extending  downward  to  the  position  of  sea-level.  All  of  the  sec- 
tions extend  in  the  direction  X.  60°  "W.,  S.  60°  E.  which  is  approxi- 
mately perpendicular  to  the  prevailing  strike.  The  relative  posi- 
tions of  the  various  section  lines  have  been  chosen  with  especial  ref- 
erence to  lines  along  which  most  favorable  conditions  for  field  obser- 
vations were  found,  combined  wherever  possible  without  sacrificing 
accuracy  with  such  positions  as  best  reveal  the  varioiis  structural 
changes.  For  this  reason  the  distances  between  the  section  lines  vary. 
Those  crossing  the  eastern  and  central  portions  of  the  county  are  ap- 
proximately two  miles  apart,  w'hile  the  distances  between  those  lying 
wholly  within  the  western  part  of  the  coimty  average  about  four 
miles. 

On  the  structure-section  sheet  the  straight  line  at  the  upper  edge 
of  each  blank  space  represents  the  section-line  along  or  near  which 
the  field  observations  were  made;  the  straight  line  on  which  the  sec- 
tion rests  indicates  the  position  of  sea-level ;  while  the  undulating  line 
at  the  top  represents  the  surface  configuration  along  the  section-line. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


155 


Interpretation^  of  the  Sedimentary  Record, 
general  character  and  variation  of  sediments. 

The  three  chief  topographic  phases  of  sedimentation  indicated  by 
sandstones,  shales  and  limestones  are  well  represented  in  Alleganv 
county.  Reviewing  briefly  that  which  has  been  given  in  detail  in 
earlier  pages,  we  find  that  four  formations,  the  Tuscarora,  the  Oris- 
kany,  the  Pocono  and  the  Pottsville,  are  entirely  or  largely  composed 
of  heavy  sandstones;  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Helderberg  and 
the  Xiagara,  as  well  as  much  of  the  Salina  and  the  Greenbrier  are 
made  up  of  limestones;  and  that  all  of  the  other  Paleozoic  forma- 
tions consist  more  or  less  completely  of  soft  shales  and  thin-bedded 
limestones  and  sandstones. 

Marked  changes  in  the  character  of  the  formations  as  they  extend 
across  the  county  are  observed  in  only  a  few  instances.  The  Oris- 
kany  and  the  Jennings  tbieken  considerably  toward  the  west,  the 
Greenbrier  thickens  to  the  south  and  the  Pocono  apparently  thickens 
to  the  north.  Lithologically  the  Pocono  on  Town  Hill  differs  ma- 
terially from  the  Pocono  in  the  westein  part  of  the  coimty.  In  the 
east  it  is  very  massive  and  coarsely  conglomeritic  wherever  observed, 
while  in  the  western  portion  it  is  much  less  massive  and  is  free  from 
heavy  conglomerate.  The  other  formations  do  not  change  except  in 
minor  particulars,  and  as  these  changes  haA^e  been  mentioned  else- 
where they  need  not  be  repeated  here. 

THE  EARLY  PALEOZOIC  PERIOD.' 

In  early  Cambrian  time  a  long  strait  extending  from  the  region  of 
the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  southward  to  Alabama  occupied  approxi- 
mately the  position  now  occupied  by  the  greater  Appalachian  valley. 
It  separated  a  mountainous  Arcliean  continent  known  as  Appalachia 
from  a  comparatively  low-lying  land  area  covering  the  Central  State?; 
region.    During  Cambrian  time  erosion  greatly  reduced  the  height 

'  For  the  discussion  of  this  period  as  well  as  for  much  that  follows  the  author  has 
drawn  liberally  from  the  writings  of  others,  especially  of  the  members  of  the  Appa- 
lachian division  of  the  United  States  Geolosjical  Survey  and  of  the  State  Geological  ■ 
Surveys  of  Pennsylvania  and  New  York. 


156 


THE  GKOLOGY  OF   ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


of  the  Arclieaii  continent  and  tlic  detritus  thus  obtained  was  de- 
posited to  the  westward  while  the  sea  gradually  transgressed  eastward. 
Near  the  close  of  the  Cambrian  period  the  western  land  area  began  to 
sink  and  the  strait  gradually  widening  westward  to  Wisconsin  and 
beyond  the  ^lississippi  formed  a  great  mediterranean  sea.  Conditions 
wore  then  poorly  suited  for  the  transfer  of  land-derived  sediments,  and 
a  long  period  of  limestone  deposition  set  in.  In  course  of  time  a  dis- 
turbance of  conditions  took  place  and  the  limestone  deposition  gave 
way  to  a  widespread  distribution  of  shale.  The  deposition  of  this 
shale,  besides  indicating  an  uplift  of  the  eastern  land  from  which  the 
sediments  were  derived,  marks  also  a  recession  of  the  shore  line  and 
a  probable  shallowing  of  the  sea.  This  shale,  known  in  Maryland  as 
the  Martinsburg  formation,  was  followed  by  a  series  of  reddish  shales 
and  sandstones — the  Jimiata  formation  in  ^larvland — the  upper  part 
of  which  is  exposed  in  Allegany  county.  AVith  the  history  of  this 
formation  the  immediate  geological  history  of  Allegany  county  be- 
gins. As  shown  on  a  previous  page,  the  sandstones  of  the  Juniata 
multiply  and  thicken  toward  the  top  and  thus  indicate  a  steady  ap- 
proach to  conditions  of  shallow  water  deposition. 

THE   TUSCARORA  I'ERIOD. 

With  the  advent  of  tlic  Tnscarora  period  a  decided  change  in  the 
factors  of  decomposition  was  introduced.  The  lithologic  characters 
of  this  formation,  which  have  been  described  on  a  previous  page, 
indicate  that  the  sediments  were  laid  down  in  shallow  water.  How- 
ever, to  say  that  the  Tuscarora  formation  is  a  product  of  shallow  water 
deposition  is  only  a  meagre  introdiu-tion  to  the  explanation  of  the 
conditions  involved.  Dr.  xV.  C.  Spencer,  in  his  paper  on  "  The 
Geology  of  Massanutten  Mountain  in  Virginia,"  has  given  a  clear 
simimary  of  the  probable  factors  which  operate  to  bring  about  such 
concentration  and  deposition  of  materials,  and  has  discussed  these 
factors  in  the  light  of  sediments  in  the  Massanutten  area  similar  to  the 
Tuscarora  of  ^laryland.  lie  says  "  The  concentration  of  the  more 
resistant  products  of  rock-decay  for  the  formation  of  extensive  sand- 
stones is  a  process  of  great  complexity.    Diu-ing  the  early  part  of  a 


MAETXAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


157 


topographic  cycle  when  denudation  exceeds  decomposition,  the  numer- 
ous rapid  streams  deliver  to  the  sea  large  quantities  of  coarse  materials 
of  mixed  composition  which  may  be  partially  sorted  by  the  waves 
and  somewhat  widely  distributed  by  marine  currents;  but  as  drainage 
becomes  more  mature  there  will  be  a  tendency  for  stream-derived 
detritus  to  accumulate  at  the  mouths  of  large  rivei*s,  often  without 
much  wave-washing.  In  either  case  the  deposits  will  be  more  or  less 
heterogeneous,  and  the  same  will  be  true  of  the  deposits  derived  by  a 
transgressing  sea  from  a  land  surface  covered  by  a  deep  residual 
mantle.  Such  coarse-grained  heterogeneous  deposits  would  be  con- 
fined to  a  rather  narrow  littoral  zone,  but  brought  a  second  time 
under  the  action  of  the  waves  by  a  slight  elevation  of  the  land,  they 
would  be  re-sorted,  the  less  resistant  components  would  be  largely 
groimd  up  and  removed  as  fine  silt  and  the  zone  of  coarse  sediments 
would  be  moved  seaward.  At  the  same  time  the  rivers  might  be 
bringing  fresh  material,  but  with  continued  slow,  or  intermittent  rise 
of  the  land  accompanied  by  marine  planation,  these  and  the  older 
surviving  materials  becoming  mingled,  the  final  resiilt  would  be  a 
mass  of  sand  and  pebbles  composed  almost  entirely  of  quartz."  ' 

The  uniform  natiu-e  of  the  quartzite  indicates  a  time  of  comparative 
quiescence  and  but  one  source  of  material.  The  period  w^as  perhaps 
initiated  by  a  gradual  but  rapid  uplift  of  the  land  accompanied  by  a 
shallowing  of  the  sea  which  prevailed  until  the  close  of  the  period. 
As  to  the  position  of  the  shore-line  at  this  time  with  reference  to 
Allegany  county  but  little  is  known  except  that  it  was  in  all  proba- 
bility a  considerable  distance  east  of  the  county.  Southward  in  West 
Virginia  and  northward  in  Pennsylvania  the  formation  is  consid- 
erably thicker  and  in  each  of  these  areas  the  deposits  are  inclined  to 
be  coarser  than  in  Allegany  county,  this  being  particularly  true  in 
Pennsylvania.  Whether  the  lesser  thickness  of  the  formation  in  Alle- 
gany county  is  due  to  local  or  remote  causes  is  not  known.  A  shal- 
lowing of  the  sea  may  have  deflected  the  currents  or  a  deepening  of 
the  sea  may  have  lessened  their  pow'er,  in  either  of  which  cases  much 
of  the  sediment  would  have  been  deposited  elsewhere. 

'Spencer,  A.  C.  The  Geolosy  of  Massaniitten  Mountain  in  Virginia.  Washing- 
ton, 1897. 


158 


THE  GKOLOGY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


THE  LATER  SILURIAN  PERIOD. 

With  the  advent  of  the  Clinton,  conditions  very  similar  to  those 
immediately  preceding  the  Tuscarora  seem  for  a  time  to  have  pre- 
vailed. The  red  shales,  with  alternating  sandstones,  were  again 
introduced,  but  they  are  more  thinly  bedded  than  those  of  the  Juniata. 
That  the  Tuscarora  represents  only  temporary  invasion  of  pure 
quartzose  materials  which  interrupted  the  deposition  of  red  clays  and 
sands  may  be  possible.  The  topographic  cycle  may  have  advanced 
sufficiently  slowly  to  allow  the  waves  of  marine  planation  to  cut  their 
way  across  the  old  littoral  deposit  and  to  reach  again  the  region  of 
.uncovered  crystalline  rocks.  If  detritus  was  obtained  in  this  way 
the  waves  would  perhaps  be  unable  to  properly  sort  it  but  might  be 
able  to  deliver  the  lighter  materials  to  strong  currents  and  thereby 
bring  about  the  distribution  as  we  find  it.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  conditions  it  seems  evident  that  the  subsidence  soon  became  suf- 
ficiently great  to  bring  about  decidedly  new  conditions.  With  the 
deposition  of  the  upper  part  of  the  Clinton  formation,  limestone  and 
iron  ore  were  both  introduced,  the  iron  being  of  comparatively  little 
importance  in  the  Juniata  except  as  a  coloring  matter,  while  the  lime- 
stone is  wholly  absent. 

Concerning  the  Xiagara  period.  Professor  James  Hall  says  that  the 
cojidition  of  the  ocean  seems  to  have  been  favorable  to  the  production 
of  corab  and  criuoids  and  to  the  deposition  of  calcareous  beds  of 
magnesian  character,  the  sea  being  comparatively  shallow.'  In  Alle- 
gany county  the  calcareous  beds  have  been  in  part  replaced  by  argil- 
laceous sediments  apparently  indicating  occasional  changes  in  marine 
currents  at  this  time.  The  corals  and  crinoids  were  acted  upon  with 
considerabl,e  energy  by  the  waves,  as  is  indicated  by  the  immense 
quantity  of  broken  and  worn  fragments  thrown  heterogeneously 
together  and  cemented  by  the  calcareous  mud  produced  by  a  more 
complete  trituration  of  some  of  the  materials. 

These  finely  comminuted  deposits,  profusely  filled  with  fragments 
of  organic  remains  imiformly  deposited  over  wide  areas,  show  an  un- 

'  Twenty-eiirhtli  Annual  Report  of  the  New  York  State  Museum  of  Natural  History. 
The  Fauna  of  the  Niagara  Group.    Albany,  1879,  p.  101. 


MAKYXAXD  GEOLOGICAL  S1JEVEY 


159 


disturbed  transition  upward,  and  the  abundance  of  carbonate  of 
lime  coming  into  the  sea  and  entering  into  the  secretions  of  the  vax'ious 
marine  organisms  indicates  the  presence  of  much  calcareous  material 
easy  of  access.  The  Silurian  limestone  was  evidently  the  source  of 
this  material,  as  it  had  no  doubt  been  raised  above  the  level  of  the  sea 
in  various  places  and  thus  brought  i;nder  the  influence  of  aerial 
degradation. 

The  lower  portions  of  the  Salina  add  further  proof  of  the  shallow 
water  conditions.  The  red  sandstone  of  that  formation,  with  its  salt, 
gypsum  and  fish  remains,  as  found  further  north,  was  certainly  laid 
down  in  reasonably  shallow  water  and  in  all  probability  in  more  or 
less  land-locked  bays.  At  any  rate,  although  no  very  great  striic- 
tural  disturbance  appears  to  have  taken  place  at  this  time,  the  condi- 
tions affecting  marine  life  appear  to  have  been  very  greatly  changed. 
In  Allegany  county  no  fossils  have  been  foixnd  in  the  red  sandstone 
and  the  presence  of  salt  and  gypsum  has  not  been  proven,  but  the 
conditions  of  deposition  are  believed  to  have  been  much  the  same  as 
further  north.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  condition,  it  is  evident 
that  when  the  Helderberg  period  was  initiated  the  organic  life  which 
came  with  it  was  very  unlike  that  which  prevailed  during  the  time 
immediately  preceding  the  shaly  sandstone  deposition.' 

THE   HELDEEBEEG  PERIOD. 

From  the  general  character  of  the  Helderberg  fossils  it  would 
seem  that  the  depth  of  the  water  at  this  time  was  perhaps  not  far 
different  from  that  of  much  of  the  later  Silurian  period,  but  one  thing 
of  especial  note  is  the  almost  entire  absence  in  the  Helderberg  of 
mechanical  detritus,  such  as  sand  and  clay.  Apparently  the  surface 
configuration  of  the  land  was  very  subdued.  Possibly  conditions  of 
base-level  erosion  now  prevailed  such  as  had  existed  during  Lower 
Silurian  time.  If  such  were  the  case  the  streams,  being  weak,  would 
be  unable  to  transport  the  heavier  detritus  in  suspension,  but  might 
continue  to  carry  much  calcareous  matter  in  solution.    The  adjacent 

'  Clarke,  J.  M.  The  Hercynian  Question.  Forty-second  Annual  Report  of  the 
Trustees  of  the  State  Museum  of  Natural  History.    Albany,  1889,  p.  436. 


160 


THE  GEOLOGY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


seas  then  being  free  from  muddy  sediments  but  highly  charged  with 
carbonate  of  lime  would  be  in  favorable  condition  for  the  growth  of 
animal  organisms  such  as  the  Helderberg  contains,  and  extensive 
limestone  beds  would  be  formed  from  the  detritus  produced  by  them. 

THE  OKISKANY  PERIOD. 

With  the  advent  of  the  Oriskany  a  great  change  in  the  character 
of  the  sediments  again  took  place.  As  has  been  stated  elsewhere,  the 
formation  is  made  np  of  highly  fossiliferous  sandstones  and  conglom- 
erates separated  from  the  Helderberg  proper  by  a  transition  zone 
of  interbedded  limestone.  We  have  alread}"  seen  how  the  coarse 
(juartzitic  detritus  which  contributed  the  sands  of  the  Tuscarora  may 
have  been  gradually  stored  up  on  a  pre-Tuscaroran  Coastal  Plain. 
The  events  in  the  concentration  of  materials  to  supply  the  sands  and 
])obbles  of  the  Oriskany  were  perhaps  much  the  same.  As  in  the  case 
of  the  Tuscarora,  an  upward  earth-movement  evidently  initiated  the 
principal  factors  of  final  distribution.  Simultaneous  with  this  the 
shallowness  of  the  sea  became  sufficiently  accentuated  to  admit  of  the 
currents  acting  with  much  energy,  thereby  enabling  them  to  transport 
heavy  materials  for  considerable  distances. 

The  supply  of  carbonate  of  lime  continued  throughout  the  period  in 
sufficient  abundance  to  admit  of  prolific  marine  life.  In  many  places 
the  formation  is  a  mass  of  shells  and  casts  and  the  abundant  cementing 
material  is  often  so  prominently  calcareous  that  a  perfectly  fresh 
specimen  has  much  the  appearance  of  a  true  limestone. 

THE  DEVONIAN  SHALE  PERIOD. 

The  Romney,  Jennings  and  Hampshire  formations  are  largely 
composed  of  fine  sediments,  and  may  here  be  treated  together.  Ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Willis,  the  lowlands  of  the  early  Devonian  were  gen- 
oral  from  Xew  York  to  Georgia,  continuing  low  in  the  southern 
Appalachian  area  throughout  the  Devonian,  but  northward  becoming 
considerably  elevated,  produced  mountains  probably  several  thousand 
feet  high,  the  degradation  of  which  supplied  the  later  Devonian 
sediments.'    Near  the  close  of  the  Oriskany  period  the  area  covered 

'Piedmont  Folio,  I'.  S.  Geol.  Survey.  l.S9(>. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XVI. 


STRUCTURAL  SECTIONS   IN   ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGIC  AT,  SURVEY 


161 


by  Allegany  county  seems  to  have  been  elevated  and  possibly  to  a 
sufficient  extent  to  allow  of  some  erosion,  although  this  is  not  proven. 
However,  in  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania,  local  non-confonnities  exist 
between  the  Oriskany  and  the  Eomney,  and  it  seems  probable  that  the 
changes  in  Allegany  county  were  in  harmony  with  the  movements 
which  bronght  abont  the  non-conformities  to  the  north  and  south. 
The  lower  shales,  resting  with  sharp  contrast  upon  the  Oriskany,  are 
extremely  fine  and  highly  carboniferous.  Various  hypotheses  have 
been  given  to  explain  the  manner  of  deposition  of  these  fine  sedi- 
ments. It  would  seem  that  a  gentle  subsidence  after  emergence 
might  so  affect  the  currents  that,  sweeping  swiftly  over  the  arenaceous 
beds  they  might  thoroughly  wash  away  any  superficial  coating  which 
may  have  previously  collected  there.  The  land  surface  was  no  doubt 
low,  and  thus  for  a  long  time  not  in  a  condition  to  supply  coarse 
detritus.  H.  D.  Rogers,  in  his  admirable  paper  on  the  origin  of  the 
Appalachian  strata,  long  ago  suggested  that  these  black  sediments 
possibly  accumulated  in  a  very  widely  spread  sea  marsh  or  marine 
savannah,  the  carboniferous  part  of  the  shales  being  the  result  of  plant 
growth.' 

The  ara^llaceous  portions  evidently  came  from  a  low-lying  land 
surface.  During  the  removal  of  the  heterogeneous  Coastal  Plain 
detritus  which  furnished  the  materials  for  much  of  the  Oriskany 
formation,  the  land  surface  farther  inland  was  low  and  imaffected  by 
rapid  streams  and  gradually  became  covered  with  a  coating  of  chemi- 
cally disintegrated  materials  awaiting  future  transportation.  Dis- 
turbances which  we  know  occurred  near  the  close  of  the  Oriskany 
period  may  have  easily  brought  about  conditions  favorable  for  the 
slow  removal  of  this  residual  mantle. 

A  general  but  perhaps  slight  depression  allowed  the  deposition  of 
the  limestone  near  the  bottom  of  the  Romney,  following  which 
shallow  water  conditions  with  only  minor  interruptions  continued 
until  after  the  beginning  of  the  Carboniferous  time. 

'Rogers,  H.  D.    The  Geology  of  Pennsylvania,  vol.  ii,  p.  791.    Philadelphia,  1858. 


11 


102 


THE  GEOLOGY   OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


THE  LOWER  CARBONIFEEOCS  PERIOD. 

In  Allegany  county  there  is  little  apparent  difference  between  the 
highest  Devonian  and  the  lowest  Carboniferous  sediments  except  in 
color  and  coarseness.  In  each  case  the  sediments  are  almost  wholly 
of  quartzose  materials  and  indicate  shallow  water  and  mountainous 
land  conditions.  Cross-bedding,  ripple-marks  and  thin  coal  seams  all 
attest  a  preparatory  step  toward  the  marshy  condition  of  the  Coal 
^Measures. 

The  limestones  and  shales  following  the  Pocono  formation  indicate 
a  degi-adation  of  the  Devonian  mountains  and  an  almost  unvarying 
relation  of  land  and  sea.  That  the  land  appeared  above  the  surface, 
however,  in  places  not  far  from  the  Allegany  county  area  seems 
proven  by  the  bands  of  limestone-shale  breccia  at  the  Greenbrier- 
"Mauch  Chunk  and  the  Mauch  Chunk-Pottsville  contacts. 

THE  COAL  MEASURES  PERIOD. 

Following  the  limestones  and  shales  of  the  lower  Carboniferous 
period  massive  conglomerates,  sandstones,  shales,  limestones,  coals, 
fire-clays,  etc.,  were  laid  down  in  rapid  but  irregular  succession.  The 
features  of  this  deposition  being  much  the  same  throughout  a  large 
part  of  the  Appalachian  region,  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  period 
need  not  be  entered  upon  here.  The  general  conditions  which  pre- 
vailed may  be  stated  in  the  following  words:  "  During  middle  and 
later  Carboniferous  time  there  ensued  that  general  vertical  movement 
of  the  eastern  land  area  and  the  region  of  the  interior  sea  which 
resulted  in  the  withdrawal  of  the  sea  to  the  Mississippi  embayment. 
The  movement  was  not  simple;  it  was  composed  of  many  episodes  of 
uplift  and  subsidence,  among  which  uplift  preponderated.  In  the 
repeated  oscillations  of  level  the  sea  swept  backward  and  forth  over 
wide  areas.  It  received  from  the  Coastal  Plain  the  coarse  quartz 
detritus  which  had  accumulated  during  previous  ages,  and  the  waves 
and  currents  of  the  shallow  sea  spread  the  concentrated  sandstones 
and  pebbles  in  beds  which  alternated  with  materials  of  less  ancient 
derivation.  The  Carboniferous  strata  include  shale  and  sandy  shale, 
derived  more  or  less  directly  from  lands  of  moderate  elevation,  and 


IIARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


163 


also  the  coal  beds,  each  of  which  marks  the  prolonged  existence  of  a 
marsh  in  which  the  peat-niakinc;  plants  jrrew.  TVhen  the  marsh  sank 
beneath  the  sea  the  peat  beds  were  buried  beneath  sands  and  shales, 
and  the  peat,  by  a  process  of  distillation,  became  coal." ' 

SUBSEQUEXT  HISTORY. 

In  the  review  of  the  sedimentary  record  we  have  seen  how  eleva- 
tion and  subsidence  followed  each  other  with  vai-ying  rapidity  while 
the  large  volume  of  Paleozoic  sediments  was  being  deposited.  It 
seems  probable  that  during  this  time  some  lateral  pressure  was  also 
exerted  upon  these  sediments,  producing  incipient  anticlines  and 
synclines.  It  was  not,  however,  until  near  the  close  of  Paleozoic 
time  that  structural  changes  of  exceptional  magnitude  were  mani- 
fested throughout  the  entire  Appalachian  province.  The  strata 
which  had  been  deposited  upon  each  other  in  an  approximately  hori- 
zontal position  were  then  squeezed  and  folded  to  an  enormous  degree, 
the  forces  being  applied  laterally  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the 
course  of  the  present  mountain  ranges.  How  long  this  compression 
continued  is  not  known.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  earliest  Mesozoic 
records  show  a  new  axis  of  drainage  and  that  most  of  the  rivers,  in- 
stead of  flowing  to  the  west  as  the  Paleozoic  rivers  had  done,  were 
then  flowing  to  the  east. 

That  there  has  been  vertical  upward  movement  of  importance  since 
the  close  of  Paleozoic  time  is  evidenced  by  the  development  of  well- 
marked  physiographic  features,  such  as  the  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary 
peneplains  and  the  various  river  terraces  found  along  the  streams  of 
the  county. 

'  Piedmont  Folio,  U.  S.  GeoL  Survey,  18!)6. 


THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY 

COUNTY 

BY 

WM.  B.  CLARK,  C.  C.  O  HARRA.  R.  B.  ROWE  AND  H.  RIES 


The  economic  resources  of  Allegany  county  are  confined  almost 
wholly  to  its  western  portion.  The  chief  product  is  coal,  but  the 
output  of  fire-clay  and  cement-rock  has  been,  and  is  now,  of  much 
importance.  Other  products,  such  as  iron  ore,  building-stone,  road- 
metal,  brick-shales,  alluvial  clays,  etc.,  have  been  or  may  be  worked 
to  advantage. 

In  the  middle  and  eastern  parts  of  the  county  some  of  the  lime- 
stones are  a  source  of  good  agTicidture  lime  and  of  excellent  road- 
metal,  although  at  present  used  only  for  local  purposes.  Mineral 
springs  also,  which  have  had  some  notoriety  in  the  past,  might  pos- 
sibly be  made  valuable  again  under  favorable  conditions.  The  pre- 
dominating rocks  in  the^e  portions  of  the  county  are  shales  and 
sandstones  which  give  little  promise  of  future  value  as  mineral  pro- 
ducers, but  this  dearth  of  mineral  wealth  is  in  part  compensated  for 
by  the  fertility  of  the  soil;  and  the  output  of  farm  and  forest  pro- 
ducts may  always  be  depended  upon  as  a  source  of  revenue. 

In  the  preceding  pages,  luider  the  heads  of  Stratigraphy  and  Struc- 
ture, much  has  been  said  that  needs  to  be  studied  in  connection 
with  this  chapter.  Certain  formations  are  there  shown  to  contain 
minerals  and  rocks  which  are  known  to  be  of  economic  impoi-tance, 
and  the  geological  positions  of  the  strata  bearing  them  are  carefully 
located,  together  with  their  areal  distribution.  Other  formations, 
from  the  data  given,  seem  to  contain  no  mineral  or  rock  of  commer- 
cial value,  and  judging  from  work  carried  on  in  these  formations 


166 


THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


elsewhere  it  seems  that  the  information,  so  far  as  the  economic 
resources  of  the  formations  are  concerned,  is  finaL  Some  exceptions 
may  occvir  and  mention  of  such  will  be  made  in  the  following  pages. 
The  various  products  will  be  taken  up  separately  and  discussed  with 
such  detail  as  their  importance  may  seem  to  demand. 

Coals.' 

The  coal  region  of  Allegany  county  is  confined  to  a  narrow  belt 
near  its  western  boundary.  The  coal  seams  occur  in  the  Pottsville, 
Allegheny,  Conemaugh  and  Monongahela  formations,  the  first  three 
containing  the  so-called  "  small-vein  coals and  the  last  the  "  big-vein 
coal,"  which  for  more  than  half  a  century  has  been  the  source  of  the 
finest  steam  coal  of  the  country. 

)  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  COAL  BASIN. 

The  Coal  Basin  of  Allegany  county  lies  in  a  higli,  hilly,  gently 
synclinal  valley  between  the  Dans-Little  Allegheny  Mountain  belt 
on  the  east  and  Savage  Mountain,  on  the  west,  and  extends  across  the 
county  from  the  Maryland-Pennsylvania  line  south-southwestward 
to  the  Potomac  river.  Its  length  is  approximately  twenty  miles  and 
its  average  breadth  is  about  five  miles.  The  northern  end  of  the 
district  lies  wholly  in  Allegany  county,  but  southward  the  Allegany- 
Garrett  county  line  gradually  encroaches  upon  the  basin  until  at  the 
Potomac  river  the  county  line  lies  less  than  a  mile  west  of  the  central 
axis  of  the  syncline. 

The  prominent  transverse  ridge  on  which  Frostburg  stands  con- 
nects the  highest  slopes  of  Dans  and  Savage  mountains,  dividing  the 
valley  into  two  unequal  parts,  and  thus  determines  two  distinct  and 
unequal  areas  of  drainage.  The  smaller  area  lying  to  the  north  of 
Frostburg  is  drained  by  Jennings  Run  and  Braddock  Run,  wliile  the 
southern  portion,  which  forms  about  three-fourths  of  the  entire  coal 
basin,  is  drained  by  Georges  Creek. 

'  A  much  more  detailed  report  on  the  coal  deposits  of  the  state  will  soon  be  pub- 
lished by  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey.  This  will  contain  full  discussions  of  the 
areal  distribution,  methods  of  mining  and  colorimetric  properties  of  the  different 
coals. 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


167 


Jennings  Eun  takes  its  rise  just  north  of  Frostburg  and  flowing  first 
in  a  general  north-northeasterly  direction,  approximately  along  the 
synclinal  axis,  then  in  an  easterly  direction,  passing  through  the  deep 
gorge  in  Little  Allegheny  Mountain,  enters  AVills  Creek  about  one 
and  one-half  miles  south  of  the  state  line.  Braddock  Eun  rises  east 
of  Frostburg,  near  Eckhart,  flows  nearly  eastward  through  the  Dans- 
Little  Allegheny  gap  and  also  joins  "U^ills  Creek,  entering  it  at  the 
west  end  of  the  "  Xarrows."  The  source  of  Georges  Creek,  the 
principal  stream  of  the  coal  basin,  is  about  two  miles  northwest  of 
Frostburg  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Savage  Mountain.  Flowing  in  a 
general  south-southeasterly  direction,  until  it  reaches  the  central  axis 
of  the  basin  south  of  Frostburg,  it  becomes  deflected  to  the  south- 
southwest  and  then  follows  quite  closely  the  axis  of  the  basin,  receiv- 
ing important  tributaries  from  either  side,  until  it  enters  the  Potomac 
at  Westernport. 

The  various  formations  of  the  Coal  Measures  are  generally  com- 
posed of  easily  eroded  materials,  and  consequently  have  suffered  deep 
cutting  by  the  various  streams,  so  that,  although  the  lower  beds  are  but 
slightly  affected,  the  upper  beds  are  now  represented  only  by  irregular 
or  rounded  areas  left  as  remnants  on  the  tops  of  the  higher  hills.  In 
this  way,  in  addition  to  the  two  outcrops  of  the  sevei'al  coal  seams 
along  the  outer  edges  of  the  basin,  two  outcrops  have  been  produced 
along  the  gorges  cut  by  the  various  streams.  As  the  streams  descend 
from  higher  to  lower  levels  these  outcrops  continually  rise  higher 
above  the  stream  beds,  thus  necessitating  the  use  of  steep  gravity 
planes  in  the  southern  part  of  the  basin  in  order  to  transfer  the  coal 
from  the  mine  openings  on  the  hillsides  to  the  railroads  in  the  valley 
below. 

HISTORY  OF  ITS  DEVELOPJIEXT. 

Coal  was  discovered  by  a  Mr.  Eiser  near  the  present  site  of  Frost- 
burg in  1804,  and,  although  various  openings  were  made  from  time  to 
time  and  a  small  amount  of  coal  taken  out,  more  than  a  quarter  of  a 
century  passed  by  before  mining  oi^erations  of  any  note  were  inaugu- 
rated. The  flrst  eastern  shipment  of  coal  was  made  in  IS 30  from  the 


168  THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


old  J^eff  mine,  now  the  I]ckhart  mine  of  the  Consolidation  Coal  Com- 
jjanv.  The  coal  was  loaded  on  barges  at  Cumberland  and  floated 
down  the  Potomac  river  to  AVashington.  Although  profitable  for 
a  time,  this  mode  of  conveyance  was  too  destructive  of  life  and  prop- 
erty to  be  long  utilized  and  was  soon  abandoned.  The  first  ship- 
ments of  coal  over  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  were  made  in 
1842,  and  over  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  from  Cumberland  in 
1850.  Since  then  shipments  have  been  continuous  and  the  record  of 
annual  output  is  complete  from  1842  to  the  present  time. 

NAMES  USED  FOR  THE  COAL  BASIN. 

The  names  by  which  the  coal  basin  and  the  coal  seams  of  Allegany 
county  are  known  are  often  confiising  to  the  general  reader.  Owing 
to  the  fact  that  Fort  Cumberland  early  gained  great  notoriety  as  a 
frontier  outpost,  and  the  important  and  thriving  city  which  now 
occupies  its  former  site  became  the  business  center  of  the  upper 
Potomac  valley,  the  Coal  Basin,  although  the  coal  lay  several  miles 
to  the  west  of  the  city,  came  to  be  known  as  the  "  Cumberland  Coal 
Region."  Primarily  the  term  referred  to  that  part  of  the  coal  area 
lying  around  and  to  the  north  of  Frostburg.  Later,  as  mines  were 
opened  throughout  the  whole  length  of  Georges  Creek,  the  term 
"  Georges  Creek  Coal  Region  "  also  came  into  use.  In  the  mean- 
time Frostburg,  rapidly  growing  and  favorably  situated  with  refer- 
ence to  the  entire  coal  field,  gave  its  name  to  the  region  without, 
however,  supplanting  either  of  the  other  two.  This  name,  although 
much  used  locally,  has  never  gained  a  firm  footing  in  the  trade  litera- 
ture of  Maryland  coal.  The  coal  trade  seems  to  prefer  the  terms 
Cumberland  and  Georges  Creek,  and  as  a  result  of  this  preference  the 
combined  term  Cimiberland-Georges  Creek  District  or  Basin  is  now 
gaining  precedence  in  scientific  literature.  In  this  way  there  need 
be  no  confusion  with  the  coal  districts  of  neighboring  areas  and  the 
coal-trade  interests  of  the  Georges  Creek  valley  may  be  fully  pro- 
tected. 

According  to  the  classification  given  by  ]\Ir.  Joseph  D.  Weeks  of 
the  United  States  Geological  Survey,  the  Cumberland-Georges  Creek 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


169 


District  is  one  of  four  districts  which  make  up  the  so-called  Potomac 
Coal  Basin.'  The  other  three  are  the  Wellersburg  District  of  Penn- 
svlvaiiia,  the  Elk  Garden  District  of  West  Virginia  and  the  Upper 
Potomac  District  of  West  Virginia,  the  latter  two  districts  including 
also  that  part  of  the  coal  area  of  Garrett  coimty  which  lies  along  the 
Potomac  river. 


THE  COAL  VEINS. 


Formations. 

Monongahela 

iiO  feet 


Conemaugh 

600  to  625  feet 


Allegheny 

2T5  to  300  feet 


Pottsville 

450  to  500  feet 


Coal  Veins. 

Knontz  coal  [Wayncaburyl 

Shales  and  limestone 

TytiOft  O'Gos")  coal  [Sewickleyl 

Shale 

Elhganlen  C^Fourteen-foot"  or 
"Biij-veiii  "i  coal  [Pitifbiug] 

Sand^tnue  and  fhalca 

Franhlin  {"Dirtii  yine-foof') 
coal   [Little  Clarksburg] 

Shales  and  Sandstone 

Barton  C'Fuur-foot  ")  coal  [Bolterstown] 

Sandstones  and  shales 

Thomas  i  "Three-foot coal  [Upper  Freeport] 
Sandstones  and  shales 

Daris  ("Six-foot")  coal   [Loiver  Kittanniim] 
Shales  and  sandstones 
Parker  coal  [Clarion] 
Bliiebaudh  coal  [Brookrille] 
Wcsternport  {"Two-fool")  coal 
Sandstone 

BJoomington  {"Bailroad")  coal 
Shale 

Gray  sandstone  and  conglomerates 


Fig.  5. — Section  sliowina:  position  of  leading  coal  veins. 

The  coal  veins  of  Allegany  county  are  found  in  the  Monongahela, 
Conemaugh,  Allegheny  and  Pottsville  formations.  Their  character 
and  position  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  pages.  The  relations 
of  the  leading  seams  are  shown  in  the  above  figure. 

'  Weeks,  Jos.  D.  The  Potomac  and  Roaring  Creek  Coal  Fields  in  West  Virginia. 
U.  S.  G.  S.  Ann.  Kept.,  1892-93,  pt.  II,  pp.  567-590. 


170 


THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGAXV  COUNTY 


THE  POTTSVILLE  COALS. 

The  Pottsville  veins  are  much  less  important  commercially  in 
Maryland  than  in  Virginia,  where  they  are  represented  by  the  impor- 
tant Xew  Kiver  and  Pocahontas  coals.  In  Maryland  only  two  veins 
have  been  exploited  hitherto,  and  both  of  them,  so  far  as  known,  are 
of  small  areal  extent  and  thickness.  The  two  veins  are  known  respec- 
tively as  the  Bloomington  (Railroad)  coal  and  the  "Westernport  (Two- 
foot)  coal. 

21ie  Bloomington  (Railroad)  Coal. — The  Bloomington  coal,  so 
named  from  the  fact  that  it  is  well  developed  along  the  line  of  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  to  the  west  of  Bloomington,  covers  a 
considerable  area  in  southwestern  Allegany  county  and  adjacent  por- 
tions of  Garrett  comity.  It  has  been  commonly  known  under  the 
name  of  the  "  Eailroad  Seam."  Numerous  attempts  have  been  made 
to  work  this  coal  but  with  indifferent  success,  on  account  of  the  vari- 
able thickness  and  quality  of  the  coal.  The  vein  varies  from  one  foot 
or  less  to  nearly  three  feet  in  thickness,  and  this  occurs  within 
short  distances.  The  coal  is  often  very  impure,  bands  of  slate  occur- 
ring in  it.  The  following  section  near  Piedmont  represents  the 
general  character  of  the  seam  in  the  Potomac  valley  in  the  south- 
western portion  of  the  county,  where  it  is  best  developed: — 

Feet.  Inches. 

Sandstone   x 

Coal   3 

Shale   5 

Coal   2  10 

Shale   2 

Coal   1 

Black  shale   1 

The  Railroad  seam  occurs  about  125  feet  below  the  top  of  the 
Pottsville  formation  and  about  170  feet  above  the  blanch  Chunk 
shales. 

The  Weste7"npo7't  (Tioo-foot)  Coal. — The  "Westernport  coal,  so-called 
from  its  occurrence  in  the  vicinity  of  Westernport,  is  only  worked 
at  the  present  time  at  a  single  locality  on  the  east  side  of  the  lower 
Georges  Creek  valley.    This  vein,  which  has  been  referred  to  at 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


171 


times  as  tlie  T-o-o-foot  vein,"  is  limited  so  far  as  known  to  the  south- 
em  portion  of  the  Georges  Creek  basin.  This  coal  is  somewhat 
variable  in  thickness,  like  the  Bloomington  vein,  but  is  usually  about 
2  feet  10  inches  to  3  feet  in  thickness,  and  generally  contains  more  or 
less  slate  interstratified  with  the  coal.  The  lower  bench  carries  more 
or  less  sulphur  at  times.  The  following  section  shows  the  thickness 
and  character  of  the  coal  at  the  opening  to  the  noi'theast  of 
"Westemport: 

Feet.  Inches. 

Sandstone   x 

Coal   1  Si 

Slate   1 

Coal   1  3 

Fire-Clav   x 

The  "Westernport  coal  is  found  at  20  feet  below  the  top  of  the 
Pottsville  formation  and  about  115  feet  above  the  Bloomington  coal. 

Other  Coals. — At  each  of  the  three  fire-clay  mines  near  the  Alle- 
gany line  in  the  northern  part  of  the  coal  basin  a  coal  seam  of  some 
importance  is  found  usually  immediately  above  the  fire-clay  bed,  the 
exact  equivalency  of  which  cannot  be  determined.  Its  thickness 
averages  about  two  feet,  but  sometimes  increases  to  four  feet.  It  is 
about  seventy-five  feet  below  the  top  of  the  Pottsville  formation.' 
This  coal  is  mined  at  the  Blount  Savage  and  the  Savage  Mountain 
mines  and  has  been  used  to  some  extent  in  burning  the  fire-brick. 

THE   ALLEGHEXY  COALS. 

The  Allegheny  coals  are  among  the  most  important  of  the  small- 
vein  coals  in  Maryland  and  are  also  worked  extensively  in  the  adja- 
cent states  of  Pennsylvania  and  West  Virginia,  affording  the  impor- 
tant Somerset  coimty  coals  of  the  former  and  several  of  the  chief 
mines  of  the  Davis  Coal  and  Coke  Company  in  the  latter  as  well  as 
many  others  further  west. 

The  Allegheny  coals,  together  with  the  Conemaugli  coals  above, 
undoubtedly  have  a  great  future  in  Maryland  in  the  days  to  come 
when  the  Biff  Vein  coal  becomes  more  nearlv  exhausted.    The  areal 


'  See  Gladden's  Run  Section.    Bull.  0.5,  U.  S.  G.  S.,  p.  186. 


172 


THE   MINERAL   RESOURCES  OF   ALLEGAXV  COCXTY 


extent  of  these  small  veins  is  so  much  greater  than  that  of  the  more 
important  Big  Vein  that  the  volume  of  small-vein  coal  in  the  state 
far  exceeds  that  contained  in  the  Big  Vein,  although  its  removal  has 
proved  to  be  much  more  difficult  and  expensive. 

The  Bluehaugh  Coal. — The  Bluebaugh  coal,  designated  by  this 
name  locally,  is  confined,  so  far  as  known,  to  the  northeastern  rim  of 
the  Georges  Creek  basin,  where  it  outcrops  along  the  margin  of  the 
field  from  near  Dans  Kock  northward.  This  coal  lies  at  or  near  the 
base  of  the  Allegheny  formation  and  is  very  variable  in  thickness, 
changing  rapidly  Avithin  short  distances.  It  generally  contains  bands 
of  slate  and  some  bone-coal.  A  mine  opening  at  Warrior  Run  to 
the  north  of  Dans  Eock  shows  the  following  section: 

,  .           ,   ,   ,  Feet.  Inches. 

Sandstone  and  shale   x 

Coal  ■.   1 

Slate     1  4 

Coal   3  4 

Slate   ] 

Coal   1  I 

Shale   X 

The  vein  is  found  but  a  few  feet  above  the  top  of  the  Pottsville 
conglomerate.  The  Bluebaugh  coal  occupies  a  position  very  near 
that  of  the  Brookville  coal  in  Pennsylvania  and  it  has  been  thought 
to  be  the  approximate  equivalent  of  that  vein. 

The  Parl-er  Coal. — The  Parker  coal  so-called  locally,  is  confined, 
to  approximately  the  same  area  as  tiie  Bluebaugh  coal,  and  like  that 
coal  is  variable  in  thickness.  It  varies  from  a  few  inches  to  verv 
nearly  5  feet,  but  like  most  of  the  other  small-vein  coals,  generally 
carries  considerable  slate,  wliich  greatly  interferes  with  economy  in 
mining.  The  Parker  vein  has  been  worked  to  some  extent  in  the 
vicinity  of  Barrellville  where  it  affords  the  following  section: 

Fpet.  Inches. 
Slate  and  bone  coal   x 

Coal   8 

Shaly  sandstone   6 

Coal   2 

Sandy  shale   x 

This  vein  thickens  somewhat  to  the  southward  toward  "Warrior 
Run,  where  it  has  been  estimated  that  a  thickness  of  nearlv  5  feet  is 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


173 


reached.  The  Parker  coal  is  situated  about  30  feet  above  the  Blue- 
baugh  coaL  Its  position  indicates  that  it  must  be  the  approximate 
equivalent  of  the  Clarion  coal  of  Pennsylvania. 

The  Davis  (Six-foot)  Coal. — The  Davis  coal,  so  named  by  the 
geologists  of  the  TJ.  S.  Geological  Survey  on  account  of  its  extensive 
development  at  and  near  Davis,  West  Virginia,  is  one  of  the  most 
important  of  the  small-A'ein  coals.  It  is  commonly  known  in  Alle- 
gany county  as  the  Six-foot  coal. 

Starting  at  an  elevation  of  about  two  hundred  feet  above  the  bed 
of  the  Potomac  river  near  Westernport,  the  outcrops  going  northward 
gradually  approach  the  level  of  Georges  Creek  until  at  a  point  a  few 
rods  north  of  Franklin  they  pass  beneath  its  surface.  The  identity 
of  the  Six-foot  coal  is  apparently  better  preserved  throughout  the 
basin  than  that  of  the  Barton  or  the  Thomas  coals,  and  in  addition 
to  the  openings  at  the  mines  now  worked  near  Westemport  this  seam 
has  been  exploited  in  various  places  along  the  eastern  slope  of  Savage 
Mountain  and  on  the  western  slope  of  Dans  and  Little  Allegheny 
mountains.  Isear  Westernport,  where  the  seam  approaches  six  feet 
in  thickness,  the  coal  has  been  mined  for  a  number  of  years,  and 
although  seldom  put  upon  the  market  as  a  competitor  of  the  Big  Vein 
coal,  it  has  nevertheless  supplied  a  considerable  part  of  the  demand 
in  Westernport  and  Piedmont,  and  is  now  finding  a  wider  market. 

Throughout  the  lower  Georges  Creek  valley  the  Davis  coal  reaches 
a  greater  thickness,  and  is  more  important  than  any  other  coal  except 
the  Big  Vein.  This  coal  always  contains  partings  of  either  shale 
or  sandstone,  while  bone-coal  is  not  infrequent.  There  is  at  times 
considerable  sulphur  in  the  lower  bench.  At  some  points  in  the 
lower  Georges  Creek  valley  the  Davis  vein  is  quite  clean  and,  in 
general,  seems  to  improve  in  quality  southward.  The  following 
section  is  typical  of  the  lower  Georges  Creek  basin: 

Feet.  Inches. 


Shale  overlain  by  sandstone   x 

Bone  coal   ~ 

Top  coal   10 

Bone  coal   'i 

Coal   1  11 

Slate    J 

Coal   3 

Shale   X 


174 


THE  MI>'EEAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


The  Davis  vein  in  Allegany  county  generally  has  a  roof  composed 
of  shale,  overlain  bv  heavy  sandstone.  The  Davis  coal  is  situated 
about  125-150  feet  above  the  base  of  the  Allegheny  formation.  This 
vein  is  generally  regarded  as  the  approximate  equivalent  of  the  lower 
Kittanning  coal  of  Pennsylvania. 

The  Thomas  (Three-foot)  Coal. — The  Thomas  coal,  so-called  by  the 
geologists  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey  on  account  of  its  occiirrence 
at  Thomas,  West  Virginia,  covers  an  extensive  area  in  the  Georges 
Creek  basin,  outcropping  around  the  higher  margins  of  the  syncline, 
and  also  cut  through  by  the  Georges  Creek  itself  in  its  lower  course. 
This  seam  is  commonly  known  in  the  region  as  the  Three-foot " 
vein  (by  some  erroneously  called  Fo\ir-foot "  vein),  although  it  sel- 
dom contains  workable  coal  of  that  thickness.  The  vein  varies  in 
thickness  from  2  feet  6  inches  to  3  feet  2  inches.  It  thickens  to  the 
southward  and  at  Thomas  has  nearly  twice  the  thickness  reached  in 
the  Georges  Creek  valley.  This  coal  is  quite  clean  and  has  been 
siiccessfully  opened  to  the  north  of  TTesternport.  The  following  sec- 
tion of  the  "  Three-foot "  vein  represents  its  thickness  and  character 
throughout  the  lower  Georges  Creek  area: 

Feet.  laches. 

Shale     X 

Bony  coal   3-5 

Bone   7 

Coal   2  10 

Fire-clay    x 

The  Thomas  vein  has  a  very  characteristic  shale  roof  and  a  fire-clay 
floor.  It  is  situated  directly  at  the  top  of  the  Allegheny  formation, 
and  about  155  feet  above  the  Davis  coal  before  described.  The  coal 
is  generally  regarded  as  the  approximate  equivalent  of  the  upper 
Freeport  coal  of  Pennsylvania. 

Other  Coals. — Several  other  coal  veins  are  foimd  in  the  Allegheny 
formation,  but  none  of  them  have  been  successfully  exploited,  and 
under  present  conditions  cannot  be  regarded  as  having  much  com- 
mercial value.  The  most  important  is  the  so-called  "  Split  Six-foot 
Vein,"  which  in  the  lower  Georges  Creek  Valley  has  been  found 
to  contain  locally  nearly  four  feet  of  workable  coal.    Partings  of  slate 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


175 


and  bone  seriously  interfere  with  the  value  of  the  vein.  It  is  situ- 
ated about  25  to  35  feet  below  the  Davis  coal. 

THE  COXEMAUGH  COALS. 

The  Conemaugli  coals  are  of  less  importance  than  the  Allegheny 
coals,  although  affording  one  vein  that  has  already  been  successfully 
exploited  in  the  Georges  Creek  basin  and  in  adjacent  areas.  This 
coal,  the  Barton  (Four-foot)  coal,  may  be  regarded  as  possessing 
much  future  commercial  value. 

The  Barton  (Four-foot)  Coal. — The  Barton  coal,  so-called  from  its 
occurrence  in  the  vicinity  of  Barton,  covers  a  considerable  area  in  the 
Georges  Creek  region.  This  vein  is  locally  called  the  "Four-foot" 
vein,  although,  by  an  unfortunate  interchange  of  names,  it  has  at 
times  been  erroneously  referred  to  by  some  as  the  "  Three-foot  "  vein. 
The  Barton  coal  varies  in  thickness  from  2  feet  0  inches  to  2  feet  11 
inches,  its  thickness,  therefore,  being  considerably  less  than  its  name 
indicates.  Its  principal  features  appear  fairly  persistent  throughout 
the  southern  part  of  the  basin,  where  it  has  been  most  examined.  Like 
all  of  the  coal-beds  situated  below  the  Big  Vein,  its  position  in  the 
north-central  part  of  the  district  is  so  far  beneath  the  surface  that  it 
may  be  considered  of  little  immediate  value,  even  though  the  purity 
and  thickness  should  prove  wholly  satisfactory.  Southward,  how- 
ever, it  gradually  approaches  the  surface  and  emerges  above  the  bed 
of  Georges  Creek  fifty  yards  north  of  the  long  railroad  bridge  one- 
half  mile  north  of  the  village  of  Moscow.  At  this  point,  where  a 
small  amount  of  coal  has  been  taken  out  by  private  indi\T.duals  for 
home  use,  the  thickness  is  2  feet  8  inches.  One-half  mile  east  of 
Barton  on  the  Potomac  tramroad,  where  this  seam  has  been  opened, 
the  workable  coal  is  2  feet  6  inches  thick. 

Southward  from  its  point  of  emergence  above  Georges  Creek  the 
coal  outcrops  along  the  hillsides,  and,  continually  rising  higher  above 
the  creek  level,  can  be  easily  traced  by  means  of  the  many  excavations 
made  in  it. 

The  Barton  coal  is  generally  quite  clean  at  the  points  where  it 
has  been  opened  in  the  central  and  lower  portions  of  the  Georges 


176 


THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


Creek  valley.  The  following  section  of  the  Barton  coal  is  character- 
istic of  the  lower  Georges  Creek  area: 

Feet.  Inches. 

Black  jack,  bone  and  slate   x 

Coal    2  4 

Bone  coal   x 

The  Barton  coal  is  situated  about  250  feet  above  the  Thomas  coal 
and  is  commonly  about  425  feet  below  the  Big  Vein.  It  is  prob- 
ably the  equivalent  of  the  Bakerstown  coal  of  adjacent  states, 
although  this  equivalency  cannot  be  very  satisfactorily  shown. 

The  Franklin  (Dirty  Nine-fooi)  Coal. — The  Franklin  coal,  so- 
called  from  Franklin  in  the  lower  Georges  Creek  valley,  where  a 
good  section  of  the  vein  is  exposed  in  the  old  Franklin  Plane,  is 
locally  called  the  "  Dirty  Xine-foot  "  vein.  This  coal  had  never  been 
worked  to  any  great  extent,  and  has  little  commercial  value.  It  is, 
as  its  popular  name  signifies,  very  dirty,  and  at  many  points  entirely 
unworkable.  With  its  contained  slates  it  varies  in  thickness  from  5 
feet  10  inches  to  10  feet  4  inches.  It  is  somewhat  thicker  at  iranklin 
than  in  the  portions  of  the  Georges  Creek  valley  to  the  north  and 
south  of  it.  The  following  section  near  the  Franklin  Plane  shows 
the  general  character  of  the  coal : 

Feet.  Inches. 


Sandstone   x 

Shale   1  6 

Shale  with  thin  coal  vein   8 

Coal   2  -i 

Slate  and  coal   x 


The  Franklin  coal  is  the  approximate  equivalent  of  the  Little 
Clarksburg  Vein  of  West  Virginia. 

Other  Coals. — There  are  a  number  of  other  small  veins  found  in 
the  Conemaugh  formation,  but  they  have  little  commercial  value, 
either  on  account  of  the  extreme  thinness  of  the  coal  vein  itself  or  the 
numerous  slates  which  are  interstratified  with  the  coal.  It  is  hardly 
probable  that  they  can  ever  l>e  worked  with  profit. 

THE  MOXONGAHELA  COALS. 

The  Monongahela  coals,  although  of  much  less  areal  extent  than 
those  which  have  hitherto  been  described,  are  by  far  the  most  impor- 
tant in  Allegany  county,  since  they  contain  the  wonderful  Fourteen- 
foot  or  Big  Vein.    The  smaller  Monongahela  coals  are  much  less 


MAKYL.VXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


177 


important  than  several  of  the  small  veins  occnrrinp-  in  the  Allegheny 
and  Conemaugh  formations  and  their  operation  hitherto  has  not  been 
attended  with  any  great  success.  The  three  moi-e  important  veins 
found  in  the  Monongahela  formation  are  the  Elkgarden  (Fourteen- 
foot  or  Big  Vein)  coal,  the  Tyson  (Gas)  coal,  and  the  Koontz 
(Waynesbiirg)  coal. 

The  Elkgarden  (Fourteen- foot  or  Big  Vein)  Coal. — The  Elkgarden 
coal,  so  named  by  the  geologists  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey  from 
Elkgarden,  "West  Virginia,  where  this  seam  is  well  represented,  is 
generally  referred  to  in  Maryland  as  the  Fourteen-foot  or  Big  Vein 
coal  and  is  much  more  extensively  developed  in  the  Georges  Creek 
Basin  than  in  West  Virginia.  The  Big  Vein  originally  covered  an 
extensive  area  in  the  Georges  Creek  Basin,  but  in  the  more  than  a 
half  of  a  century  that  this  coal  has  been  actively  mined  large 
tracts  have  become  entirely  exhausted.  It  occiu's  at  present  in 
largest  volume  in  the  central  and  northern  portions  of  the  field,  in  the 
vicinity  of  Frostburg.  This  Big  Vein  varies  in  thickness  from  5  or 
7  feet  up  to  more  than  20  feet,  the  latter  thickness  having,  more- 
over, been  exceeded  at  one  or  two  isolated  points  where  pockets  of 
unusual  thickness  have  been  reached.  Its  usual  thickness  is  from  10 
to  12  feet  and,  in  general,  it  has  been  found  to  thicken  southward. 
The  coal  is  very  clean  and  of  the  highest  quality,  affording  a  low  per- 
centage of  both  ash  and  sulphur.  It  is  in  most  respects  the  finest 
steam-coal  known,  and  is  extensively  used  where  the  highest  grade 
coals  are  demanded.  The  following  section  made  just  below  Lona- 
coning,  is  representative  of  the  Big  Vein  coal  in  that  part  of  the 
Georges  Creek  Basin: 


Feet.  Inches. 

Slate     X 

Wild  coal   1 

Fire-clay    I 

Roof  coal   2 

Bony  coal   S 

Breast  coal   8 

Slate   1 

Coal   4  in.  ] 

Slate   1  I 

Coal   1ft.  1^ Bottom  coal. .    2  Si 

Slate   J.  I 

Coal   10  J 

12 


178  THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


The  Elkgarden  coal  occurs  at  the  base  of  the  Monongahela  forma- 
tion, and  is  probably  the  equivalent  of  the  Pittsburg  Vein  of  Penn- 
sylvania and  "West  Virginia,  although  on  account  of  the  structural 
conditions  under  which  it  is  found  it  differs  materially  from  the  latter 
in  its  physical  and  chemical  properties. 

Thin  persistent  bands  of  slate  or  dry  partings  subdivide  the  Big 
Vein  coal  into  three  definite  members,  each  of  which  possesses  spe- 
cial characteristics.  These  beds  are  known  as  Roof  coal.  Breast  coal 
and  Bottom  coal. 

The  Roof  coal  includes  several  more  or  less  important  layers  of  coal 
of  varying  purity  and  thickness  separated  by  thin  beds  of  shale. 
Except  in  the  northern  part  of  the  basin  these  roof  coals  are  not 
removed  in  mining,  since  they  are  of  particular  importance  as  a  sup- 
port for  the  overlying  strata. 

The  Breast  coal  is  the  thickest  and  the  most  valuable  member  of 
the  Big  Vein  coal.  Xorth  of  Frostburg  it  seems  to  retain  its  purity 
through  a  thickness  of  scarcely  more  than  tw^o  feet,  while  south  of 
Lonaconing  it  is  sometimes  more  than  seven  feet  thick  and  without 
impurities.  Xear  the  top  there  is  a  two  to  eight-inch  layer  of  bony 
coal,  but  this  is  rarely  sufficiently  impure  to  necessitate  its  rejection. 
Xear  the  bottom  there  is  a  four  to  six-inch  band  of  soft  "  mining 
ply  "  which  is  jet  black,  has  a  brilliant  luster,  and  shows  a  strong 
tendency  to  break  into  small  cubical  blocks. 

The  Bottom  coal  is  from  two  and  one-half  to  three  feet  thick  and 
generally  contains  two  thin  slate  bands.  Other  impurities  are  some- 
times present  but  they  are  seldom  of  a  very  serious  nature.  On 
account  of  the  slate  bands  the  Bottom  coal  for  many  years  was  not 
mined,  but  under  an  improved  system  of  mining  these  thin  slates  are 
now"  easily  removed  and  the  coal  readily  taken  up. 

On  the  whole  the  slates  thin  perceptibly  from  north  to  south  and 
the  coal  members  thicken  greatly  in  that  direction,  the  total  thick- 
ness of  workable  coal  in  the  vicinity  of  Eranklin  being  in  some  places 
considerably  more  than  fourteen  feet. 

The  structure  of  the  coal  is  chiefly  columnar  though  sometimes 
shaly.    The  columnar  portions  generally  have  a  deep,  shining  jet 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


179 


appearance,  the  shalv  portions  a  dull  black.  The  cohesion  is  weak,  a 
slight  blow  causing  fractiu-e. 

The  coal  is  semi-bituminous  and  contains  on  an  average  about  nine- 
teen per  cent,  volatile  carbon,  seventy-four  per  cent,  fixed  carbon, 
less  than  six  per  cent,  ash  and  less  than  one  per  cent,  sulphur. 

The  Big-Yein  coal  is  mined  by  all  of  the  leading  coal  companies, 
among  them  The  Consolidation  Coal  Co.,  The  Georges  Creek  Coal 
and  Iron  Co.,  The  Black,  Sheridan,  TVilson  Co.,  The  American  Coal 
Co.,  the  Maryland  Coal  Co.,  the  Xew  Central  Coal  Co.  and  the  Davis 
Coal  and  Coke  Co. 

The  Tyson  (Gas)  Coal. — The  Tyson  coal,  often  referred  to  locally 
as  the  Gas  "  coal,  is  found  widely  in  the  Georges  Creek  Basin. 
Attempts  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  to  work  this  coal,  but 
the  results  have  not  been  very  satisfactory.  The  vein  varies  from  4 
feet  7  inches  to  7  feet  3  inches  in  thickness.  The  coal  is  moderately 
clean,  but  in  other  respects  is  inferior  to  the  Big  Vein  coal  in  quality. 
Like  the  Big  Vein,  the  Tyson  coal  is  separated  by  thin  slates  into 
three  members,  the  top  coal  being  generally  more  than  twelve  inches 
thick,  the  middle  coal  from  three  to  four  feet  and  the  bottom  from 
one  to  two  and  one-half  feet.  Xear  Franklin  the  thickness  of  good 
workable  coal  is  seven  feet,  but  in  the  vicinity  of  Lonaconing  it  is 
scarcely  four  feet.  The  following  section  represents  the  general 
character  of  the  Tyson  seam  in  the  Georges  Creek  region. 

Feet.  Inches. 

Shale   X 

Coal  with  thin  slates   6  2 

Shale  and  fire-clay   x 

The  Tyson  seam  occurs  at  about  120  feet  above  the  top  of  the  Big 
Vein.  It  is  probably  the  equivalent  of  the  Sewickley  coal  of  Penn- 
sylvania. 

The  Koontz  Coal. — The  Koontz  coal,  so-called  from  its  occurrence 
in  the  vicinity  of  Koontz  near  the  head  of  Koontz  Eun,  has  been  pros- 
pected with  some  success,  but  the  coal  has  not  been  worked  to  any 
great  extent  up  to  the  present  time.  The  areal  extent  of  the  Koontz 
is  very  small,  occupying  the  higher  lands  of  the  Georges  Creek  Basin. 


180  THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


The  vein  varies  from  5  feet  9  inches  to  7  feet  9  inches.  The  coal  is 
moderately  clean,  but  like  the  Tyson  vein,  is  inferior  to  the  Big 
Vein.  Kear  the  Koontz  mine,  Avhere  this  seam  has  been  perhaps 
the  most  extensively  worked,  great  trouble  was  occasioned  by  numer- 
ous fissures,  on  account  of  which  the  mining  of  it  was  finally  aban- 
doned. The  main  drift  entered  this  seam  a  distance  of  llG-i  feet, 
during  the  course  of  which  twenty-one  fissures  were  found,  one  of 
the  fissures  being  more  than  twelve  feet  in  thickness.  The  following 
section  represents  the  general  character  of  the  seam  in  its  typical 
locality. 

Feet.  Inches. 


Coal   3  3 

Bone   4 

Coal   6 

Bone   ' 

Coal   1  3 

Slate   10 

Coal   5 

Shale    X 


The  Koontz  seam  caps  the  Monongahela  formation  and  is  found 
at  an  elevation  of  about  110-130  feet  above  the  Tyson  vein  and  about 
230-250  feet  above  the  top  of  the  Big  Vein.  The  Koontz  coal  is  the 
probable  equivalent  of  the  Waynesburg  coal  of  Pennsylvania. 

Othei-  Coals. — Several  other  small  veins  are  found  in  the  Monon- 
gahela  formation,  one  on  the  west  side  of  the  valley  being  found  at 
29  feet  above  the  Big  Vein  and  containing  about  4i  feet  of  coal. 
This  coal  has  been  hardly  more  than  prospected  for  as  yet,  and  it  is 
doubtful  if  it  has  any  commercial  importance.  It  is  the  approximate 
equivalent  of  the  Redstone  coal  of  Pennsylvania. 

Clays. 

The  clay  resources  of  Allegany  county  include  fire-clays,  residual 
clays,  sedimentary  clays  and  shales.  They  represent  an  inexhaust- 
ible supply  of  material  capable  of  being  used  in  the  manufacture  of 
different  grades  of  clay  products.  "While  the  value  of  the  fire-clays 
has  been  known  since  an  early  date,  the  other  clay  materials  remain 
practically  untouched. 


jrARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


181 


FIRE-CLAYS. 

All  of  the  beds  of  fire-clay  thus  far  discovered  in  the  county  lie 
in  the  Pottsville  formation,  their  position  being  under  the  Homewood 
sandstone.  Extending  across  the  western  border  of  the  county  in  a 
X.E.-S.W.  direction  is  the  great  synclinal  trough  of  the  Georges  Creek 
coal  basin,  and  it  is  near  the  rim  of  this  that  the  fire-clay  beds  outcrop 
and  are  mined.  These  fire-clays  were  first  discovered  in  1837  at 
Mt.  Savage,  and  employed  for  lining  two  blast-furnaces  then  in  use 
at  that  locality  by  the  Maryland  and  Xew  York  Coal  and  Iron  Com- 
pany. 

In  1841  a  fire-brick  plant  was  opened  at  Mt.  Savage,  which  has 
been  in  operation  ever  since,  so  that  now  bricks  made  from  Mt.  Savage 
fire-clay  bear  a  national  reputation. 

The  fire-clay  beds  have  been  opened  up  at  three  different  mines, 
viz.,  on  Savage  Mountain,  2^  miles  northwest  of  Frostburg,  on  the 
same  mountain  2^  miles  west  of  Mt.  Savage,  and  on  Little  Alle- 
gheny Mountain  2  miles  west  of  Ellerslie.  At  these  three  points  the 
clay  occurs  in  a  bed  from  8-1-4  feet  thick,  and  is  commonly  overlain 
by  a  thin  bed  of  coal.  Two  types  of  fire-clay  are  found,  viz.,  the 
soft  or  plastic  clay  and  the  hard  or  flint  clay.  Both  possess  the  im- 
portant quality  of  refractoriness,  and  they  may  even  agree  closely 
in  composition,  but  they  differ  widely  in  plasticity.  The  soft  clay  is 
highly  plastic,  while  the  hard  clay,  even  after  being  ground,  is  devoid 
of  this  character.  They  therefore  serve  two  different  purposes:  the 
one  acts  as  a  bond,  the  other  decreases  the  shrinkage;  and  they  are 
consequently  mixed  in  suitable  proportions,  care  being  taken  to  use 
as  much  of  the  hard  as  possible. 

Xo  fixed  method  of  occurrence  of  the  two  clays  exists,  for  in  one 
mine  the  soft  may  be  on  top,  while  in  another  the  hard  clay  forms  the 
upper  members. 

In  mining  the  custom  is  to  run  in  a  drift  from  the  face  of  the  slope 
until  the  bed  of  clay  is  met  and  then  follow  it  with  gangways  in  dif- 
ferent directions.  In  these  gangways  tracks  are  laid  for  the  cars. 
Owing  to  the  looseness  of  the  roof,  much  timbering  has  to  be  em- 
ployed. 


182 


THE   MINERAL  KESOUECES  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNT Y 


The  prevailing  method  of  manufacture  is  to  charge  the  hard  and 
soft  clay  into  a  wet  pan,  adding  the  necessary  amount  of  water.  This 
results  in  grinding  up  the  clays  and  tempering  or  mixing  them  at  the 
same  time.  One  exception  to  this  is  the  Ellerslie  works,  where  the 
clay  receives  a  preliminary  grinding  in  a  dry  pan. 

The  tempering  in  the  wet  pan  takes  but  a  few  minutes,  and  one 
pan  can  in  5  or  6  hours  temper  enough  clay  for  eight  or  ten  thousand 
brick. 

The  tempered  mixture  is  carried  to  the  molding  tables  and  pressed 
by  hand  in  wooden  molds,  after  which  the  soft  bricks  are  spread  out 
on  brick-drying  floors  heated  by  flues  underneath.  After  remaining 
several  hours  on  this  floor,  the  bricks  are  put  into  a  repressing 
machine,  which  not  only  makes  the  bricks  denser  but  gives  them  a 
more  regular  shape.  They  are  then  burned  in  kilns,  of  which  sev- 
eral different  types  of  either  up  or  down-draft  pattern  are  used  in  the 
Allegany  county  works.  A  noteworthv  feature  of  the  Union  Mining 
Company's  plant  at  Mt.  Savage  is  the  use  of  two  continuous  kilns, 
which  are  heated  by  means  of  producer  gas,  generated  in  producers 
run  on  a  track  alongside  the  kiln.  The  use  of  these  producei-s  causes 
economy  of  fuel  and,  furthermore,  with  the  continuous  kiln  system 
the  waste  heat  is  used  for  heating  up  the  chambers  not  yet  burned. 
The  burning  occupies  5-6  days,  and  the  cooling  several  days  more. 

The  Mt.  Savage  Enameled  Brick  Company  is  engaged  in  the  manu- 
facture of  enameled  brick,  the  raw  materials  used  being  a  mixture  of 
hard  and  soft  fire-clay.  The  bricks  made  are  mostly  white,  although 
other  colors  are  used.  Eecently  the  company  has  undertaken  the 
manufacture  of  fancy  shapes.  Among  the  buildings  in  which  large 
quantities  of  these  bricks  are  used  are  the  Buffalo  Post  Office;  Back 
Bay  Station,  Boston;  Union  Depot,  Boston;  etc. 

SHALES. 

The  Carboniferous  and  Devonian  rocks  of  Allegany  county  con- 
tain a  vast  series  of  shales,  as  can  be  seen  from  an  inspection  of  the 
geological  map  and  sections  accompanying  this  report. 

Shale  is  simply  clay  which  has  been  consolidated  by  pressure,  and, 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


183 


consequently,  when  ground  and  mixed  with  water,  it  usually  develops 
the  same  degree  and  kind  of  plasticity  that  soft  clay  shows.  It  is 
often  found  especially  adapted  to  the  manufacture  of  vitrified  goods, 
for  its  extreme  fineness  of  gTain  and  homogeneity  permit  it  to  soften 
evenly  and  thoroughly  by  the  action  of  heat.  Allegany  county  pos- 
sesses a  large  supply  of  this  material,  distributed  not  only  in  the  east- 
ern but  also  in  the  western  half  of  the  county.  The  former  are  of 
Devonian  and  the  latter  of  Carboniferous  age. 

The  Carboniferous  shales  are  at  times  closely  associated  with  the 
coal-seams,  while  at  others  they  are  several  feet  distant  from  them. 
It  is  a  common  custom  among  coal  miners  to  speak  of  shale  under- 
lying coal  as  fire-clay ;  and  while  this  often  holds  true  in  some  regions, 
it  must  not  be  taken  as  a  universal  fact. 

Along  the  Georges  Creek  valley  there  are  numerous  outcropping 
beds  of  shale,  some  of  them  favorably  located  for  working.  Among 
them  may  be  mentioned  outcrops  on  the  hillside  opposite  Gannon's 
plane  between  Franklin  and  Piedmont,  "West  Virginia;  on  the  east 
side  of  Georges  Creek  at  Barton;  also  in  Gannon's  new  tunnel  oppo- 
site Franklin  School  House,  and  again  beyond  the  pumping  shaft. 

On  the  western  side  of  Savage  Mountain  the  Mauch  Chunk  shale 
is  well  exposed,  and  in  places  affords  very  plastic  outcrops.  Its  mix- 
ture with  the  neighboring  fire-clays  might  yield  interesting  results. 
These  shales  are  usually  fine-grained,  moderately  hard  and  would 
probably  grind  up  to  plastic  mixtures  without  much  trouble. 

The  Devonian  shales  form  a  series  of  beds  of  great  thickness  in 
Allegany  county,  and  are  well  exposed  in  places,  especially  east  of 
Cumberland, 

While  they  also  occur  at  the  southern  end  of  the  county,  still  they 
are  usually  hidden  by  a  heavy  covering  of  talus.  At  Keyser,  West 
Virginia,  the  Eomney  shales  are  exposed  along  the  railroad  tracks 
on  the  north  side  of  the  creek. 

Passing  east  from  Cumberland,  one  traverses  a  series  of  outcrops 
of  Jennings,  Portage,  Genesee,  Hamilton  and  Marcellus  shales.  The 
upper  portions  could  be  well  utilized  in  the  manufacture  of  clay  pro- 
ducts, and  even  the  lower  parts  may  find  similar  use. 


184 


THE   MINERAL  RESOURCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


At  South  Cumberland,  at  a  point  near  the  crossing  of  Evitts  Creek 
by  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  the  upper  shales  of  the  Jennings 
(Portage)  arc  yielding  excellent  results  in  the  manufacture  of  a  brick 
of  high  density  and  fine  red '  color.  The  shales  employed  here, 
although  in  part  appearing  extremely  hard,  slake  down  to  a  plastic 
clay.  The  South  Cumberland  Brick  Works  have  five  kilns  in  opera- 
tion here. 

At  Potomac  Station  the  Clinton  and  Salina  shales  are  well  ex- 
posed, the  former  on  the  hill  above  the  cement  works  and  the  latter  on 
the  slope  to  the  south  and  adjoining  the  quarries.  The  Salina,  owing 
to  its  siliceous  character,  is  not  worth  considering,  but  the  Clinton, 
if  not  too  calcareous,  might  be  useful. 

The  Juniata  (^Medina)  shales  are  exposed  along  the  northern  side 
of  the  "  Xarrows  "  just  west  of  Cumberland,  but  they  are  so  inter- 
bedded  with  sandstone  as  to  render  their  working  impracticable. 

Aside  from  their  use  in  the  manufacture  of  clay  products,  such  as 
brick,  terra  cotta,  etc.,  there  is  still  another  direction  in  which  the 
shales  might  be  employed,  and  that  is  for  the  manufacture  of  Port- 
land cement. 

The  shales  at  Keyser,  West  Virginia,  have  Helderberg  limestone 
near  by,  the  Carboniferous  shales  in  Georges  Creek  valley  are  not  far 
from  Carboniferous  limestone,  and  the  same  conditions  apply  to  the 
shales  around  Cumberland. 

SEDIMENTARY  CLAYS. 

Sedimentary  clays  are  mostly  found  in  the  broader  valleys.  They 
underlie  the  flats  at  Cumberland,  Potomac,  etc.  They  are  commonly 
siliceous,  and  while  well  adapted  to  the  manufacture  of  common  brick 
or  even  flower  pots,  their  use  ends  there. 

RESIDUAL  CLAYS. 

Kesidual  clays,  derived  from  the  Helderberg  limestone,  occur  in 
the  northern  central  portion  of  the  county  on  the  ^larvland  side  of 
the  Potomac  river.  At  Bier  and  at  Keyser  it  is  used  exclusively  for 
the  manufacture  of  brick.  At  Cumberland  both  brick  and  pottery 
are  made. 


J[AKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


185 


In  the  nortli-central  part  of  the  county  the  residual  chiys  resulting 
from  the  decomposition  of  the  Helderberg  and  Silurian  limestones 
are  available  in  abundance  but  have  been  little  used. 

In  addition  to  the  soft  clays  the  argillaceous  shales  of  the  Eomney 
and  Jennings  fonnations  Avould  no  doubt  afford  an  inexhaustible 
supply  of  good  clay  if  for  any  reason  it  should  seem  desirable  to  work 
them. 

Lime  and  Cement  Products. 

Lime  and  hydraulic  cement  are  extensive  products  of  Allegany 
county.  That  part  of  the  Salina  formation  commonly  known  as  the 
"  AVaterlime  Group  "  which  is  so  much  utilized  in  the  northern  Appa- 
lachian region  for  the  manufacture  of  hydraulic  cement,  is  worked  at 
Cumberland  and  at  Potomac.  Operations  have  been  important  and 
almost  continuous  at  Cumberland  since  1836,  at  which  time  the 
cement  from  the  Salina  beds  was  first  used  in  Maryland.  Work  at 
Potomac  was  begun  in  1891,  since  which  time  the  cement  rock  there 
has  been  mined  extensively. 

The  cement  mine  at  Cumberland,  which  is  under  the  management 
of  the  Cumberland  Hydraulic  Cement  and  Manufacturing  Company, 
is  situated  on  the  south  side  of  Wills  Creek,  where  the  cement  beds- 
are  folded  and  well  exposed,  allowing  convenient  access  to  the  rock 
along  the  strike.  At  Potomac,  where  the  rock  is  mined  by  the  Cum- 
berland and  Potomac  Cement  Company,  the  strata  stand  upright  and 
are  even  better  exposed  than  at  Cumberland. 

The  cement  rock  proper  occurs,  as  earlier  shown,  in  beds  of  vary- 
ing thickness  separated  by  impure  calcareous  shales.  Only  four  of 
these  beds  have  sufficient  thickness  and  purity  to  be  economically 
worked.  These  all  lie  within  the  "  cement  series "  of  the  Salina 
formation,  and  vary  in  thickness  from  six  to  seventeen  feet. 

The  first  or  lowest  cement  rock  is  of  but  little  value  when  worked 
alone,  but  when  mixed  Avith  material  from  the  other  beds  can  be  used 
to  advantage.  The  second  is  worked  most  extensively  and  yields  the 
finest  quality  of  cement.  The  third  is  not  so  good  as  the  second,  but 
can  be  profitably  used  by  mixing  Avith  it.  The  fourth  is  also  not  so 
good  as  the  second,  but  is  better  than  either  of  the  others. 


186 


THE  MINERAL  RESOUBCES  OF  ALLEGAXT  COCNTY 


In  general,  the  rock  varies  from  a  dark  bluish  gray  to  a  dull  black; 
is  quite  shalv,  frequently  showing  thin  limestones,  breaks  readily  and 
usually  contains  few  or  no  fossils.  The  chemical  composition  of  the 
rock  at  Cumberland  has  been  found  to  be  as  follows: 


Carbonate  of  lime   41.80 

Carbonate  of  naagnesia   S.BO 

Silica  24.74 

Alumina  16.74 

Oxide  of  iron   6.30 


Aside  from  the  exposures  at  Cumberland  and  Potomac,  the  cement 
beds  are  not  well  shown  in  Allegany  county,  although  with  a  little 
effort  they  might  be  reached  in  other  localities.  In  the  north-central 
part  of  the  coimty  the  beds  are  doubtless  developed  as  fully  as  further 
west,  but  they  are  not  well  exposed  and  lack  of  transportation  facili- 
ties necessarily  prevents  their  development. 

The  Helderberg  formation  supplies  nearly  all  of  the  lime  made  in 
the  county.  The  limestone  is  extensively  burned  at  several  places 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Cumberland,  and  in  addition  to  sup- 
plying the  local  demand  for  building  purposes,  considerable  shipments 
are  made.  A  kiln  at  a  small  quarry  north  of  Cresap  near  the  Georges 
Creek  and  Cumberland  Eailroad  supplies  a  part  of  the  Frostburg 
demand.  In  a  few  places  west  and  southwest  of  Flintstone  small 
kilns  have  been  constructed,  but  the  burning  of  the  lime  has  been 
carried  on  at  very  irregular  intervals  and  then  only  for  local  use, 
chiefly  for  fertilizing  purposes. 

In  addition  to  the  Helderberg  limestone,  the  Coal  Measures  lime- 
stones have  been  burned  to  some  extent  for  agricultural  and  building 
purposes  and  have  also  been  used  for  fluxing  iron  ores.  For  the  latter 
purpose  one  of  the  higher  limestones  of  the  Dunkard  formation,  quar- 
ried about  two  miles  southeast  of  Frostburg,  was  used  extensively 
during  the  time  of  the  development  of  the  Carboniferous  iron  ores  in 
the  Cumberland-Georges  Creek  region.  The  heavy  limestone  of  the 
Conemaugh  exposed  on  the  Potomac  gravity-plane  was  quarried  for 
a  time,  but  that  has  been  abandoned.  Other  limestones  of  the  Coal 
Measures  have  been  burned  occasionally  in  a  small  way,  but  at  present 
they  are  rarely  used. 


>[ARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


187 


The  Greenbrier  limestone  -would  no  doubt  make  lime  of  excellent 
quality,  but  it  has  apparently  never  been  tested  in  Allegany  county. 
The  outcrops,  however,  are  usually  not  good,  and  even  on  Stony  Run, 
where  the  formation  is  best  exposed,  many  of  the  purest  beds  are  not 
accessible. 

Likewise  the  Xiagara  and  the  Romney  limestones  are  rarely  well 
exposed,  and  the  far  greater  ease  of  access  to  the  excellent  Helderberg 
limestone  will  perhaps  always  prevent  their  use. 

BriLDi>XT  Stoxe. 

Building  stone  in  almost  unlimited  quantity  is  found  in  the  Tus- 
carora,  Oriskany,  Pottsville  and  Conemaugh  formations.  The  heavy 
Carboniferous  sandstones  and  conglomerates  of  the  Pottsville  and 
the  Conemaugh  have  been  used  considerably  for  heavy  bridge  ma- 
terial on  the  various  railroads  in  the  county  and  for  general  founda- 
tion work  in  the  coal  basin.  For  all  of  these  piirposes  this  material 
has  proved  to  be  satisfactory,  but  no  building  of  importance  has 
been  constructed  entirely  of  it,  the  highly  iron-stained  condition  of 
this  stone  precluding  its  use  for  such  purposes. 

The  Oriskany  formation  has  in  the  past  furnished  the  material 
used  in  the  constiniction  of  many  good  buildings  in  Cumberland,  the 
most  prominent  being  the  Protestant  Episcopal  Church,  the  stone 
for  which  was  quarried  from  a  hillside  near  the  center  of  the  city. 
"When  fresh,  this  stone  varies  in  color  from  a  pure  white  to  a  bluish- 
gray,  but  with  slight  exposure  it  changes  to  a  light  brown  or  buff. 
It  is  made  up  of  medium  fine  to  coarse  slightly  angular  fragments  held 
together  usually  by  a  calcareous  cement.  Owing  to  its  rapid  dis- 
coloration and  to  the  marked  disintegi-ation  around  the  numerous 
fossils  which  this  stone  contains,  its  use  in  the  construction  of  impor- 
tant buildings  is  much  less  extensive  than  in  former  years.  Its  con- 
venience, however,  to  Cumberland  and  the  ease  with  which  it  is  quar- 
ried give  to  this  stone  a  permanent  local  value. 

The  Tuscarora  quartzite,  until  comparatively  recently,  has  been 
little  used.  It  is  less  heavily  bedded  than  the  Oriskany  and  much 
harder  to  dress,  but  owing  to  its  almost  snowy  whiteness  and  its  com- 


188 


THE  MINERAL  KESOCRCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


parative  freedom  from  substances  likely  to  mar  its  beauty,  the  Tus- 
earora  deserves,  and  is  now  commanding,  much  more  attention  than 
formerly,  especially  in  the  vicinity  of  Cumberland,  where  it  is  found. 
The  stone  thus  far  quarried  from  the  Tuscarora  has  been  used  largely 
for  curbs,  steps  and  cemetery  work,  as  well  as  for  trimmings  in  some 
of  the  best  buildings  in  Cumberland.  It  is  nowhere  systematically 
quarried  for  building  purposes,  but  it  can  be  advantageously  reached 
by  railroad  in  many  places  along  Wills  Mountain. 

Road  Materials. 

Good  road  material  is  abundant  in  Allegany  county.  Limestone 
in  available  quantity  is  found  at  several  geological  horizons  and  only 
in  the  eastern  part  of  the  county  is  it  wholly  absent.  The  cherty 
beds  at  the  bottom  of  the  Oriskany  formation  disintegrate  deeply  into 
a  talus  of  small  angular  fragments  which  furnish  an  easily  prepared 
material  of  excellent  quality.  The  massive  limestone  beds  in  the 
Helderberg  formation  below  the  cherty  layers,  although  nowhere 
systematically  quanied  for  i-oad  use,  have  nevertheless  furnished  at 
various  times  large  quantities  of  highly  satisfactory  stone  for  use  on 
the  National  Road. 

Some  of  the  Niagara  limestones  might  be  of  local  value  should  a 
demand  for  them  arise,  but  these  are  perhaps  too  much  concealed 
and  too  near  the  better  exposed  Helderberg  to  be  used  very  exten- 
sively. Likewise  the  limestone  beds  near  the  bottom  of  the  Romney 
formation  are  available  in  a  few  places,  but  their  impurities  and  their 
general  concealment  will  no  doubt  always  prevent  their  extensive  use. 

Greenbrier  limestone  makes  excellent  road-metal,  and  although 
not  worked  in  Allegany  county,  large  quantities  have  been  brought 
into  the  county  and  used  as  ballast  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road. In  Allegany  county  the  Greenbrier  can  be  successfully  quar- 
ried in  only  three  localities,  viz.,  on  Jennings  Run,  Braddock  Run 
and  on  Stony  Run.  Even  at  these  places  the  outcrops  are  much 
concealed. 

The  Coal  Measures  limestones  are  niuiiorous  hut  rarely  well  ex- 
posed.   Along  the  Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania  Railroad  about 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


189 


two  hundred  and  fifty  yards  north  of  the  Frostburg  tunnel  limestone 
from  the  lower  part  of  the  Dunkard  formation  has  been  obtained  for 
the  streets  of  Frostburg.  Formerly  a  considerable  amount  of  ma- 
terial was  obtained  for  the  same  purpose  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
Dimkard  formation  near  the  Consolidation  Coal  Company's  pumping 
shaft  two  miles  south  of  Frostburg.  Monongahela  limestone  appar- 
ently of  excellent  quality  could  be  procured  at  slight  expense  along 
the  Carlos  Branch  Railroad  south  of  Frostburg.  This  is  a  massive 
dark  blue  limestone  which  gives  a  very  perceptible  metallic  ring 
when  struck  with  a  hammer.  For  local  uses  other  limestones  in  the 
coal  basin  could  be  made  available  if  desired. 

The  enormous  talus  slopes  of  Tuscarora  quartzite  in  the  Xarrows 
near  Cumberland  yield  an  abundance  of  hard  white  rock  which  for 
several  yeai-s  has  been  crushed  for  use  as  railroad  ballast. 

Irox  Ore. 

Xo  iron  ore  is  now  mined  within  the  county  and  the  future  gives 
little  promise  in  this  direction.  Allegany  county  in  the  past,  how- 
ever, has  been  closely  connected  with  the  iron  trade  and  of  this  especial 
mention  needs  to  be  made.  As  early  as  1837  the  iron  industry  was 
fairly  inaugurated.  During  this  year  the  Georges  Creek  Coal  and 
Iron  Company  began  the  erection  of  a  furnace  at  Lonaconing  fifty 
feet  high  and  fourteen  and  one-half  feet  wide  at  the  boshes.  In 
Jime,  1839,  it  was  making  about  seventy  tons  of  good  foimdry  iron 
per  week,  using  coke  as  fuel.  In  1837  two  large  blast  furnaces  were 
begun  at  Mount  Savage  by  the  Xew  York  Coal  and  Iron  Company 
and  were  completed  during  the  followang  year.  In  1845  the  same 
company  built  another  furnace,  but  it  was  not  lined  and  was  never 
used.  The  Mount  Savage  rolling-mill  was  built  in  1843  especially 
to  roll  iron  rails  and  during  the  summer  of  1844  it  rolled  the  first 
heavy  rails  rolled  in  America.  In  honor  of  that  event  the  Franklin 
Institute  of  Pliiladelphia  awarded  a  medal  to  the  proprietors  in 
October,  1844.  The  rails  were  of  inverted  U  form  and  weighed, 
forty-two  pounds  to  the  yard,  and  the  first  few  hundred  tons  were  laid 
on  the  railroad  between  Mount  Savage  and  Cumberland.    J.  M. 


190 


THE  MINERAL  RESOURCES  OK  AILEGANY  COUNTY 


Swank  says  that  Allegany  county  is  entitled  to  two  of  the  highest 
honors  in  connection  with  the  American  iron  trade:  "It  built  the 
first  snccessfiil  coke  fnraace  and  rolled  the  first  heavy  iron  rails." ' 
In  1846  a  furnace  was  built  at  Cumberland  which  at  first  used  char- 
coal and  aftenvards  used  coke.  This  furnace  was  not  long  in  opera- 
tion. The  blast  furnace  at  Mount  Savage  continued  in  operation 
longer,  bi;t  the  gradually  changing  conditions  of  the  iron  trade  caused 
its  final  abandonment  in  1868.  The  foundry,  however,  was  not  given 
up  and  continues  in  operation  at  the  present  time. 

So  far  as  known,  most  of  the  iron  ore  used  in  Allegany  county 
came  from  the  Coal  Measures  strata.  !Much  of  it  was  found  near 
the  middle  of  the  Conemaugh  formation,  but  not  a  little  was  obtained 
from  the  lower  part  of  the  !^^onongahela.  According  to  Professor 
Tyson,  the  fossil  ore  of  the  Clinton  formation  was  also  used  exten- 
sively for  a  time  both  at  Mount  Savage  and  at  Lonaconing. 

Iron  ore  occurs  in  almost  every  geological  formation  in  the  county 
and  even  where  not  well  exposed  may  frequently  reveal  itself  as  loose 
pieces  lying  upon  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Much  of  the  ore  is, 
however,  of  no  practical  value,  liut  when  the  condition  of  the  iron 
trade  is  not  at  its  best,  attempt  at  the  development  even  of  the  richest 
of  deposits  is  almost  sure  to  prove  unsuccessful.  Aside  from  the  Car- 
boniferous and  Clinton  ores  which  have  already  been  worked,  the 
only  horizon  which,  so  far  as  known,  might  give  even  the  slightest 
hopes  of  success  is  near  the  bottom  of  the  Romney.  Iron  ore  has 
been  prospected  for  in  many  localities,  but  in  no  place  has  it  been 
found  in  sufficient  quantity  to  be  available.  It  is  liable  to  occur  in 
pockets  of  no  great  extent,  and  generally  of  slight  thickness. 

The  iron  ores  of  the  Clinton  formation  are  exposed  to  good  ad- 
vantage in  several  places  in  the  county  where  they  can  be  easily 
reached  at  any  time  if  desired.  The  lower  ore  is  one  hundred 
sixty  feet  above  the  Clinton-Tuscarora  contact,  as  observed  south  of 
Cumberland  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Eailroad  one  mile  south  of 
Bradys.    Here  the  ore  is  in  two  bands,  the  lower  one  four  and  one-half 

'Swank,  Jaraes  M.  History  of  the  Manufacture  of  Iron  in  aU  Ages.  Philadelphia, 
1S84. 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


191 


feet  thick  and  the  upper  one  more  than  eight  feet  thick.  Between 
the  two  are  six  and  one-half  feet  of  shales.  Apparently  the  ore  bed 
exposed  on  both  sides  of  Wills  creek  west  of  the  cement  mill  in 
Cumberland  is  the  same  as  that  near  Bradys,  but  the  twin  character 
is  not  so  prominently  developed  at  Cumberland.  The  upper  Clinton 
ore  band,  very  similar  to  those  just  mentioned,  is  foimd  immediately 
above  the  ten-foot  sandstone,  near  the  top  of  the  formation.  This 
ore  was  formerly  mined,  and  for  a  time  furnished  much  of  the  ore 
used  in  the  county. 

The  Clinton  ore  is  a  highly  fossiliferous  hematite  varying  in  color  in 
weathered  outcrops  from  a  dull  brown  to  a  deep  red.  Concerning 
the  changes  brought  about  in  the  limestone  beds,  in  connection  with 
which  the  ore  was  fonned,  Professor  J.  P.  Lesley  says:  The  pro- 
toxide of  iron  is  mostly  in  combination  with  carbonate  of  lime  as  a 
triple  compound,  carbonate  of  protoxide  of  iron  and  lime.  The  iron- 
ore  beds  when  followed  far  enough  beneath  drainage  level,  show 
by  chemical  analysis  that  this  is  their  constitution.  Above  drainage 
their  carbonate  of  lime  has  been  dissolved  and  earned  off;  their  car- 
bonate of  iron  has  received  a  double  charge  of  oxygen,  and  remains 
behind  as  red  hematite  iron  ore." 

The  Coal  Measures  ore  bands  are  carbonates  and  limonites,  the 
relative  purity  and  thickness  of  which  vary  greatly.  Little  is  known 
regarding  the  character  and  extent  of  these  deposits,  as  they  have  been 
but  little  exploited  hitherto.  Their  position  and  approximate  thick- 
ness are  indicated  in  the  various  sections  which  have  been  given  in 
the  chapters  on  the  Stratigraphy  and  Structure. 

Ml2s*EKAL  AND  OkDIXAKY  SpEIXGS. 

The  only  springs  in  Allegany  county  that  have  been  especially 
noted  for  their  mineral  properties  are  the  sulphur  springs  situated 
in  the  north-central  part  of  the  county.  One  of  these,  known  as  the 
FHntstone  Sulphur  Spring,  is  near  the  center  of  the  village  of  Flint- 
stone,  and  was  for  many  years  a  source  of  considerable  revenue. 
About  four  miles  southeast  of  FHntstone  there  is  a  gi-oup  of  springs 
formerly  considered  of  much  importance.    These  are  situated  be- 


192 


THE  MINERAL  KESOCRCES  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


tween  Polish  Mountain  and  Green  Eidge  on  property  once  owned 
by  "William  Carroll,  and  are  known  as  the  Carroll  "White  Sulphur 
Springs.  The  sulphur  in  these  springs,  as  well  as  in  the  Flintstone 
spring,  is  very  perceptible  to  the  taste,  and  a  deposit  of  sulphate 
•quickly  settles  upon  the  rocks  over  which  the  water  flows. 

Little  need  be  said  concerning  the  ordinary  springs  except  to  speak 
of  their  abiindance  and  general  distribution.  Along  the  Tuscarora- 
Clinton,  the  Oriskany-Romney,  and  the  !Mauch  Chunk-Pottsville  con- 
tact lines  excellent  springs  are  particularly  numerous.  Many  good 
springs  occur  elsewhere,  but  throughout  the  greater  part  of  the 
county  they  are  not  so  strong  nor  so  regularly  distributed  as  along 
the  lines  indicated.  A  few  important  exceptions  occur.  These  are 
often  closely  related  to  disturbed  strata,  an  excellent  example  of  which 
may  be  seen  to  good  advantage  at  the  "  Big  Spring  "  one  mile  south- 
west of  Rush.  This  is  perhaps  the  strongest  spring  in  the  county  and 
its  waters  flow  from  a  local  anticline  in  the  Helderberg  limestone. 

Miscellaneous  Materials. 
In  addition  to  the  economic  resoiirces  already  discussed,  the  pos- 
sible development  of  some  other  industries  deserves  mention.  Glass- 
sand  is  now  obtained  in  the  Xarrows  near  Cumberland  as  a  by-pro- 
duct in  the  crushing  of  Tuscarora  quartzite  for  railroad  ballast.  The 
quality  of  the  sand  thus  obtained  is  excellent,  but  for  extensive  use 
the  rock  is  too  diflicult  to  pulverize.  The  Oriskany  sandstone  is  the 
great  glass-sand  producer  of  the  Xorthern  Appalachians  and  there 
are  such  extensive  outcrops  of  this  rock  in  Allegany  county  that  the 
question  of  its  utility  has  merited  some  study.  Owing  to  the  great 
abundance  of  good  glass-sand  elsewhere,  and  the  somewhat  limited 
demand  for  the  article  as  compared  with  the  supply,  it  is  necessary 
for  the  rock  to  be  of  the  highest  quality  and  most  favorably  located 
to  become  of  economic  value.  So  far  as  known,  no  special  prospect- 
ing has  been  done  hitherto  to  learn  of  the  possible  value  of  the  Oris- 
kany  sandstone  as  a  glass-sand  ]n-oducer  in  Allegany  county,  but  the 
surface  indications  are  unfavorable.  Generally  this  sandstone  is 
highly  iron-stained,  but  where  not  so,  especially  along  "Warrior  Moun- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


193 


tain,  its  exposed  surfaces  show  a  hardness  almost  equal  to  that  of  the 
Tuscarora. 

The  deep  red  argillaceous  shales  at  the  bottom  of  the  Mauch  Chunk 
possess  qualities  which  seem  to  indicate  their  adaptability  as  a  cheap 
paint,  and  it  has  been  used,  although  not  extensively,  for  that  purpose. 
Eecently  attention  has  been  called  to  the  dark  reddish-brown  loam 
which  is  sometimes  found  at  the  outcropping  edge  of  the  Big  Vein 
coal,  where  seepage  of  its  highly  charged  iron  waters  has  caused  the 
deposition  of  much  ferruginous  coloring  matter.  Recently  several 
car-loads  of  this  loam  were  shipped  from  near  the  Potomac  mine  to 
the  paint  works  at  Keyser,  "West  Virginia,  for  testing  as  to  its  value 
as  a  paint  producer. 

Is  ear  the  bottom  of  the  Pottsville  formation  a  four-foot  bed  of  black 
siliceous  oolitic  rock,  strikingly  like  some  of  the  Tennessee  phosphate 
rock,  has  been  observed.  Upon  analysis  it  was  found  that  the  rock 
contains  considerable  phosphate,  but  not  in  siafficient  quantities  to 
make  it  of  economic  value.  It  is  not  impossible  that  further  investi- 
gation in  other  areas  may  reveal  deposits  richer  in  phosphate.  The 
only  place  in  Allegany  county  where  this  phosphatic  rock  has  been 
observed  is  about  forty  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  Potomac  river  on 
the  wagon  road  one  and  one-fourth  miles  southeast  of  Westernport. 
The  rock  here  is  much  weathered  and  possesses  little  of  the  character- 
istics of  the  fresh  material.  Loose  slabs  of  the  rock,  in  a  much  less 
weathered  condition,  were  found  in  considerable  abundance  on  the 
West  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac. 


13 


194  THE  MIXEBAL  EESOUECES  OF  ALLEGAKY  COCNTY 


LIST  OF  OPERATORS  IN  MINERAL  PRODUCTS  IN 
ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


Coal. 

SAME.  ADDKESS. 

Consolidation  Coal  Company  Baltimore. 

Black,  Sheridan,  Wilson  Company   " 

Georges  Creek  Coal  and  Iron  Company   " 

Big  Vein  Coal  Company   " 

Lonaconing  Coal  Company   " 

Barton  Mining  Company  Barton. 

Sinclair  Mining  Company  Cumberland. 

Malcolm  Sinclair   " 

Borden  Mining  Company  Frostburg. 

H.  &  A.  Hitchins  "  

American  Coal  Company  Lonaconing. 

Maryland  Coal  Company   " 

Xew  Central  Coal  Company   " 

A.  J.  Merrill  Westernport. 

J.  O.  J.  Greene   " 

Atlantic  and  Georges  Creek  Consolidation  Coal  Co...  Piedmont,  W.  Va. 

Piedmont-Cumberland  Coal  Company   "  ■' 

Piedmont  Mining  Company   "  " 

Davis  Coal  and  Coke  Company  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

Clays  and  Shales. 

p.  A.  Bier  Bier. 

Peter  Alkise  Cumberland. 

H.  Brant  

Eichner  Bros   " 

Queen  City  Brick  and  Tile  Company   " 

James  Gardner  <k  Sons   " 

Savage  Mountain  Fire-Brick  Works  Frostburg. 

Knight  and  Purgit   Keyser,  W.  \a. 

Union  Mining  Company  Mount  Savage. 

Mount  Savage  Enameled-Brick  Company   "  " 

George  E.  Rawlings   Pinto. 

Lime  and  Cement. 

Chas.  F.  Treascher  Cresaptown. 

Robert  Oss  

Joseph  Dressman  Cumberland. 

Cumberland  Hvdraulic-Cement  Company   " 

Wm.  T.  Mullan  ."  

Cumberland  Valley  Cement  Company   " 

S.  K.  Berry  '  Flintstone. 

Cumberland  and  Potomac  Cement  Company  Pinto. 

C.  Long  &  Bros   " 

G.  M.  Rawlings  

Building-Stones. 

Beall  Bros,  (sandstonet  Cumberland. 

Flint  .\nd  Chert. 

John  Dressman  Cumberland. 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

BY 

CLARENCE  W.  DORSEY 


IXTRODUCTTOX. 

The  soils  of  Allegany  county  are  so  closely  related  to  the  geological 
formations  from  which  they  are  derived  that  a  knowledge  of  the 
rock  formations  throws  much  light  upon  the  soils  which  are  found 
there.  From  an  agricnltnral  standpoint,  the  soil  may  be  regarded 
as  the  uppermost  layer  of  the  earth's  crust  which  supports  vegetation. 
It  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  debris  of  rocks  more  or  less  mixed  with 
decayed  organic  matter.  In  its  composition,  soil  consists  of  frag- 
ments of  rocks  and  the  products  of  rock  decomposition,  together  with 
the  remains  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  the  mass  being  permeated 
with  more  or  less  water  containing  various  substances  in  solution. 

The  Formation  of  Soil. 
The  mechanical  forces  which  are  active  in  the  formation  of  soils 
are,  to  a  great  extent,  familiar  to  everyone.  The  result  of  their 
action  is  to  continually  break  rock-masses  into  smaller  fragments  until 
they  are  reduced  to  such  a  size  that  the  roots  of  plants  can  obtain 
support  when  the  processes  of  soil  formation  are  greatly  hastened. 
In  the  winter,  water  which  has  penetrated  the  joints  and  crevices  of 
rocks  becomes  frozen,  thereby  causing  the  rocks  to  be  pried  asunder. 
The  roots  of  trees  effect  the  same  result  by  wedging  rocks  apart. 
The  reduction  of  rocks  to  fine  particles  is  brought  about  by  the  beat- 
ing of  the  rains.  The  grinding  of  particles  of  dust  carried  by  the 
winds,  the  friction  of  the  wind  itself  and  the  erosive  power  of  moving 
water  and  ice.  Rocks  expand  on  heating  during  the  day  and  con- 
tract at  night,  causing  the  particles  to  become  loosened  and  in  time 


19G 


THE  SOIUS  OF  ALLEGANY  COtT^TY 


to  fall  apart.  This  action  is  more  pronounced  in  mountainous  coun- 
tries than  in  regions  of  less  elevation. 

Tlie  chemical  forces  which  act  upon  rocks  are  not  so  easily  recog- 
nized by  the  inexperienced  observer,  but  they  are  nevertheless  pow- 
erful in  promoting  rock  degeneration  and  their  action  may  be  noticed 
hundreds  of  feet  below  the  earth's  surface.  Rains  falling  upon  the 
earth  dissolve  substances  contained  in  rocks,  leaving  the  relatively 
insoluble  particles  of  matter.  This  is  illustrated  in  a  marked  degree 
in  limestone  areas,  as  the  soil-covering  in  this  case  consists  of  the 
insoluble  particles  of  limestone  forming  but  a  small  portion  of  the 
original  rock,  mixed,  perhaps,  with  organic  matter.  This  solvent 
action  of  rain-water  is  attributed  mainly  to  the  various  acids  it  holds 
in  solution.  The  atmosphere  likewise  contains  small  quantities  of 
acid  which  promote  rock  decomposition.  The  roots  of  plants  press- 
ing against  rocks  help  to  remove  portions  of  the  latter  by  solution. 
Even  on  bare  rock  surfaces  it  is  found  that  bacteria  and  other  low 
forms  of  plants  exert  considerable  influence  in  promoting  rock-decay. 

Certain  iron-bearing  minerals  found  in  rocks  tend  to  break  down 
as  they  unite  with  water  and  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  This 
oxidizing  process,  or  rusting,  is  especially  true  of  rocks  which  con- 
tain a  large  proportion  of  iron-bearing  minerals,  and  the  more  porous 
the  rock  is  the  more  rapidly  will  oxidation  take  place.  Another 
chemical  agency  which  is  important  in  promoting  rock  decomposition 
is  hydration  or  the  assumption  of  water  by  rocks.  The  effects  of 
hydration  are  noticed  hundreds  of  feet  below  the  surface  of  the  earth 
and  rock  masses  increase  in  size  proportionally  as  they  chemically 
unite  with  the  undergTound  waters. 

These  are  the  processes  which  operate  in  breaking  up  rocks  and 
making  them  suitable  as  supports  for  vegetation  to  take  root  and 
flourish.  As  soon  as  these  destructive  forces  have  furnished  rock- 
debris  sufficient  for  the  larger  plants  to  thrive,  the  soil-forming  pro- 
cesses are  greatly  aided  by  the  decay  of  the  roots  and  other  portions 
of  the  plant.  Small  forms  of  animal  life  also  help  to  enrich  and 
build  up  the  soil. 

Many  of  the  forces,  however,  which  have  been  enumerated  as 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


197 


operatiYe  in  forming  arable  soils  from  rocks  are,  moreover,  the 
agents  by  whicli  the  soil  covering  is  removed  and  it  is  found  that  a 
sort  of  equilibrium  is  maintained  between  the  forces  which  produce 
the  soils  and  those  that  destroy  them. 

External  and  Internal  Conditions  of  the  Soil. 
From  an  agTicultural  point  of  view,  a  soil  is  of  value  only  when  it 
is  capable  of  bringing  to  the  farmer  a  sufficient  return  for  the  money 
or  labor  that  he  has  bestowed  upon  it.  The  capacity  of  a  soil  to 
produce  plant  growth  not  only  depends  upon  the  conditions  within 
the  soil,  but  also  upon  the  conditions  sun'ounding  it.  The  soil  itself 
must  be  of  such  a  degi'ee  of  fineness  that  the  roots  of  plants  may 
penetrate  it  and  allow  the  rain-water  to  enter  so  that  it  may  be 
utilized  by  the  growing  plant.  The  soil  must  also  be  permeable  to 
air  or  its  productiveness  will  be  greatly  diminished.  The  soil,  more- 
over, must  furnish  the  various  elements  which  are  essential  to  the 
growth  of  the  plant,  and  to  this  end  these  elements  must  be  present 
in  the  soil  in  an  available  condition.  The  proper  temperatui'e  con- 
ditions must  be  maintained,  that  is,  the  soil  must  be  able  to  store  up 
the  heat  of  the  sun's  rays  in  the  daytime  and  give  them  out  at  night 
to  prevent  the  serious  efl^ects  due  to  sudden  change  of  temperature. 
These  are  some  of  the  internal  conditions  which  affect  the  fertility  of 
soils. 

The  views  concerning  soil  fertility,  however,  have  changed  con- 
siderably during  the  last  few  years.  Formerly  it  was  siipposed  that 
their  chemical  composition  was  the  controlling  factor  in  the  pro- 
ductiveness, but  more  recent  investigations  show  that  the  tempera- 
ture and  moisture  conditions  which  are  dependent  to  a  great  extent 
upon  the  physical  condition  of  the  soil  itself  determine  its  fertility. 

The  external  conditions  Avhicli  modify  the  agricultural  value  of 
the  soil  can  be  mentioned  only  briefly  in  this  connection.  Climate 
is  probably  the  most  important  factor,  and  this  depends  on  latitude, 
elevation  above  sea-level,  nearness  to  the  sea,  general  configuration 
of  the  country,  and  the  direction  and  character  of  the  winds.  The 
local  topography  is  also  an  important  factor.    The  methods  employed 


198 


THE  SOILS  OF  AIXEGAXY  COUNTY 


in  cultivation,  the  adaptability  of  the  soils  to  certain  special  crops, 
and  the  relative  amount  of  cleared  areas  exert  considerable  influence 
upon  the  agricultural  value  of  the  soils  of  any  region.  The  distance 
from  market  and  transportation  facilities  must  also  be  considered. 

From  an  agricultural  standpoint  Allegany  county  does  not  com- 
pare favorably  with  the  other  counties  of  the  state,  as  its  prominence 
depends  almost  wholly  on  its  mineral  resources.  The  surface  of  the 
county  is  rough  and  broken,  consisting  mainly  of  a  series  of  long 
ridges  separated  by  steep-sloped,  narrow  valleys.  The  gro\\"ing  sea- 
sons are  short  with  hot  days  and  cool  nights  and  the  winters  are  long 
and  severe.  The  soils  themselves  do  not  possess  any  considerable 
degree  of  fertility,  so  it  is  readily  seen  that  the  conditions  in  the 
county  are  not  favorable  for  any  great  agricultural  advancement  to 
be  made  without  a  large  expenditure  of  energy  and  perseverance. 

The  principal  agricultural  products  of  the  county  are  com,  oats, 
rye  and  potatoes.  Small  amounts  of  hay,  wheat,  fruit  and  buckwheat 
are  also  produced.  Probably  three-fourths  of  the  county  is  still 
imcleared,  and  from  the  sale  of  timber  in  these  wooded  areas  con- 
siderable income  is  derived.  This  is  especially  the  case  with  sales  of 
tan-bark  and  railroad  ties  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  county. 

Historical  Sketch. 

Comparatively  little  bas  been  written  concerning  the  soils  of  Alle- 
gany county-  Probably  the  first  one  to  atteinpt  any  scientific  exam- 
ination of  them  was  Dr.  James  Hiagins.  who  was  State  Agricultural 
Chemist  from  1849  until  1859.  Dr.  Higgins  visited  various  counties 
of  the  state,  examined  the  soils  and  agricultural  conditions  and  issued 
a  series  of  reports,  six  in  number,  in  which  the  results  of  his  work 
are  set  forth.  At  a  subsequent  date.  1867,  he  published  a  volume 
in  which  the  entire  work  was  summarized.  It  is  only  in  the  Fourth 
Annual  Eeport  that  Dr.  Higgins  has  discussed  the  soils  of  Allegany 
county  at  any  length.  In  his  report  he  describes  the  important  soil 
formations,  publishes  chemical  analyses  and  recommends  fertilizers 
and  methods  of  cultivation  for  the  different  soils. 

The  soils  which  Dr.  Higgins  describes  are  the  Red  Rock,  or  Red 


MABYXA>-D  GEOLOGICAL  SLRVEY 


199 


Sandstone  soils,  the  Limestone  Clay  soils,  the  Shaly  Red  Sandstone 
soils,  the  Potomac  Bottom  soils,  and  the  Loamy  soils  of  the  coal  region. 
These  names  will  be  correlated  with  the  present  names  in  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  separate  formations,  so  that  no  further  mention  of  them 
need  be  made  in  this  connection. 

In  1892  J.  Thomas  Scharf  published  in  a  popular  form  a  book 
describing  the  natural  resources  and  advantages  of  the  counties  of 
Maryland.  In  this  paper  mention  is  made  of  the  soils  and  agricul- 
tural conditions  of  Allegany  county.  Scharf  describes  the  soils  of 
the  county  as  sandy  loams  along  the  different  streams,  and  loams 
mixed  with  limestone,  slate  and  sand  in  the  mountains. 

In  connection  with  the  Maryland  Agricultural  Experiment  Sta- 
tion and  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Professor  Milton  Whitney  con- 
ducted scientific  investigations  of  Maiyland  soils  for  a  number  of 
years.  This  work  was  carried  on  in  1891,  and  in  1892  Professor 
"Whitney  was  made  Chief  of  the  Division  of  Soils  in  the  U.  S.  De- 
partment of  Agriculture.  Since  that  time  soil  investigations  have 
been  carried  on  in  the  state  under  his  personal  direction  and  the 
present  report  on  the  soils  of  Allegany  county  is  made  imder  his 
supervision. 

Professor  Whitney's  work  on  the  soils  of  Maiyland  consisted  of  a 
classification  of  the  soils  of  the  state  based  upon  the  distribution  of 
the  geological  formations  and  a  series  of  investigations  upon  the  phy- 
sical properties  of  the  soils  themselves.  As  Physicist  of  the  Mary- 
land Experiment  Station,  Professor  Whitney  showed  that  the  relation 
of  the  various  soils  of  the  state  to  the  different  crops  depended  upon 
their  physical  conditions  rather  than  upon  their  chemical  composition. 
A  large  number  of  experiments  and  examinations  were  made  in 
which  it  was  shown  that  the  prodi;ctiveness  of  the  soil  depends  upon 
the  moisture  and  heat  conditions  it  maintains  for  the  growing  crop. 
An  examination  then  of  the  textiire  and  structure,  or  the  physical 
condition  in  which  the  soil  exists,  explains  in  a  satisfactory  manner 
these  essential  conditions  within  the  soil. 

Several  bulletins  and  reports  were  published  in  which  the  results 
of  this  work  were  set  forth.    The  most  important  of  these  reports 


■200 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUIfTY 


which  deal  with  the  soils  of  Allegany  county  are  the  Fourth  Annual 
Report  of  the  ^Maryland  Agricultural  Experiment  Station  for  1891; 
Bulletin  Xo.  4  of  the  U.  S.  "Weather  Bureau  issued  in  1S92;  Bulletin 
Xo.  21  of  the  Maryland  Agricultural  Experiment  Station,  published 
in  1893,  and  the  chapter  on  Agriculture  in  Maryland:  Its  Industries, 
Institutions  and  Resources,  prepared  for  the  "World's  Fair  in  1893. 

In  these  reports  Professor  Whitney  describes  the  soils  derived 
from  the  Helderberg,  Oriskany,  Catskill,  Hamilton,  Niagara  and 
Clinton  formations.  Chemical  and  mechanical  analyses  were  pub- 
lished and  many  of  their  physical  properties  were  discussed  with  ref- 
erence to  their  productiveness.  Professor  "V\"hitney's  work  will  also 
be  referred  to  in  connection  with  the  description  of  the  separate  soil 
formations. 

Soil  Foriiatioxs. 

Any  description  of  the  various  soils  that  are  derived  from  the 
different  rock  formations  in  the  county  will  show  that  there  is  a 
great  similarity  between  certain  of  the  soil-types.  Thus  it  will  bo 
found  that  all  the  soils  derived  from  fine-grained,  homogeneous 
shales  will  have  certain  common  characteristics.  The  soils  derived 
from  the  different  sandstone  formations  will  also  closely  resemble 
each  other  in  many  particulars,  while  the  soils  derived  from  red  sandy 
shales  will  be  intimately  related. 

This  only  serves  to  emphasize  what  was  stated  at  the  beginning 
of  this  paper,  that  the  soils  of  any  given  region  closely  resemble  the 
rocks  to  which  they  owe  their  origin. 

Since  the  climatic  conditions  ai'e  practically  alike  over  the  entire 
area  of  the  coimty,  mechanical  analyses  of  the  soil  are  of  great  im- 
portance in  showing  the  texture  of  the  soil.  These  explain  in  a  very 
satisfactory  manner  the  relations  of  the  soil  to  moisture  and  to  heat. 
A  series  of  such  mechanical  analyses  is  given  in  the  succeeding  pages. 
Stated  in  general  terms,  the  more  clay  a  soil  contains  the  more 
moisture  will  it  hold,  hxit  the  relative  amounts  of  coarser  grades  of 
soil  particles  must  also  be  taken  into  account.  The  term  clay  in- 
cludes those  particles  of  soil  which  have  a  diameter  of  from  .0001  to 
.005  mm.  without  reference  to  their  chemical  composition. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  STJKVEY 


201 


Chemical  analyses  of  the  principal  types  of  soils  found  in  the 
county  are  also  published.  These  chemical  analyses  were  made  by 
Dr.  F.  E.  Cameron  of  the  Division  of  Soils  in  the  U.  S.  Department 
of  Agriculture.  In  the  following  pages  the  different  soils  will  be 
given  according  to  the  geological  formation  on  which  they  rest  and 
from  which  they  have  been  derived. 

THE  JUNIATA. 

The  Juniata  is  so  limited  in  its  occurrence  that  the  soils  derived 
from  its  decomposition  need  only  be  mentioned.  In  the  small  area 
it  occupies  in  The  XaiTows,  west  of  Cumberland,  the  soil  consists  of 
heavy  red  sandy  loams  in  Avhicli  there  is  an  admixture  of  shale  frag- 
ments. Xo  attempt  is  made  at  cultivation  and  but  few  trees  find 
footing  in  the  loose  slipping  mass  of  soil  and  undecomposed  rock. 

THE  TUSCARORA. 

The  soils  of  the  Tuscarora  foimation  are  also  relatively  unim- 
portant. There  are  three  areas  in  the  county:  Wills  Mountain  and 
the  southern  extension  of  Evitts  and  Tussey  mountains.  The  oc- 
currence of  the  formation  as  steep  mountainous  ridges  is  against  its 
being  of  any  great  agricultural  value.  Probably  in  not  one  of  the 
three  areas  where  the  formation  occurs  is  it  cultivated  with  the  pos- 
sible exception  of  the  area  at  the  base  of  Tussey's  Mountain.  Here 
there  appears  to  be  a  considerable  area  of  washed  material  from  the 
slopes  of  the  mountain  which  is  partly  cleared  and  cultivated,  but  in 
none  of  the  other  areas  was  a  single  cultivated  field  observed.  In 
many  places  there  are  large  areas  devoid  of  soil-covering,  while  in 
other  places,  along  the  foot  of  "Wills  Moimtain  especially,  there  are 
huge  piles  of  rock-talus. 

The  rock  from  which  the  soils  of  this  formation  are  derived  is  a 
coarse  quartz  sandstone  which  is  hard  and  massive  and  usually  of  a 
white  or  gray  color.  The  soils  partake  very  largely  of  the  nature  of 
the  rock  and  consist  of  whitish  sandy  loams  in  which  there  is  a  slight 
amount  of  organic  matter.  The  sandstone  does  not  disintegrate 
readily,  so  that  the  soils  are  always  shallow  except  in  small  pockets 
where  they  have  accumulated. 


202 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


Most  of  the  area  is  strewn  with  large  masses  of  the  resistant  gray 
sandstone.  The  average  depth  of  the  soil  covering  rarely  exceeds 
16  inches.  As  there  are  practically  no  cleared  areas  in  the  formation 
no  idea  can  be  gained  of  the  productiveness  of  the  Tuscarora  soils. 
At  present  they  only  support  a  scant  growth  of  pines  and  scrub  oaks. 
The  mechanical  analyses  of  two  samples  of  Tuscarora  soils  from 
Tussey's  Mountain  show  a  large  percentage  of  sand  with  rather  small 
amounts  of  silt  and  clay. 

THE  CLINTON. 

The  Clinton  formation,  like  the  Tuscarora,  occupies  only  three 
small  areas  in  Allegany  county,  two  to  the  east  and  one  to  the  west 
of  Cumberland.  From  an  agricultural  standpoint,  the  area  in  the 
valley  west  of  Flint^tone  is  perhaps  the  most  important.  Each  area 
occupied  by  the  Clinton  is  rolling  with  broad,  rounded  hills  and 
often  local  areas  of  bottom-land.  The  greater  portion  of  its  surface 
is  cleared  and  cultivated,  except  in  the  area  west  of  Cumberland  on 
each  side  of  Wills  Mountain,  where  it  is  not  farmed  to  any  great 
extent. 

The  rocks  of  the  formation  consist  mainly  of  brown  and  reddish 
shales,  which  are  fine-grained  and  quite  uniform  in  texture.  In  addi- 
tion there  are  minor  beds  of  limestone. 

The  soils  of  the  Clinton  are  typical  shale  soils.  They  are  shallow, 
of  a  light  yellow  or  grapsh  color,  and  consist  of  fragments  of  iinde- 
coinposed  shale  mixed  with  the  finest  particles  of  clay.  These  soils 
are  light  and  easily  stirred,  but  they  do  not  retain  moisture  well  and 
cannot  be  classed  as  strong  soils,  although  they  probably  represent 
the  best  class  of  shale  soils  found  in  the  county.  Generally  the  sur- 
face soil  contains  a  larger  percentage  of  clay  than  the  subsoil,  which 
grades  into  gray  undecomposed  shale  about  18  inches  from  the  sur- 
face. 

It  is  difficult  to  make  these  soils  productive,  for  in  bad  seasons  they 
dry  out  and  fire  the  crops.  Rye  probably  succeeds  better  than  other 
grain  crops,  as  from  12  to  15  bushels  are  produced  per  acre.  In  good 
seasons  wheat  does  fairly  well,  and  eight  bushels  per  acre  may  be 


il.VBYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


203 


considered  an  average  yield.  Oats,  on  account  of  the  fact  that  they 
ripen  late  in  the  season,  are  much  damaged  by  dry  seasons.  Corn, 
if  it  is  planted  early,  yields  fair  crops,  but  otherwise  it  is  not  culti- 
vated with  profit.  When  the  season  is  favorable  enough  to  get  a 
good  stand  of  clover  it  lasts  for  two  or  three  years,  but  much  difficulty 
is  usually  experienced  in  getting  it  started.  These  lands  before  they 
are  cleared  are  usually  covered  with  a  light  growth  of  oak  and  pine. 

In  shale  soils  of  this  character  any  course  of  treatment  is  helpful 
which  will  deepen  the  soils  and  thereby  increase  their  water-holding 
capacity.  Deep  plowing  will  elfect  this  and  heavy  applications  of 
stable  manure  will  be  beneficial.  Applications  of  common  salt  have 
also  been  found  useful  on  this  class  of  soils  in  promoting  the  decom- 
position of  the  thin  flat  pieces  of  shale. 

From  the  mechanical  analyses  of  these  soils,  it  is  seen  that  the 
coarsest  gTades  of  sand  are  represented  with  fair  amounts  of  silt  and 
clay.  In  these  analyses  no  account  is  taken  of  the  shale  fragments 
larger  than  2  mm.  in  diameter.  These  form  a  large  part  of  the  soil 
and  make  it  loose  so  that  it  is  easily  dried  out. 

THE  NIAGAKA. 

The  Xiagara  fomiation  occurs  in  four  well-defined  areas  in  the 
county,  very  closely  associated  with  the  areas  of  the  Clinton  forma- 
tion in  their  occurrence.  It  consists  mainly  of  thin  bands  of  lime- 
stone interbedded  with  fine-grained  shales  and  is  not  very  important 
from  an  agricultural  standpoint  on  account  of  the  relatively  small 
area  it  occupies.  The  soils  derived  from  the  Niagara  belong  to  the 
better  class  of  those  found  in  the  county,  and,  though  rather  shallow, 
are  usually  qmte  fertile.  They  are  yellowish  loams  containing  con- 
siderable clay  mixed  with  fragments  of  shale.  They  can  largely  be 
improved  and  oats,  rye,  grass  and  wheat  succeed  fairly  well  on  them, 
but  as  in  most  of  this  region  the  yields  per  acre  are  not  very  large. 

THE  SALINA. 

The  soils  of  the  Salina  occupy  pretty  nearly  the  same  areas  as  the 
Clinton  shales,  but  the  areas  stand  out  usually  as  more  pronounced 


204 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


ridges  than  the  broad  low  hills  of  the  Clinton.  The  soils  closely 
resemble  the  materials  from  which  they  are  derived  and  they  prove  to 
be  fairly  productive.  Occurring  as  they  do  in  the  same  localities  as 
the  Helderberg  limestone,  it  is  interesting  to  compare  the  two  classes 
of  soils,  and  it  is  found  that  in  good  seasons  they  are  nearly  as  pro- 
ductive as  the  heavier  limestone  soils. 

The  soils  are  brown  or  red  in  color,  and  although  they  contain 
some  sand,  they  may  be  classed  above  the  better  grade  of  sandstone 
soils.  They  usually  have  a  depth  of  about  22  inches.  These  soils 
are  well  drained  and  are  heavy  enough  to  hold  moisture  and  are 
easily  improved.  Twelve  bushels  of  wheat  per  acre  can  be  raised  and 
good  yields  of  grass,  com,  oats  and  rye  are  also  raised  with  fair 
crops  of  each.    They  may  be  classed  as  wheat  and  grass  lands. 

The  Salina  soils  can  be  cultivated  profitably  and  may  be  considered 
among  the  better  class  of  strong  loam  soils  found  in  the  county.  By 
referring  to  their  mechanical  analyses,  it  will  be  seen  that  they  are 
composed  of  the  finest  grades  of  sand  with  a  good  proportion  of  clay. 
The  samples  analyzed  are  all  subsoUs  and  in  each  case  are  heavier 
than  the  surface  materials. 

THE  HELDKRBEEG. 

There  arc  four  important  areas  of  the  Ilelderberg  in  Allegany 
county.  Two  of  these  occur  as  V-shaped  areas  east  of  Cumberland, 
while  the  other  two  extend  across  the  county  through  and  to  the  west 
of  Cumberland. 

The  Helderberg,  from  its  occurrence  Avith  the  Oriskany  sandstone^ 
usually  forms  steep  ridges  wliich  are  held  up  by  the  more  resistant 
Oriskany  formation.  In  some  of  the  areas  of  the  Helderberg  there 
are  comparatively  level  stretches  of  countiy,  but  generally  the  forma- 
tion consists  of  long,  steep  slopes  presenting  differences  in  elevation 
of  several  hundred  feet. 

The  Helderberg  is  principally  a  limestone  formation,  although  it 
contains  beds  of  shales.  The  soils  of  the  Helderberg  may  be  de- 
scribed as  strong  and  fertile,  although  they  may  not  have  any  great 
depth.    They  probably  rank  as  the  best  in  the  county,  and  the  better 


MABYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  StTRVEY 


205 


class  of  these  limestone  soils  will  compare  favorably  with  the  best 
agricultural  regions  of  the  state. 

These  soils,  as  distinguished  from  the  subsoils,  are  usually  red 
or  yellow  heavy  loams,  while  the  subsoils  are  generally  strong  red  or 
yellow  clay  loams.  They  are  stiff  and  firm  and  retain  the  moisture 
and  are  quite  well  adapted  to  grass  and  wheat.  They  are  spoken  of 
as  natural  Bluegrass  lands.  Timothy  does  very  well  upon  them, 
giving  one  and  one-half  tons  per  acre,  while  fifteen  bushels  of  wheat 
per  acre  is  an  average  yield.  Com  is  not  raised  to  any  great  extent  be- 
cause the  continual  cultivation  in  the  spring  and  summer  is  apt  to 
leave  the  field  in  a  condition  to  be  easily  washed  and  furrowed  by 
gullies.  It  is  customaiy  to  keep  the  fields  protected  as  much  as  pos- 
sible to  prevent  washing.    Oats,  rye  and  clover  succeed  quite  well. 

"While  the  Helderberg  soils  are  generally  strong  and  fertile  there 
are  some  areas  where  they  are  poor  and  unproductive.  This  is 
especially  true  in  the  case  of  the  soils  derived  from  the  cherty  mem- 
bers of  the  Helderberg.  These  are  light  and  shallow  and  filled  with 
pieces  of  cherty  limestone.  Eye  and  potatoes  do  fairly  well,  but  the 
other  crops  generally  grown  in  this  region  do  not  succeed.  These 
soils  are  sometimes  spoken  of  as  limestone  gravel  soils  and  they  are 
well  adapted  to  the  growth  of  peaches,  grapes  and  small  fruits. 
There  are  some  very  successful  orchards  on  the  south  and  southeast 
slopes  of  these  cherty  areas. 

There  is  a  considerable  area  of  limestone  soil  in  the  valleys  along 
the  Potomac  river  southwest  of  Cumberland  in  the  region  about 
Black  Oak  Bottom  Station.  Here  the  soil  is  deep,  but  it  is  not  as 
productive  as  might  be  expected  from  the  favorable  location.  This 
is  doubtless  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  need  of  underdraining,  for 
the  ground  receives  the  drainage  from  the  hills  and  is  apt  to  be  too 
wet  and  spouty. 

Dr.  Higgins  has  named  these  the  Clay  Limestone  soils  and  de- 
scribed them  as  dark  loams  with  a  tough  reddish  clay  subsoil.  The 
difference  in  their  fertility  he  ascribes  to  the  greater  abundance  of 
phosphoric  acid  in  some  localities  than  in  others.  Professor  Whit- 
ney, in  the  reports  mentioned,  called  them  the  Helderberg  Limestone 


206 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COCXTY 


soils  and  describes  them  as  strong  yellow  clay  soils  which  are  naturally 
well  drained  and  capable  of  a  high  state  of  cultivation.  They  are 
uniform  in  texture  and  well  adapted  to  grass  and  wheat.  The  chem- 
ical analysis  of  this  soil  which  he  published  gives  but  little  clue  to  its 
productiveness. 

The  mechanical  analyses  of  the  Helderberg  show  only  small 
amounts  of  sand  while  the  bulk  consists  of  silt  and  clay.  The  analyses 
of  these  soils  easily  explain  their  strength  and  productiveness.  The 
analysis  of  the  cherty  sample  is  quite  similar  to  the  analyses  given 
of  the  Clinton  shale  soils.  The  samples  which  contain  the  greatest 
amounts  of  clay  are  usually  considered  the  strongest  and  most 
valuable. 

THE  ORISKANY. 

The  Oriskany  formation  occupies  a  large  area  in  the  center  of  the 
county  and  two  or  three  minor  areas  in  the  western  part.  The  forma- 
tion includes  most  of  the  mountainous  ridges  and  the  intervening 
valleys  in  the  center  of  the  county,  and  in  the  other  areas  where  it 
occurs  it  forms  long  narrow  ridges  with  the  Helderberg.  The  forma- 
tion, although  it  occupies  quite  a  large  area  in  the  county,  is  not 
important  from  an  agricultural  standpoint.  The  rocks  of  the  Oris- 
kany are  described  as  coarse,  white,  friable,  slightly  calcareous  sand- 
stones. 

The  soils  derived  from  tlie  disintegi'ation  of  the  Oriskany  are 
usually  shallow  sandy  loams  with  a  small  percentage  of  organic 
matter.  They  arc  gray  or  yellow  in  color,  and  over  most  of  the  area 
there  is  a  covering  of  gravels  and  bouldei's  ranging  in  diameter  fi*om 
a  few  inches  to  several  feet. 

Along  the  lower  levels  of  this  area  the  soil  is  usually  a  heavier 
loam,  but  along  the  summits  of  the  mountains  the  soil  consists  of  a 
very  shallow  covering  of  sandy  loam  mixed  with  large  boiildei-s  and 
masses  of  rock.  In  some  parts  of  the  area  the  rock  surfaces  are  bare 
of  soil-covering,  with  here  and  there  an  occasional  pine  tree  which 
finds  footing  in  the  rock  crevices.  By  far  the  larger  part  of  the 
area  is  imcleared  and  covered  with  a  light  growth  of  pines  and  oaks. 
Where  the  Oriskany  is  cleared  it  is  found  that  rye  and  potatoes  sue- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


207 


ceed  better  than  other  crops,  although  corn,  oats  and  clover  do  rea- 
sonably well  for  such  light  sandy  soils.  Along  the  higher  parts  of 
the  mountains  the  soils  are  warm  and  dry  and  fair  crops  of  com  are 
raised  on  fields  where  the  soil  covering  seems  only  to  consist  of  a  loose 
mass  of  white  sandstone  fragments.  There  is  no  doubt  that  peaches, 
grapes  and  small  fruits  would  succeed  on  the  protected  slopes  of  these 
rocky  areas,  but  up  to  the  present  time  no  attempt  has  been  made 
to  introduce  them. 

In  the  Fourth  Annual  Report  of  the  Maryland  Agricultural  Ex- 
periment Station,  Professor  Whitney  has  described  these  soils  as 
lacking  uniformity  in  texture  and  naturally  poor,  but  capable  of  some 
improvement.    He  has  classed  them  as  Mountain  Pasture  Soils. 

THE  ROMNEY- JENNINGS. 

The  Romney- Jennings  formation  probably  occupies  the  largest  area 
in  Allegany  county.  Most  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  coxmty  consists 
of  these  two  foimations,  and  there  are  two  good-sized  areas  in  the 
western  part.  The  Romney-Jennings  are  two  distinct  geological 
formations,  but  the  soils  are  so  nearly  alike  that  they  can  be  de- 
scribed together. 

In  the  eastern  part  of  the  county  the  surface  is  rolling  with  one  or 
two  rather  prominent  ridges.  In  the  other  areas  there  is  consider- 
able rolling  upland  with  some  bottom-land.  The  rocks  of  these 
foiTuations  are  fine-grained  shales  with  minor  beds  of  sandstone. 
Thin  bands  of  limestone  occur  as  well  as  beds  of  coarse  conglomerate. 

The  soils  derived  from  these  two  formations  are  quite  uniform  over 
the  entire  area.  They  are  shallow  soils  with  an  average  depth  of 
about  18  inches  and  possess  little  agricultural  value,  and  where  un- 
cleared there  is  a  light  growth  of  pine  and  oak.  In  some  areas  of  the 
formation,  however,  especially  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  county, 
there  are  some  farms  which  have  been  considerably  improved  and 
produce  fairly  well. 

The  color  of  these  soils  is  grayish  and  yellowish  and  they  contain 
a  large  proportion  of  shale.  On  the  steep  slopes  the  soil  particles 
are  washed  away  nearly  as  fast  as  they  are  formed,  so  that  often  these 


20S 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUKTY 


slopes  are  only  covered  with  a  slight  layer  of  shale  fragments.  These 
soils  are  rather  typical  shale  soils  and  quickly  dry  out  and  fire  the 
crops.  Eye  and  oats  do  fairly  well  and  corn  is  profitable  if  it  is 
planted  early.  Seven  bushels  of  wheat,  fifteen  bushels  of  oats  and 
from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  bushels  of  corn  per  acre  are  said  to  be 
average  yields  on  the  Romney-Jennings.  Such  soils  need  to  be  care- 
fully treated  and  will  not  stand  hard  farming.  Many  of  the  sloi>es 
in  this  area  that  are  cultivated  should  be  allowed  to  grow  up  in  forest 
or  else  they  will  soon  be  swept  clear  of  soil-covering.  Some  of  the 
angles  of  the  steepest  of  these  slopes  were  measured  and  found  to  be 
as  high  as  40^. 

Deep  plowing  would  be  beneficial  to  these  soils;  turning  under 
green  manures  and  stable  manures  would  also  increase  their  water- 
holding  capacity.  Applications  of  common  salt  have  also  been  found 
to  be  useful  on  these  soils  in  promoting  the  decay  of  the  shale  frag- 
ments contained  in  the  soil. 

Dr.  Iliggins  and  Professor  Whitney  have  both  described  these 
soils.  Dr.  Iliggins  calls  them  the  Eed  Shaly  Sandstone  soils  and 
states  that  their  gTcat  disadvantage  is  their  shallowness  and  the  injury 
they  receive  from  washing.  Professor  Whitney  described  them  as 
Mountain  Pasture  L^nds.  They  are  naturally  poor,  he  states,  but 
are  capable  of  some  improvement.  They  consist  of  fine-grained 
powdery  material  with  fragments  of  the  original  rock.  Mechanical 
analyses  of  these  soils  show  them  to  be  composed  principally  of  the 
finest  grades  of  sand  and  silt. 

THE  HAJrPSHIEE. 

The  Hampshire  occurs  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  coimty  and  again 
along  the  eastern  slope  of  Dans  Mountain  in  the  western  part.  In 
both  areas  the  fonuation  is  hilly  with  steep  slopes,  although  there  is 
a  small  amount  of  level  upland.  The  rocks  of  the  formation  are  red 
and  bi'own  shales  and  fine  sandstones. 

The  soils  of  the  formation  are  not  important  in  Allegany  county, 
although  they  are  quite  valuable  fann  lands  in  Garrett  county.  Only 
the  area  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  county  is  fanned  to  any  extent,  as 


MAKYLAKD  GEOLOGICAL  STJRrEY 


209 


the  area  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Dans  Mountain  is  uncleared,  and 
there  are  no  wagon-roads  leading  to  it  with  the  exception  of  two  or 
three  wood-roads.  The  soils  are  red  and  brown  sandy  loams  with  a 
scattering  of  flat  shalv  rocks  on  the  surface.  These  soils  grade  from 
a  typical  shale  soil  to  a  rather  heavy  type  of  sandstone  soil  which 
produces  fairly  well.  The  shale  soils  are  shallow,  sandy  soils  which 
wash  badly  and  are  hard  to  improve.  The  areas  of  the  heavy  type 
of  Hampshire  soils  are  small  and  are  derived  from  the  fine-grained 
sandstone  members  of  the  formation. 

The  Hampshire  soils  produce  an  average  of  about  12  bushels  of 
wheat,  from  15  to  20  bushels  of  com  and  about  20  bushels  of  oats 
per  acre.  Grass  holds  fairly  well  and  these  soils  make  fair  pasture 
lands.  They  are  more  productive  than  the  Eomney-Jennings  soils, 
although  the  analyses  of  samples  from  the  eastern  part  of  the  county 
do  not  show  as  large  percentages  of  clay  as  the  Eomney-Jennings 
contain.  The  gTeatest  part  of  the  soil,  according  to  the  analyses 
given,  consists  of  very  fine  sand  and  silt. 

Dr.  Higgins  describes  these  soils  as  the  Eed  Sandstone  soils  and 
states  that  they  belong  to  the  class  known  as  quick  soils.  He  also 
states  that  they  are  light  and  porous  and  do  not  suffer  from  drought 
and  moisture.  Professor  Whitney  in  his  description  states  that  they 
are  good  strong  lands  adapted  to  grass  and  wheat. 

THE  POCONO. 

The  Pocono  forms  the  capping  of  Town  Hill  Mountain  in  the 
east  of  the  county  and  a  line  of  foothills  along  the  east  front  of  Dans 
Mountain  in  the  western  part.  Xeither  of  these  areas  is  of  any  value 
for  farming  purposes,  although  there  is  some  attempt  at  cultivation 
in  the  eastern  part  of  the  county.  The  rocks  from  which  the  Pocono 
soils  are  derived  are  hard,  thin-bedded  flaggy  sandstones  and  the 
soils  closely  resemble  the  parent  rock.  They  are  sandy  with  a  slight 
mixture  of  vegetable  material.  These  soils  rarely  exceed  10  inches 
in  depth  and  they  are  probably  the  poorest  soils  in  the  county.  They 
are  hard  to  cultivate  on  account  of  the  fragments  of  rocks  in  the  soU 
and  the  boulders  which  are  strewn  over  the  surface.  They  consist 
almost  entirely  of  sand  with  small  amounts  of  silt  and  clay. 

14 


210 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


THE  GREENBEIEE-MAUCH  CHUNK. 

The  only  area  of  Greenbrier-Mauch  Chunk  in  the  county  lies  in  a 
slight  depression  between  the  outlying  ridge  of  Pocono  sandstone  and 
the  eastern  front  of  Dans  Mountain.  The  area  is  almost  entirely 
forested  and  is  difficult  of  access.  The  rocks  of  these  two  formations 
are  grayish  limestones  with  red  and  brown  shales  and  sandstones. 
The  soils  are  usually  loams  which  are  capable  of  being  improved  and 
cultivated  with  profit.  Often,  however,  there  is  difficulty  in  getting 
rid  of  the  huge  boulders  which  come  down  the  mountain  side  from 
the  Pottsville  formation.  These  soils  are  not  deep  but  are  heavy 
enough  to  retain  moisture,  and  they  closely  resemble  the  better  class 
of  Hampshire  soils. 

The  formations  included  in  the  Coal  Measures  occupy  the  entire 
portion  of  the  county  west  of  Dans  Moimtain  known  as  Georges 
Creek  Valley.  The  surface  of  the  valley  is  hilly  but  there  is  some 
level  upland.  Considerable  of  the  area  is  cleared  and  one  is  surprised 
that  not  more  of  the  better  class  of  land  is  cultivated.  The  soils  are 
derived  from  several  formations  and  each  one  will  be  briefly  de- 
scribed. These  soils  all  closely  resemble  one  another  and  consist  of 
a  series  of  loams  ranging  from  light  sandy  loams  to  heavy  loams. 

THE  POTTSVILLE. 

The  Pottsville  forms  the  capping  of  Dans  Mountain  and  is  prac- 
tically valueless  from  an  agricultural  standpoint.  The  soils  range 
from  heavy  loams  of  a  good  depth  to  only  a  shallow  covering  of 
coarse  sandy  loam  strewn  with  huge  masses  of  sandstone.  But  little 
of  the  area  is  cleared  and  it  is  usually  covered  with  a  light  growth  of 
oak,  chestnut  and  hickory.  AVhere  cultivation  is  practiced,  however, 
fair  yields  of  buckwheat,  rye  and  oats  are  harvested. 

THE  ALLEGHENY. 

The  Allegheny  formation  occurs  on  both  sides  of  Georges  Creek 
Valley  as  a  series  of  outlying  hills  and  slight  depressions  between  the 
hills  and  the  mountain  tops.  There  is  quite  a  large  proportion  of 
cleared  land  in  the  area  and  much  of  it  could  be  farmed  with  profit. 


M-VKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  STTKVEY 


211 


There  is  only  a  slight  amount  of  it  cultivated,  however,  as  the  people 
of  the  valley  depend  entirely  xzpon  the  coal  mines  for  a  livelihood 
rather  than  upon  fanning. 

The  rocks  from  which  the  soils  of  the  Allegheny  formation  are 
derived  are  mostly  sandstones  with  small  beds  of  sandy  shales.  The 
soils  are  yellow  loams  of  no  great  depth,  but  they  could  easily  be  im- 
proved and  made  profitable  farm  lands.  At  present  they  are  mostly 
used  for  pastures,  although  oats,  rye,  buckwheat  and  potatoes  are 
raised.  In  some  areas  where  this  fonnation  occurs  the  surface  is 
strewn  with  boulders  and  rock  masses,  although  small  pieces  of  flaggy 
sandstone  are  mixed  with  the  soils. 

In  the  depressions,  or  "  Sags,"  between  the  outlying  hills  and  mo\;n- 
tain  tops  the  drainage  is  poor  and  swamps  result.  The  soils  in  these 
areas  are  usually  coarse,  sandy  soils,  quite  shallow  and  contain  a  large 
percentage  of  organic  matter.  Xone  of  these  areas  are  cultivated 
and  underbrush,  mosses  and  ferns  grow  abundantly.  Oats,  rye  and 
buckwheat  are  probably  the  only  staple  crops  which  could  be  farmed 
with  profit  on  these  cold,  swampy  soils.  From  the  analyses  it  is 
seen  that  they  are  composed  principally  of  sand  and  silt. 

THE  CONEMAUGH. 

The  Conemaugh,  in  the  northern  part  of  Georges  Creek  Valley, 
embraces  some  of  the  best  farming  land  of  the  valley.  In  the  Cone- 
maugh there  is  more  of  an  attempt  to  cultivate  the  land  than  in  any 
of  the  other  foi-mations  of  the  area.  The  soils  derived  from  the 
disintegration  of  the  Conemaugh  shales  and  sandstones  are  probably 
not  much  better  than  those  of  the  Allegheny.  They  consist  of  yellow 
shaly  loams  about  18  inches  in  depth.  These  soils,  like  those  of  the 
Allegheny  formation,  are  adapted  to  oats,  rye,  potatoes  and  buck- 
wheat. 

THE  5I0N0NGAHELA. 

The  Monongahela  occupies  the  center  of  Georges  Creek  Valley 
and  the  soils  are  similar  to  those  already  described  as  occurring  there. 
They  are  not  uniform  in  texture  and  may  range  from  a  leachy,  grav- 
elly soil  to  heavy  dark  loams.    Considerable  of  the  area  is  cleared  and 


212 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COXTNTY 


only  those  crops  raised  which  are  most  valuable  for  local  purposes. 
Rye  is  grown  especially  for  the  straw,  and  as  much  hay  is  made  as  is 
possible  to  supply  the  mules  which  work  in  the  mines.  !Much  of  the 
area  is  devoted  to  gardens  by  the  miners.  Over  most  of  the  area  the 
soils  are  yellowish  loams  about  18  inches  in  depth. 

THE  DUNKAKD. 

The  Dunkard  occurs  in  the  central  portion  of  the  valley  capping 
the  hills  in  the  vicinity  of  Lonaconing  and  Frostburg.  The  soils 
closely  resemble  the  other  soils  of  the  area.  They  consist  of  sandy 
and  clay  loams,  yellow  in  color  and  rarely  exceed  20  inches  in  depth. 
They  are  not  cultivated  to  any  great  extent.  Oats,  corn,  rye  and 
potatoes  are  grown  upon  them,  but  the  yields  are  not  very  large. 

ALLUVIAL  SOILS. 

The  alluA^al  soils  found  in  Allegany  county  include  those  areas  of 
river-deposited  sediment  found  along  the  principal  streams  of  the 
county.  Such  soils  vary  greatly  in  texture,  composition  and  agri- 
cultural value,  depending  largely  upon  the  size  of  the  streams  and 
the  materials  from  which  these  soils  are  derived.  These  soils  belong 
to  the  pleistocene  period,  although  many  areas  of  alluvial  soils  are  still 
in  process  of  formation  and  are  subject  to  change  with  the  overflows 
of  the  various  streams  along  which  they  occur.  The  area  southwest 
of  Cumberland,  on  the  Xorth  Branch  of  the  Potomac  river,  is  prob- 
ably the  most  important  area  found  in  the  county  and  many  large  and 
prosperous  farms  are  located  there.  Along  Evitts  Creek  and  the 
Potomac  at  Xorth  Branch  Station  there  are  large  areas  which  are 
profitably  cultivated,  while  many  areas  of  less  importance  are  found 
along  the  smaller  streams  of  the  county. 

In  the  areas  mentioned  the  soils  vary  in  texture  from  gravelly 
loam,  composed  of  large  rounded  gravel  mLxed  with  sand  and  clay,  to 
heavy  clay  loams  which  are  derived  from  the  decomposition  products 
of  shaly  limestones  and  fine-grained  sandstones.  Alluvial  soils  are 
usually  regarded  as  fertile  soils  on  account  of  the  rather  high  per- 
centage of  organic  matter  they  contain  and  the  thorough  mixture  of 
the  various  rock  particles  which  compose  them. 


MAKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


213 


The  soils  in  the  valley  southwest  of  Cumberland  and  along  Evitts 
Creek  are  mainly  derived  from  the  wash  of  limestone  hills  and  closely 
resemble  rich  fertile  soils  derived  from  pure  limestone.  These  soils, 
from  their  position,  rarely  suffer  from  drought  in  dry  seasons,  and 
therefore  are  well  adapted  to  grass  and  corn,  while  wheat  does  fairly 
well  on  the  better  drained  bottom-lands.  Many  of  these  soils  suffer 
from  the  lack  of  undergroimd  drainage,  and  thorough  drainage  shoxild 
be  the  first  step  in  their  cultivation.  Wheat  on  these  heavy  lands 
has  a  tendency  to  disease  and  makes  a  coarse,  rank  growth  of  straw, 
while  grass  succeeds  quite  well  and  large  crops  are  made  every  year. 

Along  the  larger  streams  the  distinction  between  first  and  second 
bottoms  is  made.  The  first  bottom  usually  refers  to  the  lowest  land 
lying  along  the  stream,  while  the  second  bottom  refers  to  a  distinctly 
higher  terrace  sloping  gradually  back  to  the  hills.  The  first  bottoms 
are  usually  considered  the  better,  although  the  crops  are  subject  to 
overflow  during  almost  any  season  of  the  year.  The  second  bottoms 
are  generally  "  spouty '"'  or  "  springy,"  and  during  the  spring  and 
early  summer  they  are  apt  to  be  wet  and  i;nfit  for  cultivation. 

Alluvial  soils  which  are  subject  to  overflow  may  have  thick  de- 
posits of  sand  or  gravel  left  upon  them  in  times  of  high  water,  or  the 
rich  fertile  loam  may  be  entirely  swept  away  during  times  of  flood. 
Along  the  smaller  streams  there  may  be  small,  local  areas  where  the 
streams  have  cut  wide  valleys.  Such  areas  make  good  farm-land, 
but  generally  along  the  small  streams  the  deposits  consist  mainly  of 
coarse  sand,  gravel  and  even  masses  of  huge  boulders.  These  coarse 
deposits  are  of  little  or  no  agricultural  value. 


214 


THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


ill 

•JI!8 

!i 

I''  r  ct. 

5.42 

9.51 
10.90 
13.63 

0..52 
8.8.T 
8.30 

12.37 
15.. 50 
'  7.98 
6.40 
4.95 
8.33 
6.32 

3.95 
5.16 
3.61 
12.63 
7.97 

6.46 
7.82 
6.03 

-HIS 

ii 

Per  ct. 

22.62 
17.07 

33.49 
15.64 
18.00 

23.81 
33.74 
12.90 

23.98 
32.33 
37.15 
20.39 
22.87 
20.11 
9.57 

9.89 
19.79 
14.20 
22.52 
29!  08 

24.07 
20.13 
31.85 

•pires 

!:i 

•PUM 

ii 

Perot. 

20.01 
22.17 

3.90 
3.57 
4.30 

13.33 
3.00 
4.40 

5.35 
.3.37 
8.70 
8.07 

3.92 
1.18 

41.72 
20.40 
20.07 
13.91 
9.90 

9.03 
10.32 
12.01 

•piTBS 

nimpDK 

tl 

Per  ct. 

13.70 
15.07 

■1..S2 
1.11 

4.53 
3.43 
4.08 

■1.08 
1.10 
1.20 
2.90 

.02 
1.02 

.07 

7.19 
9.21 
7.12 
9.38 
4.31 

2.19 
1..S9 
2.. 50 

n 

1    L-i  ~     d  0  X        «■        «  -  •  ^  •           ci  0  «•  «•  si     ^  ■  ^ 

•13AWO 

si 

Per  ot. 

3.93 
.82 

7.32 
1 5.. 50 

8.70 

.40 
4.07 
3.20 

7.80 
trace 
.25 
trace 
.36 
.75 

1.38 
3.25 
3.57 
1.00 
1.81 

1.24 
.98 
1.20 

'J9DBII1 

oia«3jo 

1.97 
3.80 

5.42 
7.87 
4.63 

2.68 
8.77 
4.00 

.5.06 
4.80 
4.30 
8.86 
4.28 
.5.20 
.5.21 

1.54 
2.32 
3.64 
3.72 
3.50 

4.62 
7.00 
8.28 

Xap-aiB 
ni  ojnjsioiv 

^     •  ^                                    K  5i  ^     ■  •  ■  ■  ^  r^^si 

I 


12 


II 


1 
.= 

£  n  £ 

g  5  S 

s:  O  as 


^  „         —  X  cj     r:  •M  5J 

oto^ot  man 


il 
51 

in 

=  «  g 


=  =  =  « 


I 

Jill- 
5  *  ^  ^ 

s: c  c  :^  c  c 


g  g 


i  2  s  2 


•3 

.  =  :  :    §  :  =  H  c 

iil^illllllJll  i! 


=  =  °r  a 

"I 


.3 

-  i 


Pi 

re  r:  n 


e      is  S  is  ~.  = 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  STJKVEY  215 


•Ws   j  S  g 


c:  —  a:      —  X 


00  o: 


9UI}       ~-  S 


(M  O 

d  «i 


•ptres 


^1  q 


•pUBS       CI  C 

ninipare    ^  g 


n  ?j  « 


•poBS 
8SJBO0 


"f-a 


^  L"  cj  in  i-H 


*n 

oo'  oi 


o 

oi  CO 


Ah 


(M  t-  cc  ;o  •*  cc 


CO          o  o 

(N     II  ?J  »  N 

I   I  I  I  I  I 

X  O  X  Tl  O  X 


*^  -i^  "t^ 
—  03  — 
^   O  S 


OD  ■ 


o  5= 


CO 


cQ  m 

03   03   ?  ' 

tri     b<  '.v 

SlO  iX  g 

a"  a'  oT"  a  a 
1.  t.  *j  H  ^ 

o  o  =3  o  o  o 
O  O  O  S  O  O 


5  i£  i£ 


X  C^! 
I  I 

o  X 


E  E 


o  a 

c  o 
J-  & 

e  a 

o  c 
O  O 


X  CJ 

I  I 


—  X  05 
I  I  I 
X  O  X 


^  3 
1^ 
■Si 

c3 

O  - 
ei 

oT  » 
§1 

b  a 
CP 


'I  a 


o  t- 


o  o 

I  I 
X  o 


c  - 


> 

i  ^ 


3  c 


s  ■ ; 

2  ^ ' 


9  A 


c5  ta  ?  cd  o  c 

X  *-H  07  CC 

00  —  000 

in  O  *n  *n  in  ift 

CC  CO  M  CO  CC  CQ 


>1 

>> 

a 

a 

3 

c 

0 

CJ 

0 

5M 

Z 

0 

p 

m 

si 

sS 

la 

;0 
'  *-( 

.  o  / 

;  02 
i  . 

1  E 


E 


c 


a3g^-^-33-r; 
a  a 


So  3l     if  ic 


2  £  £ 

<tH  StH  !t-l 

W  63  W 


,a  2i 
.  > 


cot-  CO  >— '  GOirrtc  t-io 
t-ic      t-c:      CO0O3O  csci 

ccco      cccc     cococc  cow 


216  THE  SOILS  OF  ALLEGANY  COU^'TY 


IS'  o 


—  00 

i/i  t— 


^  —  —  CJ 


«     tc  o 


CU 


^  ^ 


1-1       Oi  y-> 


•pUBS 

SB 

53           si     —     c;            ;c     tc     ^      t-'     0;     -r     «'     1-'  05 

(2     M      iM      ;i  - 

•puss 
innipaK 

(^IB 

■S            c      -f     c:      X      m     If      1-     L-:     ec     t-     c  — 
tt            J-     -r            -*     to     ec            irf            CO     —  -)■' 

•pnFS 

0     Jc            •'■     sj     <ri            cc     ci     K     x'            —     r;  — 

•I9ABJIO 

'Ta 

I'cr  ct. 
1.16 
2.30 

2.!>5 
2.19 
3.66 
3.27 
2.86 
1.48 
10.53 
3.31 
3.03 

1.31 

OIUBajQ 


'aidniBS  a 

..{jp-JIB  fc, 

HI  9anisio]<  ~ 


—     —  n 


—     _     ^  « 


E 

§     =  5  - 

I    7  -  "1 

a     o  ^  £. 

g    =:  o  d 

o  o  J 

^  (A 

i  s  s 


a:  — 


cj       _  .- 


=  B 

—  .2 

I  ^ 

S  V 


a>  "-5 

CD  C3 

E 

O 


s 
o 


'89idniBS 


—     S5  ec 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

BY 

OLIVER  L.  FASSIG 


Introduction. 

So  variable  are  the  elements  of  the  weather  in  an  inland  region  in 
our  latitudes  that  many  years  of  continuous  observations  of  tempera- 
ture and  rainfall  are  required  to  obtain  an  accurate  average  value. 

To  obtain  a  value  for  tJie  mean  annual  temperature  correct  within 
1°  Fahrenheit  requires  from  twenty  to  thirty  years  of  daily  obser- 
vations. In  the  tropics  near  the  ocean,  where  weather  conditions  are 
more  uniform,  an  equally  accurate  value  may  be  obtained  from  four 
or  five  years  of  observations. 

Allegany  county  is  particularly  fortunate  in  the  possession  of  a 
long  series  of  valuable  observations  of  climatic  conditions.  One  of 
the  first  objects  to  claim  the  attention  of  Professor  Joseph  Henry, 
after  the  establishment  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  in  184:9,  was 
the  organization  of  an  extensive  network  of  stations  for  recording 
weather  conditions,  and  collecting  facts  for  the  study  of  American 
storms.  Professor  Henry  soon  succeeded  in  enlisting  the  services  of 
a  devoted  body  of  intelligent  observers.  Among  the  early  and  faith- 
ful members  of  this  system  was  Mr.  Edwin  Thomas  Shriver  of  Cum- 
berland. Mr.  Shriver  began  the  daily  reading  of  the  thermometer, 
and  his  observations  of  wind  and  weather,  in  January  of  1859.  With 
splendid  persistence,  and  with  the  true  spirit  of  devotion  to  science, 
he  continued  his  daily  observations  uninterruptedly  for  thirty-seven 
years.  In  1871  the  measurement  of  rainfall  was  added  to  his  record. 
The  last  report  of  Mr.  Shriver,  for  January,  1896,  made  a  month 
before  his  death,  was  as  complete  as  those  of  his  early  days.  Few 
individual  records  of  the  weather  in  this  country  can  compare  with 


218 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


those  of  Mr.  Shriver  in  completeness  and  continuity.  But  two 
records  in  Maryland  are  longer.  Frederick  has  a  continuous  record 
from  about  1821,  but  made  by  numerous  observers;  Baltimore  has  a 
record,  though  not  entirely  continuous  and  made  imder  diflFerent 
auspices,  beginning  in  1817.  To  Cumberland  belongs  the  distinction 
of  having  the  longest  continuous  record  in  ^Maryland  made  by  a  single 
observer. 

The  topography  of  Allegany  county  is  described  in  detail  else- 
where in  this  volume.  It  is  desirable  here  to  bear  in  mind  only  the 
most  general  topographic  features.  The  county  is  in  the  heart  of 
the  Alleghany  mountain  system;  its  surface  is  made  up  of  parallel 
ranges  rising  in  places  to  elevations  of  nearly  .3000  feet,  and  extend- 
ing northeast  and  southwest.  The  valleys  are  narrow.  The  popula- 
tion of  the  county  is  mostly  in  the  valleys,  largely  along  the  Potomac 
river,  at  elevations  varying  between  700  feet  and  1000  feet  above 
sea-level.  Cumberland,  Boettcherville,  Westernport,  Flintstonc,  and 
Oldtown  are  all  under  1000  feet  elevation  and  have  appro.ximately 
similar  climatic  conditions.  The  annual  and  monthly  values  for  tem- 
perature and  rainfall  at  all  of  these  stations,  as  showTi  by  accompany- 
ing tables,  agree  very  closely  with  the  normal  values  obtained  from 
Mr.  Shriver's  long  record  for  Cumberland,  after  making  due  allow- 
ance for  the  short  periods  of  observation.  The  climate  of  Cumber- 
land represents  very  well  the  climate  of  the  valleys  of  Allegany 
coimty. 

Climatic  conditions  change  rapidly  with  change  in  elevation.  In 
round  numbers  the  mean  temperature  falls  1°  Fahrenheit  for  every 
300  feet  in  elevation  above  the  surface  of  the  earth.  A  similar  fall 
in  the  mean  temperature  is  experienced,  at  sea-level,  in  the  Middle 
Atlantic  states,  by  traveling  northward  about  40  miles.  To  state  the 
same  fact  in  another  way:  Frostburg,  at  an  elevation  of  about  1500 
feet  above  Cumberland,  should  have  a  mean  annual  temperature  of 
about  5°  Fahrenheit  less  than  that  at  Cumberland,  or  about  48°. 
A  similar  fall  in  the  mean  annual  temperature  is  met  with  in  going 
northward  from  Cumberland,  across  the  state  of  Pennsylvania,  into 
the  soTithern  portions  of  Xew  York  state. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


At  the  present  time  we  have  but  little  over  one  vear's  observations 
for  Frostburg,  a  period  totalh'  inadequate  to  establish  a  reliable  mean 
value  for  the  annual  temperature.  The  mean  annual  temperature 
obtained  for  the  period  from  September,  1898,  to  August,  1899,  is 
50.7°  Fahrenheit.  During  this  period  the  temperature  at  neigh- 
boring stations  was  about  1.5°  above  normal;  substracting  this  amount 
from  50.7°,  we  have  49.2°  as  a  closer  approximation  to  the  normal 
value  for  Frostburg.  Probably  a  still  more  accurate  value  would 
be  the  mean  for  five  years  of  observations  made  at  the  neighboring 
station  of  Grantsville,  in  Garrett  county,  which  has  about  the  same 
elevation  as  Frostburg  and  is  bi;t  a  few  miles  to  the  north.  This  is 
48°. 

Temperature. 

The  climatic  factor  of  most  concern  to  us,  viewed  from  the  stand- 
point of  personal  comfort,  is  the  variability  of  the  temperature  in 
our  vicinity.  In  tables  and  diagrams  here  presented,  may  be  found 
the  average  annual  and  monthly  values  for  all  stations  established  in 
Allegany  coimty,  the  mean  daily  variation,  the  mean  monthly  varia- 
tion, and  the  absolute  extremes  of  temperature.  In  Table  I  may  be 
found  the  results  of  Mr.  E.  T.  Shriver's  extremely  valuable  record 
of  the  temperature  at  Cumberland  for  thirty-seven  years.  The  nor- 
mal mean  temperature  for  the  year  is  51.5°;  the  annual  average 
has  varied  between  the  limits  of  19.1°  in  1867  and  54.6°  in  1893. 
The  mean  monthly  temperatures  have  a  range  varying  from  18°  dur- 
ing the  wiuter  months  to  less  than  10°  during  the  summer  months. 
January  is  the  month  of  greatest  variation,  with  February  a  close 
second,  while  August  is  decidedly  the  month  of  least  variation. 

Table  II  presents  the  mean  monthly  and  annual  temperatures  for 
each  station  in  Allegany  county  at  which  observations  have  been  made 
during  a  period  of  one  jea.r  or  more.  The  average  daily  range,  the 
average  monthly  range,  and  the  absolute  maximum  and  minimum 
values  are  also  shown.  In  the  valleys  the  average  daily  range  of 
temperature  is  about  24°,  at  Frostburg  the  average  daily  range  is 
but  21°. 


220 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


TABLE  I.— MONTHLY  AND  ANNUAL  MEAN  TEMPERATURES 
AT  CUMBERLAND  FROM  1859-1895. 

Recobd  of  E.  T.  Sbriver. 


Year 

Jan. 

Feb. 

Har. 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 

I 

Sept. 

Oct 

I 

Nov. 

Dec. 

S 

B 
< 

1859. . 

31.4 

34.9 

rt  1 .0 

f\9  rt 

A7  J. 

7rt  ft 

1 

AQ  1 
Dlf.  1 

A*?  T 

=\rt  A 

Olf .  D 

I 

'  4.^  *; 
40. 0 

04.0 

9 1.0 

1860, . 

33.4 

ox,  § 

to.o 

'irt  J. 

fij.  1 
U-i.  1 

Aft  J. 

7rt  J. 

Aft  A 

^Q  7 

Kt\  7 

4.0  ft 

00. 0 

^1  A 

1861 

30.6 

U  7 

J.1 

rsl .  0 

■iO.  0 

•>•>. •? 

71  ft 

79  A 

<  70  tt 

A4.  ft 

if 

4.4.  ^ 
44.  •> 

^4.  7 
04.  f 

04.0 

1862 

32  9 

^ft  J. 

4.fi  rt 

AO  A 

70  4. 

7rt  ft 

*»Q  4. 

^  ft 
00.0 

4.0  rt 

^4  1 

ou.o 

1  AR^ 

0 1 .  *> 

^j.  =; 
0 

J.K  J. 

j;ft  J. 

AA  ± 
DO,-* 

7J.  ft 

7^  4 

0 1 . 0 

44  1 
40. 1 

Q4  ft 
00. 0 

'^rt 

1864 

30.3 

32  2 

Q=;  0 
»>•*. 

^*).  L 

7rt  A 

7rt 

74.  rt 

7rt  Q 
<  If  .Sf 

=;rt  A 

4.0  Q 

rt 

00.  D 

•^rt  7 
•f  U.  f 

1865 

— 4 

4.1  7 

=irt 

7J.  Q 

1  "T.  .f 

74 

AQ  A 

1 

1  Ui 

4.ft  0 

4.1  A 
4  1.0 

*14  rt 

04.  U 

0  l.o 

1  Mftft 
1  oou .  . 

31  4 

97  Q 

•>  1 . 0 

71  1 
i  1.  i 

70  ^ 

0  ( .If 

A4  4. 

=il  4 

4if,  »f 

07 

4.Q  ft 

1  ftK7 

11  7 

»jO.O 

J.O  rt 

K±  rt 

AQ  Q 

0«f  .  if 

7rt  Q 
<  If .  «f 

AQ  Q 

Oif  ,  if 

AO  ^ 

4.ft  rt 
4o.U 

4.0  0 

4rt  ft 

1  ftAK 
lOOO, , 

.60.  w 

')•>  4. 

AQ  ft 

7=;  0 

AQ  7 

AO  ^ 

4ft  Q 

4.1  0 
4  1. « 

^Irt  7 
OU.  I 

4.Q  7 

1869 

36  4 

O.J.  1/ 

J. 

J.7  A 
*x  1 .0 

=ift  4. 

Aft  f\ 

7A 
1  If. 

71  rt 

AO  rt 

O'iS.  If 

OD.  0 

ft 

00.0 

^rt  ^ 

1 R70 

lO  4  U .  . 

10  7 

00.  V 

4  if.  « 

1Q  J. 

AO  ^ 

7rt  7 

62  9 

4.1  0 
41 

^  rt 

^irt  ^ 

LO  1  1  >  . 

in  7 

J.1  J. 

llf  .0 

AO  rt 

AQ  0 

0  if. 

7^  A 
1  0. 0 

/»^.  / 

A1  1 

0  JL.  1 

^4  1 

4.rt  K 

Olf .  0 

*il  4. 
•9  1.4 

1  S7*> 

30 

111 

0  0 .  .2 

=i1  ft 

A^  Q 
00.  if 

70  rt 

7A  A 
10,0 

7 

AA  4. 

=;o  A 

^ft  ft 
00.0 

97  Q 

M  7 
01.  1 

1  RT'-t 
1  O  I  o .  . 

QO  Q 
•J-..  0 

=i1  7 

A1  ^ 
01.0 

70 

74.  rt 

710 

A4  <! 

^0  Q 
0  ^ .  if 

QQ  rt 

^7  A 
0  I  .D 

^1  Q 

0  1  .  if 

1874 . 

36  0 

36  I 

J.1  J. 

A*>  rt 

7J.  rt 

71  .1 

AQ  A 

A7  rt 

53  0 

4.rt  rt 
4Vf .  V 

35  0 

^9  ft 

1875. . 

29  0 

05  2 

30  0 

J.7  rt 

A^  rt 

7  1  rt 

70  rt 

AQ  rt 

Dif.U 

63  0 

50  Q 

4.rt  rt 
4if .  V 

^7  rt 

AQ  ft 

38  0 

00,  .J 

00.  •> 

J.Q  rt 

AO  rt 

7'^  rt 
#  •>.  U 

7A  rt 
f  0.  If 

7Q  rt 

AO  rt 

4.Q  rt 

4  if  .  \J 

4.1  rt 
41.  D 

00  e; 

't9  rt 

1R77 

ID  n 

38  0 

^7 

=il  0 
0 1 .  '2 

OiJ.O 

AQ  rt 

0  if.  1/ 

7^  rt 
1  0.  If 

7rt  rt 

A"^  rt 
DO.  If 

KK  A 
00,  D 

4.1  A 
41. D 

4.rt  rt 

4v.  If 

^9 

1  S7J4 

29  0 

ifi  ft 

OQ.  V 

•iD.  If 

rt 

00.  u 

rt 

0-7.  •> 

7A  4. 

74.  rt 

A4.  rt 

=ia  rt 

4.9  rt 
4*.  If 

9ft  rt 

<dO.D 

:^9  X 

1  ftTQ 
lO  f  If  .  . 

*>7  0 

rt 

E\rt  rt 
ou.  u 

AO  rt 

A7  rt 

74.  rt 

AO  rt 

Art  rt 

^Q  rt 
0  i*.D 

4. 1  rt 

4  I.U 

*17  rt 

t^l  rt 

1880. . 

39.0 

36.2 

38.5 

53.0 

69.0 

71.0 

70.0 

63.0 

50.0 

S5.0 

.51.5 

1881. . 

2.5.0 

27.5 

37.0 

57 

65.0 

67.5 

73.5 

75.0 

70.0 

00.0 

43.0 

33.5 

52.H 

1882. . 

33.3 

37.9 

42.7 

50.5 

57.0 

69.1 

71.4 

69.0 

65.0 

55.8 

41.0 

31.2 

52.0 

1883. . 

37.0 

33.4 

35.0 

48.0 

62.5 

69.9 

72.9 

fJS.5 

62.3 

53.9 

36.0 

.52.0 

1884. . 

26.6 

36.3 

40.8 

49.6 

61.4 

68.7 

70.5 

70.0 

6S.0 

56.8 

41.9 

33.2 

52.0 

1885. . 

29.0 

25.9 

33.1 

50.4 

60.0 

68.8 

74.5 

70.0 

63.0 

51.0 

42.6 

a5.4 

50.3 

1886. . 

25.0 

29.9 

40.2 

54.8 

61.4 

67.2 

70.8 

70.5 

65.3 

54.2 

41.1 

29.1 

.50.8 

1887. . 

28.6 

36.4 

35.0 

49.2 

65.8 

69.6 

70.2 

62.0 

50.0 

39.8 

32.9 

51.4 

1888. . 

26.6 

32.8 

3o.  i 

50.3 

60.2 

70.2 

70.3 

69.2 

59.3 

4S.0 

42.8 

33.6 

49.9 

1889.. 

34.7 

28.0 

41.9 

52.8 

62.9 

67.2 

73.6 

69.2 

64.0 

49.5 

41.8 

4^h2 

.52.4 

1890. . 

40.7 

40.0 

36.3 

51.8 

61.4 

72.6 

73.9 

69.8 

63.2 

52.7 

44.3 

31.8 

53.2 

1891.  . 

33.2 

38.0 

35.9 

54.2 

60.9 

70.1 

lis.  7 

70.5 

67.1 

51.5 

40.9 

39.6 

52.6 

1892.  . 

30.0 

34.5 

35.7 

49.3 

62.3 

73.3 

72.9 

75.2 

64.0 

52.6 

41.0 

31.6 

51.9 

1893. . 

2.5.3 

32.8 

42.6 

55.3 

64.3 

75,1 

77. 7 

74.0 

66.0 

56.7 

44.6 

40.6 

r.4.0 

1894.  . 

35.0 

31.2 

44-^* 

51.0 

63.2 

72.2 

75.2 

70.8 

68.8 

55.0 

38.6 

33.0 

53.2 

1895. . 

26.0 

22.0 

37.8 

52.0 

62.2 

72.2 

70.3 

74.0 

70.0 

48.8 

42.8 

33.9 

51.0 

Means 

30.8 

32.2 

38.0 

I 

50.3 

60.9 

70.1 

73.1 

71.1 

64.2 

52.3 

41.4 

33.5 

51.5 

Range 

1S.3 

18.0 

16.4 

12.6 

13.1 

9.8 

11.0 

7.2 

1L8 

14.4 

9.7 

17.2 

5.5 

Note.— Obserxations  prior  to  .July.  IfTl,  were  made  at  8  A.  M.  dailj-.  and  reduced  to 
true  mean.    After  that  date  ob8er^•ations  were  made  at  7  A.  M.,  2  P.  M.  and  9  P.  M. 


jiaeylajStd  geological  survey 


221 


•aSuru 
a>niosqy 

Si     ~     -  S 

•nmratniin 
ajn|osqy 

■  T  T  T  T  7    •  T 

•mnmixBin 

1^      X       -f  -* 

aSBjaAY 

X      X      c              •  in 

1-  • 

aSBia.vv 

JO  -ON 

I-        O        X                  T!        —  >- 

'IBnauv 

51.5 

55.3 
51  .8 
51  .5 
52.0 
50.7 
50 .  H 

53.5 

•jaqmaoaa 

o     o     •—     -t     i~  — .  o 
«     00         ■    ?J      ec      "  o"> 

•jaqinaAOK 


O  Tl*  Tl< 

>-l  —  t- 


o 

05 

IS 

t- 

■jaqcjoQ 

o 

X 

•jaqinajdag 

-* 

52 

CO 

o 

s 

^  o 

•.tlTlf 


•annf 


o     o  o 


•Iiady 


■qoJBlvC 


•jiJBnjqajC 


•^jBnuBC 


3C 


222 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


The  highest  temperature  ever  officially  recorded  in  Allegany 
county  and  also  in  the  state  of  Maryland,  is  109°,  the  inaximuin  of 


jfm»m-ij»sono 


110° 


+•10 


-  10 


-20 


Fig.  (J. 

(a)  Absolute  maximum  temperatures  in  AUegany  County. 
(6)  Average  maximum  temperatures  in  Allegany  County, 
(c)  Normal  temperatures  in  Allegany  County. 
id)  Average  minimum  temperatures  in  Allegany  County, 
(e)  Absolute  minimum  temperatures  in  Allegany  County. 


July  3,  189S,  reported  by  Mr.  F.  F.  Brown  of  Boettchervillo,  near 
Cumberland.    On  the  13th  of  February  of  the  following  year  a 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


223 


temperatlue  of  — 22°  Fahrenheit  was  reported  from  Frostburg,  the 
lowest  officiallv  recorded  within  the  limits  of  Allegany  county. 

The  occurrence  of  the  absolute  maximum  and  absolute  minimum 
of  temperature  for  Allegany  coimty  within  the  short  period  of  two 
successive  seasons  is  a  striking  coincidence,  and  has  probably  fixed 
the  absolute  range  of  temperature,  131°,  for  this  county  for  many 
years  to  come.  The  records  for  the  highest  and  for  the  lowest  tem- 
peratures were  broken  throughout  the  state  on  these  dates. 

The  fluctuations  in  temperature  from  year  to  year  at  Cumberland 
from  1859  to  1895  are  graphically  shown  in  Figure  7.  From  1861 
to  1871  the  mean  temperature  was  continuously  below  the  average, 
while  from  1872  to  1884  and  from  1889  to  1894  it  was  above,  ex- 
cepting for  the  years  1875  and  1879. 


Vear  i860         1865  i870  1875  1880         -1885  1890  1895" 


Fig.  7. — Fluctuations  in  mean  annual  temperature  at  Cumberland. 


Rainfall. 

The  rainfall  record  for  Allegany  county  begins  with  August,  1871, 
and  extends  to  the  present  time  without  interruption.  The  record 
from  1871  to  December,  1895,  is  that  of  Mr.  E.  T.  Shriver. 

In  1840  Mr.  T.  L.  Patterson  kept  a  record  of  the  rainfall  at  Cum- 
berland for  nearly  one  year,  in  connection  with  the  construction  of 
the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal. 

In  Table  III  we  have  the  results  of  the  long  series  of  observations 
for  Cumberland  extending  over  a  period  of  twenty-seven  years.  The 
maximum  and  minimum  amounts  of  rainfall  for  each  month  and  for 
the  year  are  in  italics,  to  show  more  clearly  the  fluctuations.  The 
variations  are  graphically  shown  in  the  diagrams  of  Figaires  8  and  9. 

At  the  valley  stations,  Cumberland,  Boettcherville,  Westemport, 


224 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


and  Flintstone  the  annual  rainfall  is  approximately  34  inches.  We 
have  at  present  but  little  more  than  one  year's  observations  of  rainfall 
at  the  high-level  station  at  Frostburg.  From  September,  1898,  to 
August,  1899,  the  rainfall  measured  47. G6  inches  at  this  place. 
During  the  same  period  the  fall  at  Cumberland  was  about  38.74 


TABLE  in.— RAINFALL  AT  CUMBERLAND,  1871-189.5. 
Record  of  E.  T.  Shrivek. 


Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

_- 
d 

3 
B 

c 

< 

?  '^0 

3.40 

6.30 

3  3.5 

I/.  /  'J 

O.nO 

1.30 

2.80 

2.60 

2.70 

3.00 

2.90 

4.30 

1.30 

2.10 

21.05 

2.90 

2.30 

4.30 

4.40 

4.90 

3.80 

0.40 

2.00 

1.30 

1.10 

32.50 

1.80 

G.r,o 

1.50 

1.70 

4.00 

2.80 

2.10 

0.80 

1.80 

1.10 

28.90 

2.20 

1.30 

3.90 

4.60 

6.10 

2.50 

1.30 

3.80 

2.40 

39.. 50 

4.00 

1.30 

1.60 

3.30 

4.60 

0.90 

8.20 

0.60 

1.90 

1.30 

30.60 

3.30 

2.20 

1.90 

2.90 

4.60 

1.30 

2.20 

3.70 

.5.10 

0.80 

39.40 

2.60 

2. 10 

1.70 

3.90 

3.70 

1.70 

1.30 

3.30 

3.30 

2.70 

39.70 

1.40 

O.GO 

1.10 

1.90 

4.10 

4.60 

1.00 

2.00 

2.10 

3.40 

32.50 

4.17 

3.44 

3.34 

5.84 

3.  .35 

1.62 

2.30 

2.13 

2.43 

3.45 

3.3.99 

1.74 

1.72 

1.39 

5.22 

3.83 

0..?/ 

2.09 

2.05 

1.33 

4.r>o 

39.  .53 

4.  .50 

4.. 53 

3.80 

3.08 

3.05 

s.ou 

tiJiO 

1.31 

1.44 

1.10 

45.98 

2.20 

2.57 

4.73 

5.38 

4.05 

1.46 

2.59 

3.09 

0.87 

1.75 

33.39 

5.14 

1.96 

5.33 

3.33 

4.61 

1.49 

0.93 

1.98 

0.92 

4.25 

35.43 

L30 

1.79 

2.58 

Q.HG 

un 

3.87 

0.75 

4.14 

1.73 

1..55 

25.90 

3.53 

2.18 

3.63 

4.03 

2.87 

3.25 

1.38 

0..50 

4.15 

1.77 

32.00 

1.57 

2.61 

.5.64 

3.87 

.5.-5.9 

1.12 

3.68 

0.39 

0.82 

3.00 

33.97 

3.25 

2.. 56 

3.47 

3.76 

4.34 

8.00 

2.95 

3.60 

2.60 

1..53 

41.06 

3.. 53 

3.22 

7.02 

3.10 

2.74 

1..52 

4.16 

3.84 

1.63 

40.17 

.5.18 

3.58 

7.7.J 

3.07 

1.67 

7.07 

6.77 

6.C.5 

1.83 

3.77 

52.42 

2.02 

2.57 

7.69 

5.17 

3.44 

2.46 

2.21 

2.92 

3.42 

46.29 

2.62 

3.21 

3.31 

W.itS 

1.15 

1.90 

2.36 

<>.2Ji 

3.16 

1.73 

34.66 

1.00 

.3.96 

4.37 

3.13 

1.40 

3.74 

1.97 

4.37 

2.01 

0.80 

30.04 

1.33 

2.41 

6.13 

1.64 

3.23 

1.15 

1.74 

2.25 

0.63 

2.63 

28.12 

2.45 

1.63 

1..52 

4.43 

2.49 

1.81 

0.15 

1.20 

3.51 

23.03 

3.90 

3.49 

3.33 

8.75 

3.36 



3.09 

2.71 

3.45 

2.17 

2.20 

32.86 

Year 


Jan. 


1871  

1873  

1873  

1874  

1875  

1876  

1877  

1878  

1879  

1880  

1881  

1882  

1883  

1884  

1885  

1886  

1887  

1888  

18S9  

1890  

1891  

1892  

1893  

1S94  

1895  


0.55 

2.50 

3.40 

1.00 

1.40 

0.80 

3.90 

1.00 

2.16 

1.98 

3.65 

1.80 

1.85  i 

3.80  ' 

2.90 

0.30  I 

3.01 

1.46 

3.93  . 

3.18 

0.72 

1.22 

3.  .53  , 


Feb. 


0.70 
2.70 
2.40 
1.20 
1.50 
O.GO 
L50 
1.30 
2.76 
3.47 

2.80 
3.64 
3.-52 
1.83 
4.38 
3.15 
3.07 
4.34 
3.99 
2.73 
3.58 
3.76  j 
0.98 


I 

Means  .  .  .  2.16 


inches,  which  is  5.29  inches  above  the  normal  for  Cumberland. 
Allowing  a  similar  excess  for  this  year  at  Frostburg  we  have  42.37 
inches  as  an  approximate  normal  rainfall  for  Frostburg,  or  between 
8  and  9  inches  more  than  at  the  valley  stations.  The  monthly  values 
for  all  stations  are  given  in  Table  IV. 

In  Figure  8b  we  have  a  graphic  representation  of  the  distribution 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


225 


B  UI  Si«p 

.{aiBJ  JO  'OX 


2     ^     S  5 


S    S    g    S  £ 
j3  s  ^  s  ?? 


ff    3  § 

I!  I!' 


I!  — 


•j3qm3AOjj 


—  -r  ^ 

iT.        iT.         ^        a  7Z 

ci     -*     13  d 


$  i  5^  g  ?^  = 

13        13        T3        C    ■    X        T!  13 

'J9qni3:)d3g 

t-      :i             1^      ?.      ^  3 

13'        T3        13        c-'        —        13  ?} 

2     5  S 

jj        ?3        d  CC 


=?    s    5^    £    3  g 


•aunf 


§  s      s  s 

r:  li 


H     S      ^      =      g  f. 
:■:      ir      t      :■:             r:  :•: 

5    §    S    S    5    ^.  5 

53'       13'       13'        ?3        :i'        ?3  J3 

3.    ;E    ~    E    ?.  "Z 

T3       ?t'               -r      I--'  Jl 

S    S    g    5    S    2  s 

?3      K      13             -r      T3  i> 

3.49 
3.45 

:i.no 

4.53 
3.58 

3.43 

g 
>■ 

i  1  i  1  1  1 
g  i  i  i  i  i 

Stations. 

5  e  i 

rs  "c 

1    1     1  1 

1  i  1  1 

5  5  ^  s 

- 

t     -3  t: 

.  1  1  :  i 

1  i  s  1 

i  5  1  1 

15 


226 


THE  CLIMATE  OK  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


of  rainfall  during  the  year  at  Cumberland,  based  on  twenty-seven 
years  of  observations.  The  curve  indicates  a  fairly  well-distributed 
rainfall  throughout  the  year,  with  a  maximum  during  the  summer 
months  and  a  minimum  in  winter,  A  marked  feature  of  the  curve 
is  the  sudden  deflection  downward  during  the  month  of  April,  indi- 
cating a  decrease  in  the  rainfall.  A  similar  diminution  in  the 
amount  of  precipitation  is  shown  in  the  records  for  all  the  stations 
in  Allegany  county. 

Figure  Sc  shows  that  there  has  been  no  period  of  one  mouth  without 
some  rain  at  Cumberland  since  August,  1871,  though  during  Sep- 
tember, 1895,  there  was  but  0.15  inch.  In  this  connection  a  quotation 
from  a  recent  letter  received  from  Mr.  T.  L.  Patterson  of  Cumber- 
Year  i870        1875  1880  1885  1890  1895 


Fig.  8. —  Fluctuations  in  the  mean  annual  rainfall  at  Cumberland. 

land  by  the  writer  is  interesting:  In  1838  there  was  no  fall  of  rain 
here  from  May  until  early  in  October,  excepting  a  smart  shower  on 
the  4th  of  July.  It  was  the  hottest  and  dryest  year  I  have  ever 
known." 

In  Figure  10,  representing  the  average  number  of  rainy  days  dur- 
ing each  month  of  the  year,  we  see  again  a  fairly  equal  distribution  of 
rain  throughout  the  year,  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  weather  in 
regions  traversed  by  cyclonic  storms. 

While  the  amount  and  character  of  the  rainfall  of  Allegany 
county  are  affected  to  a  considerable  extent  by  local  topography,  the 
chief  controlling  factor  is  the  position  of  the  county  with  reference 
to  the  centers  of  passing  cyclonic  storms.  The  rainfall  and  storm- 
paths  have  been  carefully  investigated  for  Maryland  by  Mr.  F.  J. 


MAKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  STJKVEY 


227 


Walz,  the  meteorologist  of  the  Maryland  State  Weather  Service,  and 
the  results  recently  published  in  Volume  I  of  its  reports. 


7" 


6" 


5" 


3" 


0" 


 u 

j 

j 

i  ; 

Vt 

4 

i 

— h 

r/- 

Fig.  9. — Rainfall  at  Cumberland  (averuLces  for  25  years), 
(rt)  Maximum  monthly  amounts. 
(6)  Average  "  " 

(c)  Minimum        "  " 


Figure  10  shows  the  fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  rainfall  from 
year  to  year  at  Cumberland  from  1S72  to  1898,  a  period  of  twenty- 


228 


THE  CI-IJIATE  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


seven  years.  In  Table  IV  the  average  monthly  and  animal  rainfall 
is  given  for  each  station  and  also  the  average  number  of  rainy  days 
during  the  year. 

Description  of  Stations. 
Cumberland. — The  early  observations  of  Mr.  E.  T.  Shriver  were 
made  at  8  A.  M.  daily.  After  1871  he  adopted  the  hours  prescribed 
by  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  namely:  7  A.  M.,  2  P.  M.,  and  9  P.  M. 
The  location  of  the  station  was  near  Washington  and  Allegany  streets. 
The  climatic  factors  recorded  were  temperature,  rainfall,  humidit}-, 
wind  direction  and  force,  cloudiness,  and  the  general  character  of 
the  weather.  After  the  death  of  Mr.  Shriver  the  observations  were 
continued  by  Mr.  "Webster  Bruce  for  about  one  year. 

JFMAMJJ  ASONDJ 


Fig.  10. — Average  number  of  rainy  days  in  tlie  valleys  of  Allegany  County. 

In  May  of  1889  ^Mr.  Howard  Shriver  began  an  elaborate  series  of 
observations  at  his  residence  near  Fayette  and  Smallwood  streets,  and 
has  continued  them  without  interruption  to  the  present  time.  Mr. 
Sliriver's  instrumental  equipment  is  very  complete,  comprising  maxi- 
mum and  minimum  self-registering  thermometers,  exposed  and  wet- 
bulb  thermometers,  a  Draper's  self-recording  thermometer,  a  barom- 
eter, and  a  rain-gage. 

In  comparing  the  two  series  of  temperature  observations  made  in 
Cumberland  during  the  period  of  simultaneous  observations  from 
1889  to  1896,  a  difference  of  nearly  four  degrees  is  observed  in  the 
value  for  the  mean  annual  temperature.  How  much  of  this  discrep- 
ancy may  be  accounted  for  by  difference  in  hours  of  observation,  in 
the  character  of  the  thermometers  used,  and  to  difference  of  exposure. 


10 


5 


MARYXA>-D  GEOLOGICAL  STJKVET 


329 


it  is  difficult  to  determine.  The  monthlv  mean  vahies  of  Mr.  Howard 
Shriver  are  imiformly  from  3°  to  5°  higher  than  those  of  his  brother. 
Tliey  are  also  higher  than  the  reading  at  Boetteherville  and  Western- 
port  by  an  equal  amount.  Comparing  the  mean  daily  maximum 
values  with  those  at  the  neighboring  stations  at  Flintstone  and  AVest- 
ernport  we  find  a  close  agreement.  In  the  minimum  reading-s,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  a  wide  difference,  Mr.  Howard  Shriver's 
values  being  nearly  7°  higher,  as  shown  by  the  following  figures: 

Cumberland.  FUntstone.  Westernport. 

Mean  daily  maximum                           65.1°  64.6°  63.. 5° 

••     minimum                           46.3°  39.4°  39.5° 

"     range                                 18.8°  25.2°  24.0° 

The  discrepancy  in  the  mean  annual  temperature  must  therefore  be 
sought  in  the  readings  of  the  minimum  thermometer. 

The  two  series  of  temperature  observations  at  Cumberland  have 
been  separately  reduced  to  mean  values  in  Table  II. 

BoETTCHERviLLE. — In  1S91  Mr.  Howard  Shriver  loaned  some  of 
his  instruments  to  Mr.  F.  F.  Brown  in  order  to  secure  comparative 
observations  in  a  neighboring  locality.  In  Xovember  of  1891  ^[r. 
Brown  became  a  regular  observer  of  the  Maryland  State  Weather 
Service.  From  1891  to  October,  1897,  temperature  readings  were 
made  daily  at  7  A.  M.  and  2  P.  M.  Since  October,  1897,  Mr.  Brown 
has  used  self-registering  maximum  and  minimum  thermometers.  The 
rainfall  has  been  recorded  regularly  since  Xovember,  1891.  The 
station  is  located  at  Boetteherville,  about  three  miles  to  the  west  of 
Cumberland,  in  the  narrow  east  and  west  valley  of  Braddock  Run, 
and  has  an  elevation  of  780  feet  above  sea-level ;  it  is  at  the  base  of  a 
ridge,  which  rises  abriiptly  to  an  elevation  of  about  1300  feet. 

Westee>-port. — Observations  were  begim  in  Westernport  by  Pro- 
fessor Oliver  H.  Bruce  in  Xovember,  1891:,  and  have  been  continiied 
without  interruption  to  the  present  time.  The  station  is  equipped 
with  a  maximum  and  a  minimiun  self-registering  thermometer  and 
a  standard  rain-gage.  Westernport  is  built  upon  a  slight  eminence  in 
a  valley  entirely  shut  in  l)y  mountains.  The  city  has  an  elevation  of 
about  1000  feet  above  sea-level. 


230 


THE  CLIMATE  OF  ALLEOANT  COUNTY 


Flintstone. — The  station  at  Flintstone  was  established  in  Febni- 
arv  of  1S9G  and  continued  in  operation  a  little  over  two  years.  It 
"Was  ])rovided  with  the  usual  instrumental  equipment  of  the  Maryland 
State  Weather  Service,  nauicly,  a  maximum  and  a  minimum  self- 
registering  thermometer  and  a  rain-gage.  From  February  to  May, 
1896,  observations  were  made  by  Mr.  Newton  T.  Downs,  from  June, 
1896,  to  April  1,  1898,  by  Mr.  Justin  Barkman.  The  town  of  Flint- 
stone  is  closely  hemmed  in  by  mountains,  the  valley  at  this  point 
being  not  over  half  a  mile  wide. 

Frostbukg. — The  station  at  Frostburg  was  established  but  little 
over  a  year  ago  by  ]\Ir.  G.  Cr.  Townsend.  Observations  were  begun 
on  June  1,  ISOS,  and  were  continued,  with  the  assistance  of  Mrs. 
Townsend,  to  the  present  time.  Frostburg  has  an  elevation  of  about 
2100  feet  above  sea-level,  and  is  the  only  active  high-level  station 
within  the  limits  of  Allegany  county.  The  observations  consist  of 
daily  readings  of  the  maximum  and  minimum  thermometers  and  a 
rain-gage.  In  addition  the  direction  of  the  wind  and  state  of  the 
weather  are  recorded. 

The  situation  of  Frostburg,  upon  the  divide  between  Jennings 
Run  and  Georges  Creek,  permits  a  free  movement  of  the  atmosphere 
from  any  direction.  We  have  at  the  present  time  a  little  more  than 
one  year  of  observations.  While  this  record  is  not  sutRcient  to  deter- 
mine definitely  the  character  of  the  climate,  there  is  sufficient  evidence 
to  show  that  conditions  are  distinctly  different  from  those  of  the  lower 
stations. 

Mount  Savage. — We  have  one  complete  year's  record  of  the  tem- 
perature at  !Mount  Savage,  made  by  Mr.  T.  C.  Atkinson  in  1846. 
Mr.  .Vtkinson  reported  to  the  Smithsonian  Institution  the  daily  read- 
ings of  the  thermometer  at  7  A.  ^L,  2  P.  M.,  and  9  P.  M.  Observa- 
tions were  made  at  the  Eyrie  House. 

Oldtowx. — The  record  at  Okltown  covers  but  a  fraction  of  one 
year,  from  May  to  August,  1895,  and  consists  of  readings  of  the 
maximum  and  minimum  thermometei*s  and  the  rain-gage  by  Dr.  H. 
C.  Shipley. 


MAEYLAITD  GEOLOGICAL  STJEVET 


231 


O 

■< 
a 


OS 

»5 
O 

< 
(» 

< 

o 
o 
*A 
o 
PS 
o 


-3 

g 

.4 


it 

si 


I 


El(!Vil- 

tlon, 
in  feet. 

1 

i 

§ 

1,500 

1,000 

II 

O 

o 

1 

o 

o 

o 

r- 

I 

i- 

I 

± 
= 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 

^. 

St 

11 


1 


I 


o:  «5 

00  CO 


ii 


i  i 

1  ^ 


i  i 


IP 
I" 

§1 


|i 


c 

r- 
C 


s 


£ 

I 


MKASUKINC;  \  ILLOCITY  OF  KI\  KK  WATKK  FKOM  BOAT. 
HYDROGRAPHV   OF  ALLEGANV  COUNTY. 


THE  HYDROGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY 
COUNTY 


BY 

F.  H.  NEWELL 


Owing  to  the  peculiar  sbai>e  of  Allegauy  county  a  study  of  its 
hydrography  involves  not  merely  an  examination  of  a  few  small 
streams  but  the  consideration  of  problems  whose  successful  solution 
affects  the  prosperity  of  large  communities  situated  in  several  states. 
The  county,  as  described  in  other  chapters,  extends  along  the  north 
side  of  the  Potomac  river  for  a  distance  of  about  93  miles  following 
the  course  of  the  stream,  and  extending  back  or  northerly  from  it  for 
a  distance  of  from  five  to  fifteen  or  twenty  miles.  For  simplicity  of 
description,  the  name  Potomac  is  here  applied,  not  only  to  the  main 
stream  formed  by  the  junction  of  the  Xorth  and  South  forks  at  a 
point  about  opposite  the  center  of  the  county,  but  also  to  the  Xorth 
Fork  itself  which,  above  this  point,  forms  the  southern  boundaiy  of 
the  area  under  consideration.  The  general  coiirse  of  the  river  is 
easterly,  crossing  the  trend  of  the  ranges  which  make  up  the  moun- 
tain system,  and  the  Potomac  thus  receives  from  the  north  a  con- 
siderable number  of  small  streams  draining  the  narrow  valleys.  Tak- 
ing these  in  order  down  the  stream,  that  is,  from  west  to  east,  the  fii*st 
is  Georges  Creek,  the  only  stream  of  importance  whose  drainage  area 
is  almost  entirely  included  within  the  county;  following  this  are 
Wills  Creek,  Evitts  Creek,  Big  Spring  Pun,  Town  Creek,  15-mile 
Creek,  and,  finally,  Sideling  Creek,  forming  the  eastern  boundary  of 
the  county.  Most  of  these  streams  rise  in  Bedford  county,  Penn- 
sylvania, and  flow  in  a  general  southerly  direction  across  the  narrow 
strip  of  Maryland  constituting  Allegany  coxmty. 


234 


THE  HYDROGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


The  Potomac  and  the  smaller  tributaries  flowing  along  or  within 
the  boundaries  of  Allegany  county  receive  the  run-off  from  precipita- 
tion which  has  fallen  upon  relatively  steep  and  undulating  surfaces 
covered  for  the  most  part  with  woodland  or  scattered  growth  of  trees. 
The  valuable  timber  of  the  original  forest  has  long  since  been  cut 
away,  leaving  the  unmerchantable  wood  or  second  growth.  The 
valleys  and  rounded  hills  have  been  partly  cleared  and  brought  under 
cultivation;  there  are  no  ponds  or  marshes  such  as  occur  in  the  north- 
em  glaciated  regions  of  the  United  States,  and  thus  there  is  little 
to  retain  the  water  in  its  course  from  the  hillsides  to  the  various 
creeks.  The  run-off  is  rapid  and  the  amount  of  water  percolating 
into  the  soil  to  reappear  as  springs  and  to  feed  the  summer  flow  is 
relatively  small.  In  times  of  deficient  rainfall  the  streams  shrink 
rapidly  to  mere  rivulets,  and  this  diminution  in  discharge  has  pre- 
vented the  utilization  of  the  flowing  water  in  the  production  of  power. 

The  principal  industrial  uses  of  the  streams  and  springs  of  the 
region  are  in  town  or  municipal  supply  and  in  manufacturing  opera- 
tions. There  is,  however,  a  large  problem  inseparably  connected 
with  the  study  of  water  resources  which  may  be  considered  as  bear- 
ing on  the  negative  side,  that  is  to  say,  whose  proper  solution  may 
result  in  preventing  injury  to  these  resources  rather  than  promoting 
them;  this  is  the  great  question  of  stream-pollution — one  which  is 
not  only  of  interest  to  the  i>eople  of  the  county,  but  to  all  persons 
resident  along  the  streams  flowing  from  this  area. 

The  matter  of  stream-pollution  within  or  near  Allegany  county 
has  already  become  one  of  public  interest  and  has  even  reached  the 
acute  stage  of  contention  in  the  courts;  it  is  therefore  not  desirable 
to  discuss  the  matter  in  a  way  which  might  be  considered  as  reflecting 
upon  one  side  or  another,  but  to  give  merely  some  of  the  principal 
physical  facts  noted  by  a  reconnaissance  of  the  area.  These  will  be 
given  in  connection  with  statements  regarding  the  quantity  of  water 
found  by  the  measurements  made  at  various  times. 

The  only  systematic  series  of  observations  of  flow  of  water  within 
or  near  Allegany  coiinty  has  been  that  made  at  Cumberland,  the 
results  of  which  have  been  given  from  time  to  time  in  the  reports 


MAEYLAIfD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


235 


of  the  Division  of  Hydrography  of  the  United  States  Geological 
Survey.  Observations  of  river  height  were  begun  on  June  11,  1894, 
at  the  "West  Virginia  Central  Railroad  bridge  about  200  yards  below 
the  dam  on  the  Potomac.  The  gage  was  a  vertical  rod  10  feet 
long,  bolted  to  the  east  end  of  the  abutment  of  the  head-gates  above 
the  dam.  The  channel  consists  of  loose  rocks  and  did  not  change 
notably.  The  discharge  measurements  were  made  from  the  bridge." 
Measurements  were  made  not  only  of  the  discharge  of  the  river  but 
also  of  the  amount  of  water  taken  out  above  the  dam  by  the  feeder 
of  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal.  On  June  5,  1895,  when  there 
were  216  cubic  feet  per  second,  or  second-feet,  in  the  river,  there 
were  in  the  canal  feeder  40  second-feet.  On  June  6  the  river  dis- 
charged 530  second-feet  and  the  canal  feeder  carried  79  second-feet; 
on  June  13  the  river  discharged  149  second-feet  and  the  canal  feeder 
carried  38  second-feet;  on  July  IT  the  river  discharged  266  second- 
feet  and  the  canal  feeder  carried  79  second-feet.°  Measurements 
were  continued  through  1896,  the  results  being  shown  on  pages  22-24 
of  the  Eighteenth  Annual  Report,  Part  IV,  of  the  United  States 
Geological  Survey.'  Observations  were  discontinued  in  November, 
1897.* 

The  following  tables  give  the  daily  gage  height  as  observed  during 
the  years  1895,  1896  and  1897: 

The  heights  of  water  noted  above  show  from  day  to  day  the  eleva- 
tion of  the  surface  of  the  stream  as  noted  upon  an  arbitrary  gage. 
In  order  to  interpret  these  into  quantity  of  flow  it  has  been  necessary 

^  Report  of  Progress  of  the  Division  of  Hydrography  for  the  calendar 
year  1893  and  1894,  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  No.  131,  Washing- 
ton, 1895,  p.  SS. 

'  Report  of  Progress  of  the  Division  of  Hydrography  for  the  calendar 
year  1895,  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  No.  140,  Washington, 
1896,  p.  46. 

'  For  daily  gage  heights,  1896,  see  Water-Supply  and  Irrigation  Paper 
No.  11,  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  Washington,  1897,  p.  8. 

'  Water-Supply  and  Irrigation  Paper  Xo.  15,  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey, 
Washington,  1898,  p.  15;  Report  of  Progress  of  Stream  ^Measurements  for  the 
Calendar  Year  1S9S,  extract  from  the  Nineteenth  Annual  Report,  Part  IV, 
Washington,  1899,  p.  146. 


236 


THE  HYDROGBAPHY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUIfTY 


to  make  a  number  of  measurements  of  the  amount  of  water  passing 
the  given  point.  For  this  purpose  the  locality  has  been  visited  at 
various  dates  given  below,  the  width  of  the  stream  ascertained,  and 
also  its  depth  at  short  intervals  across  from  one  side  to  the  other. 
At  the  same  time  the  speed  with  which  different  parts  of  the  current 


DAILY  GAGE  HEIGHT  OF  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT  CUMBERLAND.  MD.. 

FOR  1895. 


Jan. 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Dec. 

1 

3 

00 

3 

60 

6 

00 

3 

90 

3 

40 

00 

3 

10 

2 

80 

1 

00 

2 

3 

00 

3 

60 

5 

70 

3 

80 

3 

80 

3 

00 

3 

40 

2 

70 

1 

00 

3  

3 

00 

3 

50 

4 

90 

4 

40 

3 

80 

3 

00 

3 

30 

2 

70 

1 

00 

*j 

UU 

q 

Kf\ 
OU 

fid 

•5 

q 

OU 

on 

q 

o 

1  U 

1 

90 

.5  

3 

00 

3 

50 

4 

20 

3 

80 

3 

60 

2 

90 

3 

10 

2 

70 

1 

90 

0  

3 

10 

3 

50 

4 

00 

3 

70 

3 

40 

3 

00 

3 

20 

2 

60 

1 

90 

4 

80 

3 

50 

3 

80 

3 

60 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

20 

2 

60 

1 

80 

8  

6 

00 

3 

.50 

3 

80 

3 

80 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

20 

2 

60 

0 

80 

4 

80 

3 

50 

4 

20 

5 

60 

3 

40 

2 

90 

3 

30 

2 

50 

0 

70 

10  

4 

70 

3 

.50 

4 

00 

5 

50 

3 

20 

90 

3 

70 

50 

0 

50 

11  

4 

10 

3 

50 

4 

00 

4 

70 

3 

20 

2 

90 

3 

40 

I 

40 

0 

50 

13  

3 

80 

3 

40 

3 

80 

4 

70 

3 

70 

2 

80 

3 

20 

40 

0 

60 

3 

50 

3 

40 

3 

80 

3 

90 

3 

70 

2 

80 

3 

20 

I 

40 

1 

10 

U  

3 

50 

3 

40 

4 

.50 

■3 

80 

3 

70 

3 

30 

3 

80 

2 

30 

1 

30 

3 

50 

3 

40 

4 

80 

3 

80 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2 

20 

1 

00 

16  

3 

90 

3 

30 

5 

20 

3 

80 

3 

30 

3 

20 

3 

30 

10 

0 

90 

17  

3 

90 

3 

40 

4 

70 

3 

80 

3 

40 

3 

20 

3 

00 

I 

00 

0 

90 

18  

3 

90 

3 

40 

4 

50 

3 

70 

3 

40 

3 

10 

3 

00 

1 

00 

0 

80 

19  

3 

80 

3 

40 

4 

30 

3 

60 

3 

40 

3 

00 

2 

90 

1 

80 

0 

70 

80 

3 

40 

4 

10 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

00 

2 

90 

1 

70 

0 

50 

3 

40 

3 

SO 

3 

40 

3 

40 

2 

90 

2 

70 

1 

60 

0 

40 

32  

4 

60 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

40 

3 

40 

3 

00 

2 

70 

1 

30 

0 

30 

3.00 

4 

00 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

30 

3 

40 

3 

00 

2 

70 

1 

20 

0 

20 

3.20 

24  

3 

70 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

30 

3 

40 

3 

00 

2 

70 

1 

10 

0 

10 

2.90 

60 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

20 

3 

30 

2 

90 

2 

70 

1 

00 

2.90 

3 

60 

4 

50 

3 

30 

3 
3 

20 

3 
3 

00 

2 

70 

0 

90 

3.00 

27  

3 

50 

4 

10 

4 

30 

3 

30 

30 

00 

2 

70 

0 

90 

2.90 

28  

3 

40 

5 

00 

4 

30 

3 

30 

3 

20 

3 

30 

2 

80 

0 

90 

2.90 

29   

3 

40 

5 

10 

3 

30 

3 

10 

3 

20 

2 

90 

0 

90 

2.90 

30  

3 

70 

4 

50 

3 

40 

3 

10 

3 

00 

2 

90 

0 

80 

3.10 

31  

3 

70 

4 

50 

3 

10 

. 

2 

80 

0 

.90 

3.00 

(a)  Water  5  inches  below  gage.  Readings  discontinued  till  December  33. 


is  moved  has  been  ascertained  by  means  of  suitable  devices  known  as 
current  meters.  These  usually  consist  of  small  wheels  or  turbine 
screws  so  constructed  that  the  flowing  water  causes  them  to  revolve. 
The  rate  of  revolution  of  the  wheel  is  dependent  upon  the  speed  of 
the  water.    Each  revolution  is  made  known  or  recorded  by  suitable 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY.  PLATE  XIX. 


PRICE   ELECTRIC   CURRENT  METERS,   WITH  BUZZERS. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


237 


electrical  device,  and  when  the  relation  between  the  revolution  of 
the  wheel  of  the  cun-ent  meter  and  the  velocity  of  the  stream  has  once 
been  ascertained  it  is  a  relatively  simple  mechanical  matter  to  com- 
pute the  rate  of  flow  at  any  point  across  or  beneath  the  surface  of  a 
river.    The  following  table  gives  in  cubic  feet  per  second,  or  second- 


DAILT  GAGE  HEIGHT  OF  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT  CUMBERLAND,  MD., 

FOR  189G. 


Day 


10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 


Jan  i 
'  1 

Feb. 

Mar. 

Apr.  1 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

1 

2.90 

4. 

60 

3. 

90 

5. 

00 

4. 

50 

3 

60 

3. 

10 

3 

80 

2 

60 

5 

50 

3 

10 

3 

70 

2.90 

4. 

80 

3. 

70 

4. 

80 1 

4. 

50 

3 

50 

3. 

10 

3 

80 

2 

70 

4 

50 

3 

10 

3 

50 

4. 

00 

3. 

00 

4. 

40 

4. 

50 

3 

40 

3 

10 

3 

80 

2 

70 

4 

50 

3 

10 

3 

40 

2.90 

3. 

SO 

3. 

30 

4 

20 

4 

50 

3 

50 

3. 

10 

3 

70 

2 

70 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2.90 

3. 

80 

3. 

10 

3 

80 ; 

3 

40 

3 

30 

3. 

10 

3 

30 

2 

70 

3 

40 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2.90 

3. 

80 

3. 

10 

3 

80 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2. 

9U 

3 

30 

2 

80 

3 

30 

5 

50 

3 

30 

2.90 

4. 

50 

3 

10 

3 

701 

3 

10 

3 

80 

2. 

90 

3 

20 

2 

90 

3 

10 

^ 

50 

3 

30 

3.90 

3 

90 

3 

60 

3 

70l 

3 

00 

3 

70 

2 

90 

3 

30 

2 

90 

3 

10 

3 

80 

3 

30 

3.90 

3 

00 

3 

40 

3 

70' 

3 

00 

3 

40 

3 

10 

3 

40 

2 

90 

3 

10 

3 

80 

3 

30 

2.90 

3 

40 

3 

30 

3 

70| 

3 

00 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

40 

2 

90 

3 

00 

3 

70 

3 

30 

2.90 

3 

10 

3 

30 

3 

70 

o 

90 

3 

40 

3 

40 

3 

30 

2 

SO 

3 

00 

3 

60 

3 

40 

3.00| 

3 

30 

3 

40 

4 

30 

2 

90 

3 

40 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2 

70 

3 

10 

3 

50 

3 

60 

3.00 

4 

90 

3 

10 

4 

30 

3 

50 

3 

20 

3 

10 

3 

10 

2 

90 

3 

10 

3 

50 

3 

40 

3.00 

4 

10 

3 

10 

4 

10 

3 

50 

3 

20 

3 

00 

3 

60 

3 

00 

3 

00 

3 

40 

3 

30 

3 

80 

3 

10 

3 

90 

3 

30 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

50 

3 

10 

8 

00 

3 

20 

3 

30 

3.00 

3 

80 

3 

20 

3 

80 

3 

20 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

30 

3 

50 

3 

00 

3 

10 

3 

30 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

80 1 

3 

10 

3 

70 

00  3 

10 

3 

00 

3 

00 

3 

10 

3 

30 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

70 

3 

40 

4 

10 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

00 

I 

00 

3 

20 

3 

30 

2.90 

3 

20 

3 

50 

3 

50 

3 

50 

3 

70 

3 

10 

90 

3 

00 

90 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2.90 

3 

20 

3 

60 

3 

50 

3 

80 

3 

60 

3 

10 

2 

90 

2 

90 

2 

90 

3 

30 

3 

30 

3.00 

3 

20 

3 

70 

3 

.50 

3 

80 

3 

30 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

00 

3 

10  3 

20 

3 

30 

3.00 

3 

20 

3 

70 

3 

..50 

3 

60 

3 

30 

4 

00 

3 

00 

3 

10 

3 

10 

3 

30 

3 

20 

3.00 

3 

.30 

4 

00 

3 

.30 

3 

40 

3 

20 

4 

70 

3 

00 

3 

10 

3 

10 

3 

30 

3 

20 

3.10 

3 

.10 

3 

90 

3 

.40 

3 

40 

3 

50 

4 

601  3 

.30 

3 

00 

3 

30  3 

40 

3 

20 

3 

.30 

3 

.70 

3 

.50 

3 

50 

3 

50 

10 

00 

3 

00 

3 

00 

3 

70'  3 

30 

3 

30 

3 

.30 

4 

00 

3 

..501 

3 

..50 

3 

.60 

6 

50 

2 

90 

3 

00 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

.30 

3 

.30 

5 

.00 

3 

..50' 

4 

.00 

3 

..50 

4 

70 

2 

.90 

3 

00 

3 

20 

3 

20 

3 

.10 

3.00 

3 

.20 

4 

.50 

3 

.50 

3 

.70 

3 

30 

4 

90!  2 

.90 

2 

90 

3 

.30 

3 

.20 

3 

.10 

3 

.70 

5 

.80 

3 

.50 

4 

.10 

3 

.30 

i 

.501  2 

.90 

2 

90 

3 

.10 

3 

90 

3 

.10 

3.70 

8 

.00 

3 

.401 

4 

.00 

3 

.20 

4 

50|  3 

.90 

10 

00 

10 

4 

.00 

3 

10 

4.20 

6 

.00 

3 

.80 

4 

50 

3 

.10 

3 

.20 

feet,  the  results  of  these  measurements  made  at  various  times  since 
1894.  It  also  shows  the  height  of  water,  the  area  of  the  section  in 
square  feet,  and  the  average  or  mean  velocity  of  the  entire  stream 
at  that  time  and  place. 

From  the  observations  of  height  of  water  and  the  measurements 
of  discharge  made  at  various  times,  rating  tables  have  been  made 


238 


THE  HYDBOGEAPHY  OF  ALLEGAlfY  COUKTY 


giving  approximately  the  amount  of  water  flowing  in  the  stream 
corresponding  to  different  heights  on  the  gage.  This  has  been  con- 
structed by  plotting  upon  cross-section  paper  the  height  of  water  and 
the  discharge  by  the  relative  distance  from  one  side  of  the  drawing; 
in  other  words,  by  plotting  these  points  according  to  rectangular 


DAILY  GAGE  HEIGHT  OF  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT  CUMBERLAND,  MD., 

FOR  18'.)-. 


Day 


Jan.  Feb. 


  3.20 

  3.20 

  3.. 30 

  3.30 

  4.00 

  4.00 

7   3.70' 

8   3.40, 

9   3.30 


10.  , 

11. 

12.  , 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17.  , 

18.  , 
19. 
20.  , 
21. . 
22. 
23.  . 
24. 
25.  . 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29.  . 
30. 
31.  . 


3.40 
3.20 
3.20 
3.20 
3.20 
3.20 
3.20 
3.40 
3.70 
3.. 50 
3.40 
3.40 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 


3. 
3. 
o . 
3. 
3. 
3. 
4. 
4. 
4. 
3. 
3. 
3. 
3. 
4. 
4. 
4, 
4. 
5. 
4. 
3. 
3. 
.50  10 
40  8. 


40 

30 
30 
30 
3.30 
3.30| 
3.30 
3 . 30 


Mar. 


4.00 
3.80 
3.90 
5.20 
4.90 
6.00 
5.00 
4.40 
4.60 
4.20 
4.00 
4.00 
3.90 
3.80 
4.00 
3.80 
3.70 
,00 
.50 
.80 
.60 
20 
4.00 
4.20 
4.10 
4.00 
3.90 
3.80 
3.70 
3.60 
3.60 


Apr. 

May 

June 

July 

Aug. 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

3 

50 

3 

50 

90 

2 

70 

3 

00 

2 

60 

3 

20 

2 

80 

3 

40 

7 

50 

2 

80 

2 

70 

3 

00 

2 

50 

2 

00 

3 

00 

3 

40 

5 

50 

2 

80 

2 

70 

2 

90 

2 

50 

1 

90 

3 

00 

.... 

3 

70 

5 

00 

2 

80 

2 

70 

2 

90 

2 

50 

1 

70 

3 

10   

3 

80 

4 

60 

2 

80 

2 

70 

3 

50 

2 

40 

1 

70 

3 

00   

3 

70 

4 

10 

80 

2 

60 

3 

20 

40 

1 

60 

2 

90   

3 

60 

4 

10 

2 

80 

2 

10 

2 

20 

1 

50 

2 

90'  

5 

20 

"3 

90 

2 

80 

2 

In 

I 

20 

1 

90 

1 

40 

3 

00   

5 

40 

3 

70 

2 

90 

2 

70 

3 

10 

1 

80 

1 

40 

4 

oo!  

4 

50 

3 

70 

2 

70 

2 

70 

3 

00 

1 

80 

1 

.50 

3 

40;  

4 

.50 

3 

60 

2 

70 

2 

80 

3 

00 

1 

70 

1 

30 

40 

4 

10 

4 

00 

2 

70 

2 

90 

2 

90 

1 

60 

1 

30 

3 

30 

.... 

4 

00 

4 

40 

2 

60 

2 

90 

3 

90 

1 

.50 

1 

30 

3 

20 

3 

80 

5 

40 

2 

50 

2 

80 

2 

80 

1 

40 

1 

40 

3 

20 

:::: 

3 

90 

4 

60 

2 

.50 

2 

80 

3 

00 

1 

30 

1 

50 

3 

50 

3 

90 

4 

30 

3 

00 

2 

80 

3 

00 

1 

20 

1 

50 

3 

50 

3 

70 

3 

90 

3 

00 

2 

70 

2 

90 

1 

20 

1 

40 

3 

40 

3 

70 

3 

80 

2 

90 

2 

80 

2 

80 

3 

20 

1 

40 

3 

30 

3 

60 

3 

70 

2 

90 

3 

80 

2 

90 

3 

00 

1 

40 

3 

30 

3 

70 

3 

50 

2 

90 

2 

90 

2 

90 

2 

90 

1 

40 

3 

20 

3 

50 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

20 

2 

90 

2 

80 

1 

40 

3 

30 

3 

30 

3 

00 

3 

00 

2 

90 

2 

70 

1 

30 

3 

30 

3 

30 

2 

90 

3 

00 

2 

90 

2 

60 

1 

30 

3 

30 

3 

00 

2 

90 

3 

00 

2 

90 

2 

80 

1 

50 

3 

20 

3 

00 

3 

00 

3 

00 

2 

90 

3 

00 

1 

60 

3 

10 

3 

00 

2 

90 

3 

90 

3 

00 

3 

00 

1 

60 

3 

00 

3 

00 

2 

90 

3 

20 

3 

00 

2 

90 

1 

70 

3 

00 

3 

00 

2 

90 

3 

10 

3 

00 

•> 

80 

1 

70 

3 

00 

•) 

90 

2 

90 

3 

10 

2 

90 

2 

80 

2 

40 

•> 

90 

o 

90 

2 

80 

3 

10 

2 

80 

2 

70 

2 

70 

2 

90 

3 

00 

3 

60 

2 

7o;  . 

co-ordinates.  Through  the  series  of  points  thus  obtained  a  smooth 
curve  has  been  drawn  averaging  the  conditions  and  giving  for  each 
tenth  of  a  foot  height  on  the  gage  a  corresponding  flow  of  discharge. 
These  rating  tables  are  given  below  in  condensed  form. 

By  applying  the  values  given  in  the  above  tables,  a  statement  has 
been  prepared  of  the  average  daily  flow  throughout  the  period.  From 


MAKYLA^CD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


239 


LIST  OF  DISCHARGE  MEASUREMENTS  MADE  ON  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT 
CUMBERLAND,  MD.i 


No. 

Date. 

Hydrographer. 

.  3 

|s 

Gage 
height 
(feet). 

Area  of 
section 
(square 
feet). 

Mean 
velocity 
(feet  per 
second). 

Discharge 
(second- 
feet). 

1894. 

May  24 

C. 

C.  Babb   

23 

1  166 

60 

3,037 

1895. 

Mar  30 

..do  

29  1 

4 

50 

1  088 

3 

17 

3  446 

3 

Apr  10 

..do  

29  1 

5 

40 

1  560 

3 

88 

6  054 

4 

Apr.  25 

..do  

29  h 

3 

30 

423 

1 

49 

630 

.5 

May  3 

..do  

29  h 

3 

75 

722 

39 

1,728 

6 

May  9 

..do  

29  h 

3 

40 

465 

1 

67 

777 

7 

May  23 

..do  

29  h 

3 

40 

569 

1 

46 

831 

8 

June  5 

..do  

29  h 

2 

95 

373 

0 

69 

256 

9 

June  6 

..do  

29  h 

3 

10 

445 

1 

37 

609 

10 

June  13 

..do  

29  h 

3 

00 

334 

0 

86 

287 

11 

July  1" 

..do  

76 

3 

05 

357 

0 

97 

345 

1896. 

12 

June  24 

D.  C.  Humphreys. . 

W.  B. 

3 

31 

580 

1 

42 

822 

13 

Aug.  6 

..do  

W.  B. 

3 

30 

355 

1 

71 

605 

14 

Nov.  18 

A. 

P.  Davis  

68 

3 

38 

.577 

1 

33 

765 

1.5 

Feb.  10 

.  .do  

3 

75 

1,307 

16 
17 
18 
19 

Mar.  27 
June  25 
Sept.  1 
Sept.  22 

..do  

3 
3 
2 
3 

93 
00 
60 
70 

1,995 
425 
86 
92 

..do  

..do  

..do  

'  Gagings  include  discharge  of  canal  feeders. 


RATING  TABLES  FOR  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT  CUMBERLAND,  MD., 
1S9.5,  1896  AND  1897. 


Gage 
Height  in 
feet. 

Discharge  in  second-feet. 

Gage 
Height  in 
feet. 

Discbarge  in  second-feet. 

1895. 

1896. 

1897. 

1895. 

1896. 

1897. 

2.7 

160 

160 

110 

4.3 

3,070 

3,070 

3,015 

2.8 

200 

200 

140 

4.4 

3,325 

3,325 

3,295 

2.9 

250 

240 

180 

4.5 

3,580 

3,580 

3,575 

3.0 

325 

300 

355 

4.6 

3,835 

3,835 

3,855 

3.1 

425 

400 

375 

4.7 

4,090 

4,090 

4,135 

3.3 

525 

.500 

525 

4.8 

4,345 

4,345 

4,415 

3.3 

650 

650 

680 

4.9 

4,600 

4,600 

4,695 

3.4 

800 

800 

835 

5.0 

4,8.55 

4,855 

4,975 

3.5 

1,030 

1,000 

990 

5.2 

.5,365 

5,365 

5,53.5 

3.6 

1,285 

1,285 

1,165 

5.5 

6,130 

6,130 

6,375 

3.7 

1,.540 

1,540 

1,365 

6.0 

7,405 

7,405 

7,775 

3.8 

1,795 

1,795 

1,615 

7.0 

10,575 

3.9 

2,050 

2,050 

1,895 

8.0 

13,375 

4.0 

2,305 

2,305 

2,175  • 

9.0 

16,175 

4.1 

2,.560 

2,560 

3,4.55 

10.0 

18,975 

4.3 

2,815 

2,815 

3,735 

11.0 

21,775 

240 


THE  HYDBOGHAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


these  averages  a  condensed  table  giving  the  greatest  and  least  flow  for 
each  month  and  the  average  for  that  mouth  in  second-feet  has  been 
compiled  for  convenience  of  reference.  The  average  flow  for  tlio 
month  is  also  given  in  another  form  in  comparison  with  the  area 

ESTIMATED  MONTHLY  DISCHARGE  OF  POTOMAC  RIVER  AT 
CLMBERLAND.  MU. 
[drainage  area,  891  square  miles.] 


Month. 


Discbarge  in  second-feet. 


Kun-<)ff. 


I  Second- 

.Maximum.  Minimum.     Mean.    ^^1,^°  |  '^"a*;^' 

mile. 


189.5. 

January  i  7,405 

February   4,85.5 

March.!   7,405 

April   6,385 

May   1,795 

June   C50 

Julv   1,540 


1896. 


January  . 
February 
March  .  .  . 
April . .  .  . 
May 


June  

July  

August  

September   1 

October  

November  

December  


2,815 
4,600 
2,505 
4,8.55 
3,  .580 
2,560 
7,600 
1,795 
,600 
6,130 
6,130 
1,540 


Per  annum  1  17,600 

1897.  I 

January   2,175 

February   20,375 

March   7,775 

April   6,095 

May   11,975 

June  •   255 

July   525 

August   990 

September  (a)   525 

October  (a)   110 


325 
650 
1,540 
525 
425 
200 
160 


240 
400 
300 
650 
240 
500 
300 
200 
140 
240 
400 
400 


140 


525 
835 
1,165 
180 
ISO 
80 
85 
85 
10 
20 


1,844 
1,128 
3,185 
1,875 
870 
355 
431 


438 
1,498 
1,991 
1,792 
1,351 
1,396 
2,141 
6.56 
8.59 
868 
1,116 
654 


1,230 


836 
3,610 
2,744 
1,570 
2.162 
165 
199 
256 
70 
40 


2.39 
1.32 
4.12 
2.35 
1.13 
0.45 
0.55 


0.56 
1.81 
2.57 
2.24 
1.75 
1.75 
2.77 
0.85 
1.07 
1.12 
1.39 
0.84 


18.72 


1.08 
4.21 

3.55 
1.96 
2.79 
0.21 
0.25 
0.33 
0.09 
0.04 


2.07 
1.27 
3.57 
1.10 
0.98 
0.40 
0.48 


0.49 
1.68 
2.23 
2.01 
1.52 
1.57 
2.40 
0.74 
0.96 
0.97 
1.25 
0.73 


1.38 


0.94 
4.05 
3.08 
1.76 
2.42 
0.19 
0.22 
0.29 
O.OS 
0.04 


((J  I  Approximato. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE 


Fig.  1.— GEORGES  CREEK  AT  WESTERNPORT,    NEAR  THE 
CONFLUENCE  WITH  NORTH  BRANCH  OF  POTOMAC. 


Fig.  2.— GEORGES  CREEK  AT  WESTERNPORT,  LOOKING 
UP-STREAM  FROM  WASHINGTON  STREET  BRIDGE. 


HYDROGRAPHY   OF   ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MAKYLA>*D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


241 


drained.  That  is  to  say,  above  the  i:)oiut  of  measurement  there  are 
891  square  mUes;  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  water  comes  equally  from 
all  parts  of  this  surface  (which,  however,  it  does  not  do)  and  that  the 
average  for  the  month  is  1,782  second-feet,  there  would  he  an  average 


Figs.  11  and  12. — Diagram  showing  discharge  of  the  Xorth  Branch  of  the  Potomac 
at  Cumberland  for  1895  and  1896. 


of  2  second-feet  per  square  mile  drained.  This  expression  is  of  con- 
venience in  considering  the  probable  amount  discharged  from  a 
larger  or  smaller  drainage  area  of  similar  character,  that  is  to  say, 

16 


242 


THE  HYDROGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


from  a  portion  of  the  drainage  area  above  Cumberland,  embracing 
say  500  square  miles,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  about  1,000 
cubic  feet  per  second  flowed  during  the  month.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
however,  the  run-off  from  a  smaller  drainage  area  is  usually  relatively 
greater  than  from  a  large  drainage  area,  because  the  smaller  often 
includes  a  greater  proportion  of  mountain  or  rough  land  at  the  head- 
waters of  the  streams.  The  table  also  gives  the  average  flow  per 
month  in  terms  of  depth  in  inches  over  the  whole  surface  drained. 


JAN 

ro  20 

FEB  *• 

10  20 

4  A  RC  M     A  PP  1  L 

10  20       10  20 

M 

lO 

AY 

20 

'jUNt 

10  20 

JUL 
10  ? 

0 

A  u 

O  J 

c 

0 

S£  PI 

oc 

T 

Dec 

^ 

1 

1 

a 

— 

1 — 

1 

r— 

1 — 

— ' 

1 
( 

t    "■ 

i 

i 

1  1 

— 

i 

I— 

— 1 

1 

f 

; 

 1 

C 

<r 

c  , 

1 

1 

i 

v. 

IK 

<t 

f 

1 

R 

HI 

"^1 

Fig.  13. — Diagram  showing  discharge  of  the  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac  at 
Cumberland  for  1S97. 


The  rainfall  records  give  the  precipitation  upon  the  surface  in  depth 
in  inches  and  the  amount  flowing  from  the  surface  has  also  been 
compiited  in  depth  in  inches  for  convenience  of  comparison  of  the 
run-oiT  with  the  rainfall. 

In  addition  to  the  measurements  of  discharge  at  Cumberland,  a 
number  of  determinations  of  the  flow  of  various  streams  were  made 
during  the  reconnaissance  of  the  Potomac  Basin  before  mentioned. 
This  was  carried  on  during  the  unusual  drought  of  the  fall  of  1S97, 


MAEYLAXD  GEOLOGICAI,  SURVEY 


243 


the  field  work  being  by  Mr.  Arthur  P.  Davis  and  his  assistants,  Mr. 
E.  G.  Paul  and  Mr.  Gerard  H.  Matthes.' 

The  country  was  systematically  examined  as  far  as  practicable  and 
facts  bearing  upon  the  quantity  of  water  and  also  upon  its  utiliza- 
tion or  pollution  were  obtained.  From  time  to  time  samples  of  water 
were  taken.  These  were  referred  to  the  Supervising  Surgeon-Gen- 
eral of  the  Marine  Hospital  for  examination,  the  results  being  pub- 
lished in  a  report '  by  the  latter  organization.  The  following  details 
have  been  taken  largely  from  the  field-notes  of  the  BydrogTaphers 
above  named. 

The  water  of  the  i^^orth  Branch  of  the  Potomac,  even  near .  its 
head,  is  naturally  somewhat  dark  in  color,  and  it  is  stated  by  the 
older  inhabitants  of  the  region  that  it  has  always  been  thus  dark, 
owing,  probably,  to  the  presence  of  decaying  vegetable  matter  from 
the  forests.  This  discoloration  is  further  increased  by  the  effluents 
from  sawmills,  tanneries  and  coal  mines,  so  that  at  the  old  mill- 
dam  near  Keyser,  where  the  polluted  water,  agitated  by  the  falls, 
boils  and  foams,  a  thick  layer  of  whitish-brown  froth  is  formed. 
Within  the  northern  part  of  its  drainage  area,  including  Allegany 
county,  and  particularly  in  the  vicinity  of  Cumberland,  are,  as  is 
well  known,  a  considerable  number  of  large  coal  mines  furnishing 
employment  to  hundreds  of  laborers.  The  drainage  water  from 
these  mines,  as  they  are  deepened,  becomes  considerable  in  quantity, 
and  as  this  is  pumped  directly  into  the  smaller  streams,  stains  the 
waters  of  the  creeks  which,  above  point  of  inflow,  are  usually  bright 
and  clear. 

The  headwaters  of  the  Xorth  Branch  proper  are  at  the  Potomac 
Spring  near  the  Fairfax  Stone  on  the  present  West  Virginia  and 
Maryland  state  line  at  an  elevation  of  about  3,000  feet.  From  this 
the  river  flows  in  a  northeasterly  direction  for  about  46  miles,  form- 
ing the  dividing  line  between  Garrett  county,  Maryland,  and  Grant 
county,  West  Virginia,  to  the  confluence  of  Savage  river,  where  the 

'  Drainage  Basin  of  the  Potomac,  Fifty-fifth  Congress,  second  session.  Sen. 
Doc.  Xo.  90;  also  Nineteenth  Annual  Eeport,  Part  IV,  pp.  132-161. 

^  Bacteriological  Examination  of  the  Potcmae  Eiver,  Senate  Doc.  No.  211, 
Fift}--fifth  Congress,  second  session. 


244 


THE   HYDROGliArilY   OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


elevation  is  over  950  feet.'  From  this  point  on  it  forms  the  boundary 
of  Allegany  county,  separating  it  from  ^Mineral  county,  "West  Vir- 
ginia. From  tlie  moiith  of  Savage  river  the  course  is  southeasterly 
for  a  distance  of  6  miles  to  Keyser,  on  the  West  Virginia  side  of  the 
river.  Here  the  stream  abruptly  resumes  its  northeasterly  course 
and  continues  for  23  miles,  reaching  Cumberland  at  an  elevation  of 
600  feet.  At  this  point  again,  the  river  sharply  turns  and  continues 
soiitherly  for  12  miles,  where  it  joins  the  South  Branch  to  form  the 
main  Potomac. 

Along  the  upper  part  of  its  course,  down  to  "Westernport,  the  most 
westerly  town  in  Allegany  county,  the  Xorth  Branch  flows  through 
a  nan-ow,  tortuous  valley,  the  steep,  wooded  hillsides  of  which  aflFord 
little  opportunity  for  settlement.  The  roads  are  few  and  bad,  and 
the  "West  Virginia  Central  and  Pittsburg  Railway  affords  the  only 
means  of  transportation.  The  extensive  lumber  trade  in  this  region 
is  responsible  for  a  number  of  small  settlements  along  the  river  and 
the  existence  of  the  two  towns  of  Bayard,  West  Virginia,  with  an 
estimated  population  of  TOO,  and  Gormania,  West  Virginia,  with  an 
estimated  population  of  600  inhabitants. 

Owing  to  its  considerable  fall  along  this  section,  which  averages  46 
feet  per  mile,  but  in  some  portions  exceeds  60  feet  per  mile,  the  river 
assumes  much  the  natiire  of  a  mountain  torrent,  presenting  one  con- 
tinuous series  of  riffles  and  falls,  the  latter  in  some  instances  having 
a  drop  of  5  feet  and  over.  There  seems  to  be  little  opportunity  for 
developing  the  waterpowers  of  this  stream,  however  considerable  they 
may  be.  Freshets  are  frequent  and  heavy,  and  would  inflict  serious 
damage  to  the  cheaper  fonns  of  milldams.  Stone  and  brush  dams, 
crib  dams,  and  loose-rock  dams  would  either  be  swept  away  or  would 
requii'e  incessant  repairs  and  rebuilding.  On  accoimt  of  the  narrow- 
ness of  the  valley,  waste-weii-s  would  be  impracticable,  and  dams 
woiild  have  to  be  built  to  withstand  the  heaviest  floods  passing  over 
them,  which  would  render  their  construction  elaborate  and  expensive. 
It  is  only  difficult  to  find  good  mill  sites.  The  following  discharge 
measurements,  made  in  September  and  October  of  ISO 7,  will  serve  to 

'  Nineteenth  Annual  Report.  Part  IV.  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  p.  141. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXI. 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


245 


throw  light  upon  the  capacity  of  the  river  during  the  dry  season: 
September  23  a  measurement  made  at  Goi-mania,  West  Virginia, 
gave  a  discharge  of  54  second-feet.  On  September  25  the  discharge 
of  the  river  at  Schell  was  136  second-feet.  !Measiirements  made 
above  the  junction  with  Savage  river  on  September  27  and  October 
27  gave  discharges  of  122  and  102  second-feet,  respectively,  the 
latter  fairly  representing  the  capacity  of  the  !N^orth  Branch  at  this 
point  during  the  severe  drought  of  1897.  These  results,  together 
with  the  large  amount  of  available  head  and  the  fact  that  the  river 
does  not  freeze  over  in  winter,  seem  to  indicate  that  there  would  be 
ample  power  at  all  times  for  average  milling  purposes.  The  fact 
that  no  attempt  has  been  made  by  any  of  the  sawmills  and  tanneries 
along  the  river  to  make  iise  of  waterpower  has,  however,  sufficient 
explanation.  The  first-named  enterprises  use  steam  by  preference, 
because  they  are  primarily  of  a  temporary  character,  liable  to  be 
shifted  whenever  it  may  be  found  advantageous  to  shorten  the  dis- 
tance which  the  raw  materials  are  to  be  hauled,  and  also  because 
they  are  supplied  with  an  abundance  of  fuel,  at  no  cost,  in  the  form 
of  sawdust.  The  tanneries,  though  of  a  more  permanent  character, 
invariably  prefer  steam  power,  because,  besides  being  able  to  utilize 
tan  bark  as  fuel,  they  require  the  use  of  steam  in  their  processes. 

A  small  waterpower  has  been  developed  by  two  mills  at  Blaine, 
West  Virginia,  but  the  amount  is  trifling  in  comparison  with  Avhat 
might  be  obtained  at  that  point.  One  15-inch  and  one  18-inch  turbine 
under  74  feet  head  furnish  about  8  horsepower  to  a  small  woolen  mill. 
On  the  same  mill-race  is  situated  a  sa^\anill  and  grist-mill  combined, 
which  obtains  about  25  horsepower  from  one  36-inch  turbine  under  9 
feet  head.  Water  is  taken  from  the  river  at  a  point  about  one-half 
mile  above  the  mills,  where  there  is  a  low  natural  dam  across  the  river. 

The  more  important  tributaries  were  visited  and  the  discharges 
measured.  September  24  the  discharge  of  Buffalo  Creek  at  Bayard, 
West  Virginia,  was  found  to  be  23  second-feet.  The  water  was 
heavily  laden  with  sawdust  from  the  Buffalo  Lumber  Company. 
Stony  river,  the  principal  tributary  above  the  mouth  of  Savage  river, 
was  visited  September  25.    Its  discliarge  was  38  second-feet.  This 


246 


THE  HYDBOGRAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COTJNTY 


stream  flows  through  a  hilly  region,  covered  with  thick  timber 
growths,  and  has  no  settlements  along  it  except  a  few  logging  camps. 
The  headwaters  rise  in  the  highest  part  of  the  Potomac  Basin,  at  an 
altitude  of  4,000  feet.  September  25  Abram  Creek  showed  a  dis- 
charge of  7.4  second-feet.  The  water  of  this  creek  carries  much 
coaldust  from  the  mines  at  Elk  Garden,  West  Virginia,  and  also 
receives  sawdust  from  a  sawmill  at  Emory,  West  Virginia. 

The  Xorth  Branch  all  along  this  upper  section  is  polluted  by  large 
quantities  of  sawdust  produced  by  fourteen  sawmills,  some  of  which 
discharge  the  sawdust  directly  into  the  river,  and  others  into  the 
tributaries.  The  more  important  of  these  are  the  sawmiU  of  the 
J.  L.  Rumbarger  Company,  at  Dobbin,  West  Virginia,  with  a  capacity 
of  100,000  feet  of  lumber  a  day,  the  saw-  and  planing-mills  of 
M.  X.  Wilson,  at  Wilson,  Maryland,  with  a  capacity  of  20,000  feet 
of  lumber  a  day,  and  of  the  Biiffalo  Lumber  Company,  at  Bayard, 
West  Virginia,  with  a  capacity  of  50,000  feet  of  lumber  a  day.  It 
furthermore  receives  the  wastes  from  two  tanneries — those  of  the 
Middlesex  Leather  Company,  at  Bayard,  West  Virginia,  with  a 
capacity  of  from  600  to  800  hides  a  day,  and  the  J.  T.  Hoffmann's 
Sons  Company,  at  Gormania,  West  Virginia,  with  a  capacity  of  300 
hides  a  day.  The  wastes  from  the  latter  establishments  consist  of 
tan  liquor,  lime  water,  and  a  certain  amount  of  tan  bark,  which  is 
washed  from  the  banks  at  times  of  high  water.  The  total  amount 
of  this  pollution  is  such  that  the  river,  especially  during  the  dry 
season,  has  a  foul  appearance  in  spite  of  its  dashing  course  over  the 
bowlders  of  its  rough  but  picturesque  bed.  The  water  has  a  dark- 
brown  tinge,  very  suggestive  of  contamination  by  tan  liquor,  and 
particles  of  sawdust  are  extremely  plentiful  and  are  carried  for  long 
distances.  In  many  places  where  irregularities  in  the  current  have 
caused  accumulations  of  sawdust,  small  banks  and  bars  composed  of 
solid  strata  of  sawdust  are  to  be  found.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that 
Stony  river,  though  free  from  artificial  pollution,  exhibits  to  a  certain 
degree  the  same  dark  color  peculiar  to  the  waters  of  the  main  river. 

About  2  miles  above  Westernport,  Savage  river  empties  into  the 
Xorth  Branch.    It  is  a  small  stream  of  great  purity,  having  its 


MAKYLA^T)  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


247 


headwaters  in  Garrett  county.  Only  two  small  sawmills  are  located  on 
its  banks,  and  the  pollution  caused  by  them  is  insignificant.  A  dis- 
charge measurement  made  October  27  at  the  mouth  of  the  stream, 
above  the  intake  of  the  Piedmont  water  supply,  gave  a  discharge  of 
11.3  second-feet.  The  tovm  of  Piedmont  and  part  of  Westemport 
are  supplied  with  drinking  water  by  a  gravity  system,  from  a  reser- 
voir which  is  kept  filled  by  pumping  water  from  Savage  river.  The 
quantity  pumped  daily  is  estimated  at  375,000  gallons. 

One-half  mile  above  Westernport,  at  Luke,  is  the  factory  of  the 
Piedmont  Pulp  and  Paper  Mill  Company,  which  has  a  daily  capacity 
of  40  tons  of  book  paper  and  50  tons  of  pulp.  In  the  process  of 
manufacturing  the  pulp  from  spruce  and  poplar  wood  the  wood-fiber 
is  disintegrated  by  treating  with  bisulphite  of  lime,  and  a  number  of 
chemical  residuals  are  formed  which  are  discharged  into  the  river. 
These  chemicals  consist  principally  of  sulphates  and  sulphites  of  cal- 
cium, some  free  sulphuric  and  sulphurous  acids,  chloride  of  calcium 
used  in  bleaching  the  fiber,  and  a  large  amount  of  resinous  matter. 
An  analysis,  made  of  a  sample  of  the  effluent  from  one  of  the 
digesters,  shows  acids  as  follows: 

Grams  per  liter. 

SO,  (sulphuric  acid  and  sulphates)    1.030 

SO2  (sulphurous  acid,  sulpho-acids,  etc.)    8.800 

Total  SO3  after  complete  oxidation   12.030 

It  further  appears  from  the  analysis  that  but  little  of  the  acid 
occui's  in  a  free  state,  being  chiefly  combined  with  organic  matter 
contained  in  the  effluent. 

Besides  these  chemical  compounds,  wastes  of  a  more  solid  nature 
are  discharged  into  the  river  at  this  point.  A  small  amount  of  pulp 
is  lost  in  the  washing  of  the  fiber;  its  escape  is  more  or  less  accidental, 
signifying  a  loss  against  which  the  owners  of  the  mill  keep  careful 
watch.  The  sediments  from  the  filter  tanks,  representing  the  ma- 
terials carried  in  suspension  by  the  river  water,  are  screened  out 
before  the  water  can  be  used  in  the  process  of  manufacturing  pulp 
and  paper,  and  are  returned  into  the  river.  The  filtering  plant, 
established  solely  for  this  purpose,  was  put  in  at  a  cost  of  $35,000. 
Tlic  water  of  the  North  Branch  is,  therefore,  hardly  fit  for  industrial 


248 


THE  HYDBOGKAPHY  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


purposes,  much  less  for  domestic  use.  The  action  of  the  acids  on  the 
clay  contained  in  the  water,  together  with  the  small  amount  of  pulp 
referred  to,  forms  a  gray  compound  which  is  found  to  coat  the  stones 
in  the  bed  of  the  river  below  the  mill,  and  is  frequently  spoken  of 
as  waste  pulp. 

The  Xorth  Branch,  in  passing  the  towns  of  Piedmont  and  West- 
ernport,  receives  a  large  amount  of  impurity  in  the  form  of  sewage 
and  garbage,  and  is  badly  polluted  by  the  water  of  Georges  Creek, 
which  enters  the  river  at  AVesteniport.  This  small  stream,  in  its 
course  of  17  miles,  receives  the  effluents  of  a  number  of  coal  mines, 
besides  the  drainage  and  sewage  of  several  towns,  the  most  important 
of  which  are  Frostburg,  Lonaconing  and  Westemport,  with  popula- 
tions of  6,000,  4,200  and  2,000  respectively. 

When  measured  at  Westemport  September  25,  1897,  the  discharge 
of  Georges  Creek  was  found  to  be  6  second-feet,  a  very  low  stage. 
The  water,  which  is  very  clear,  possesses  such  acidity  that  horses  and 
cattle  refuse  to  drink  it,  and  no  living  organisms  can  be  seen  in  it. 
An  analysis  shows  acids  as  follows: 


The  water  also  contains  a  large  quantity  of  alumina.  The  presence 
of  the  sulphuric  acid  and  sulphates  is  due  to  the  large  percentage  of 
ferric  sulphate  contained  in  the  coal-mine  effluent.  Being  an  un- 
stable compound,  it  breaks  up  when  acted  upon  by  the  oxygen  of  the 
air,  parting  with  the  iron  which  settles  on  the  rocks  in  the  bed,  form- 
ing a  coating  of  ferric  hydroxide  which  gives  to  the  entire  stream  a 
very  rusty  appearance. 

The  Xorth  Branch,  between  Westernport  and  Keyser,  "West  Vir- 
ginia, has  little  fall.  Xear  the  latter  town  it  passes  over  an  old  mill- 
dam.  The  fall,  though  slight,  causes  a  thick  froth  to  form  on  the 
water,  covering  the  entire  river  below  the  dam  with  a  white  coat  of 
sc\mi  several  inches  deep,  a  strong  evidence  of  the  foulness  of  the 
water.  The  town  of  Keyser,  which  has  an  estimated  population  of 
3,500,  although  not  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Xorth  Branch,  adds 


Grams  per  liter. 


Combined  sulphuric  acid,  as  SO3 

Free  sulphuric  acid,  as  SO,  

Sulphurous  acids  and  sulphites 


0.7350 
0.1047 
None. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXII. 


MARYLA>"D  GEOLOGICAL  SUKVEY 


249 


materially  to  the  pollution  of  the  latter.  Xew  Creek,  a  tributary  of 
the  North  Branch,  passes  through  the  to^vn  and  carries  off,  besides 
sewage,  the  effluents  from  the  Keyser  woolen-mills.  The  waste  water 
resulting  from  the  washing  of  the  wool  with  sal  soda  and  soap  prob- 
ably constitutes  the  most  obnoxious  element  in  this  effluent,  contain- 
ing as  it  does  much  animal  matter  subject  to  decay.  The  pollution 
from  this  source  alone  is  estimated  at  1,200  gallons  a  day.  Besides 
this,  a  variety  of  chemicals  are  discharged  into  the  water,  together 
with  much  coloring  matter  used  in  dyeing  the  wool.  On  X ew  Creek 
6  miles  above  Keyser  is  situated  a  tannery  owned  by  the  United  States 
Leather  Company  with  a  capacity  of  GO  hides  a  day.  All  waste  tan 
liquor  is  discharged  into  the  creek,  the  waters  of  which  ai'e  discolored 
for  a  distance  of  3  miles  below  the  tannery.  There  are  two  small 
sawmills  on  this  stream,  but  the  sawdust  discharged  by  them  is 
insignificant  in  amount.  The  discharge  of  Xew  Creek  was  measured 
near  its  mouth  on  September  29,  and  found  to  be  3.5  second-feet. 
There  are  a  number  of  mills  and  manufactories  of  various  kinds  at 
Keyser,  all  of  whicli  were  visited,  but  none  were  foiind  to  contribute 
in  any  measure  to  the  pollution  of  the  river.  At  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  car  shops,  at  the  time  of  visit,  a  sewer  to  drain  the  sewage 
of  the  shops  into  the  Xorth  Branch  was  under  construction.  The 
number  of  hands  employed  aggregates  160. 

Along  the  23  miles  of  its  course  from  Keyser  down  to  Cumberland, 
the  North  Branch  receives  no  pollution  other  than  that  from  natural 
sources.  A  distillery  on  Cranberry  Rim  and  the  works  of  the  Cum- 
berland Cement  Company,  both  situated  near  Pinto  post-office,  were 
visited,  but  no  wastes  obseiwed  at  these  points.  The  river  along  this 
section  has  an  average  fall  of  12  feet  per  mile  and  riffles  are  few  in 
number. 

At  Cumberland,  the  Xorth  Branch  assumes  a  totally  different 
aspect.  A  tight  dam  maintained  across  the  river  at  this  point  by  the 
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal  Company  for  diverting  the  water  of  the 
river  into  the  head  of  the  canal,  impounds  the  water  over  a  distance 
of  a  mile,  causing  back  water  for  about  3  miles  up  the  i-iver.  Above 
this  dam  is  the  mouth  of  Wills  Creek,  which  flows  through  the  city, 


250 


THE  HYDBOGEAPHY  OF  ALLEGANY  COUIfTY 


receiving  a  large  quantity  of  sewage  and  refuse  from  a  paper-mill, 
a  brewery,  a  distillery,  cement  works,  a  tannery,  dye  works,  and  a  gas 
plant.  The  city  of  Cumberland  has  a  population  of  about  15,000. 
The  mayor  states  that  about  one-half  of  the  houses  in  the  city  are 
provided  with  sewers  which  drain  directly  or  indirectly  into  the 
Potomac.  A  supply  of  2,500,000  gallons  of  water  is  furnished  daily 
to  the  people  of  the  city,  and  the  resulting  drainage  must  be  more 
than  1,000,000  gallons  per  day,  most  of  which  is  discharged  into 
"Wills  Creek.  Along  this  stream  are  located  a  nimiber  of  coal  mines, 
the  drainage  of  which  also  reaches  the  creek.  A  discharge  measure- 
ment made  September  28,  1897,  above  the  paper-mill  gave  a  dis- 
charge of  12.5  second-feet.  As  may  be  expected,  the  refuse  thrown 
into  Wills  Creek,  the  polluting  substances  carried  by  the  waters  of 
the  Xorth  Branch  as  enumerated  above,  and  the  sewage  from  the  city 
of  Cumberland  accumulate  in  the  pond  above  the  dam  as  if  in  a  set- 
tling basin.  This  is  the  case  especially  in  seasons  of  low  water,  when 
no  water  passes  over  the  crest  of  the  dam.  About  400  yards  above 
the  dam  is  the  intake  of  the  Cumberland  waterworks;  the  water  is 
pumped  from  the  river  directly  into  the  water  mains  and  is  served 
to  the  inhabitants  mthout  being  purified  through  filter  beds  or  other 
ai'tificial  means.  Serious  complaints  have  arisen  from  year  to  year 
during  the  dry  season,  when  the  water,  besides  being  unpalatable,  is 
scarcely  clean  enough  for  laundering  purposes.  Of  the  large  per- 
centage of  impurities  which  the  water  contains  at  such  times,  a  por- 
tion is  doubtless  made  up  of  sewage  from  the  city  that  has  backed  up 
to  the  point  of  intake.  The  city  authorities  have  for  several  years 
looked  about  for  a  better  source  of  supply,  but  as  yet  no  improve- 
ments have  been  made. 

"Wills  Creek  is  one  of  the  most  important  tributaries  of  the  Jforth 
Branch  of  the  Potomac.  It  flows  across  the  naiTOwest  part  of  Alle- 
gany county,  only  about  6  miles  of  the  main  stream,  measuring  from 
the  mouth  upward,  being  included  within  its  boundaries.  It  receives 
the  drainage  from  portions  of  Somerset  and  Bedford  counties,  Penn- 
sylvania. Much  of  the  catchment  area  is  open,  cleared,  or  cultivated 
land,  and  there  is  a  considerable  population  residing  within  the  area 
deriving  support  from  coal-mining,  brick-making,  and  similar  indus- 


MAETLAXD 


GEOLOGICAL 


STJEVET 


251 


tries,  as  well  as  agriculture.  The  discharge  of  this  creek,  on  Sep- 
tember 28,  1897,  was  12.5  second-feet;  on  May  12,  1S9S,  at  Cum- 
berland, the  flow  was  381  second-feet,  and  on  the  next  day  368 
second-feet.  The  waters  are  polluted  by  the  drainage  from  about 
twenty  coal  mines  and  by  the  refuse  from  the  Cumberland  Paper 
Company,  manufacturers  of  manila  and  fiber  papers.  The  water 
is  taken  from  "Wills  Creek  for  the  digesters,  but  as  it  contains  too 
much  sulphiir  for  the  boilers  a  supply  for  steam  purposes  is  obtained 
from  Braddocks  Eun. 

Below  "VTills  Creek  and  down  to  the  confluence  with  the  South 
Branch,  two  tributaries  are  received — Evitts  Creek  from  the  north 
and  Patterson  Creek  from  the  south.  The  discharge  of  the  former 
at  its  mouth,  on  September  25,  1897,  was  21  second-feet,  and  of  the 
latter  12.3  second-feet.  There  are  a  few  small  mills  along  these 
streams,  but  no  indication  of  pollution  of  the  water. 

East  of  Evitts  Creek  is  a  small  stream  known  as  Frog  Hollow,  the 
water  of  which  is  taken  under  the  canal  above  Lock  jSTo.  71  by  a  small 
culvert.  The  discharge,  on  September  25,  1897,  was  about  0.1  of  a 
second-foot.    During  the  summer  the  water  disappears  altogether. 

Below  the  junction  of  the  ^s^orth  and  South  forks  is  Town  Creek, 
which  receives  the  drainage  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  eastern 
part  of  Allegany  county,  its  headwaters ,  being  in  Bedford  coimty, 
Pennsylvania.  It  is  a  clear,  beautiful  stream,  its  waters  not  being 
polluted.  There  are  reported  to  be  two  mills  on  this  creek,  beside 
several  good  waterpowers  as  yet  undeveloped.  The  discharge,  on 
September  25,  189 7,  was  11  second-feet.  Pursley  Rim,  which  dis- 
charges opposite  Pawpaw,  and  15-mile  Creek,  Avhich  discharges  near 
Little  Orleans,  are  small  streams  with  turbid  watere.  Each  of  these 
creeks,  on  September  26,  1807,  was  flowing  about  .5  of  a  second-foot. 
The  eastern  boundary  of  the  county  is  formed  by  Sideling  Creek, 
which  rises  in  Bedford  county,  Pennsylvania,  and  furnishes  power 
to  several  grist-mills  and  sawmills.  Its  waters  are  clear  and  not 
polluted.  The  discharge,  on  September  26,  1897,  wa^  1  second-foot. 
Back  water  from  a  dam  in  the  Potomac  extends  up  the  mouth  of 
this  creek,  the  measurement  just  noted  being  made  above  the  head 
of  this. 


THE  MAGNETIC  DECLINATION  IN  ALLEGANY 

COUNTY 

BY 

L.  A.  BAUER 


Magnetic  observations  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  mag- 
netic declination  of  the  needle,  or  the  "  variation  of  the  compass," 
have  been  made  by  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey  at  A^arious  points 
within  the  coimty  or  along  its  boundaries.  The  values  obtained 
thus  far  are  given  in  the  tables  below.  For  a  description  of  the 
methods  and  instruments  used,  reference  must  be  made  to  the  "  First 
Report  upon  Magnetic  Work  in  Maryland,"  Vol.  I,  Maryland  Geo- 
logical Survey  Report.  This  report  gives  likewise  an  historical 
account  of  the  phenomena  of  the  compass  needle  and  discusses  fully 
the  difficulties  encoiintered  by  the  surveyor  on  account  of  the  many 
fluctuations  to  which  the  compass  needle  is  subject.  Surveyors  of 
the  county  desiring  a  copy  of  this  report  should  address  the  State 
Geologist. 


TABLE  I.— MAGNETIC  DECLINATION'S  OBSERVED  BY  L.  A.  BAUER,  WITH 
U.  S.  COAST  AND  GEODETIC  SURVEY  MAGNETOMETER  No.  IS. 


No 

Station. 

Lati- 
tude. 

Longi- 
tude. 

Date. 

Magnetic 
Declination. 

Atdate 

Remarks. 

o  / 

o  / 

o  / 

o  / 

1 

Cumberland  .  . 

.S9  39 

78  46 

Oct.  10,  1896 

4  02.7 

4  12.4 

Camp  Hill. 

3 

39  40 

78  46 

Aug.  14,  1897 

4  06.4 

4  13.5 

South  meridian 

stone.  Poor 

3 

Westernport.  . 

39  29 

79  02 

Aug.    3,  1897 

3  46.2 

3  .53.4 

House  Farm. 

4 

Lonaconing  . . 

39  34 

78  .59 

Aug.  31,  1898 

3  .51.0 

3  55.0 

.5 

Paw-Paw  

39  32 

78  26 

June  12,  1809 

4  10.8 

4  12.4 

In  W.  Virginia. 

254  THE  MAGNETIC  DECLIXATIOX  IX  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


TABLE  II —MAGNETIC  DECLINATIONS  ALONG  BOUNDARY  LINE  BETWEEN 
ALLEGANY  AND  GARRETT  COUNTIES,  MARYLAND. 


AO. 

Ova  Lion. 

Latitude. 

Lon^tude. 

West 
Declination 
on  July  1, 
1898. 

West 
Declinatic 
on  Jan.  1 

im. 

o 

/ 

o 

/ 

0 

o 

I 

\i  n  11  n  1 

39 

43.4 

78 

.54.8 

4 

07.7 

4 

12.2 

2 

ii  2 

39 

42.5 

78 

.55.4 

4 

06.5 

4 

11.0 

3 

39 

42.4 

78 

•5.5.7 

3 

.58.4 

4 

02.9 

4 

\fr»nni1  -1 

39 

41.2 

78 

56.1 

4 

04.1 

4 

08.6 

tt  5 

39 

40.5 

78 

.56.6 

4 

04.7 

4 

09.2 

g 

((  7 

39 

39.3 

78 

.57.3 

3 

.59.9 

4 

04.4 

7 

tt  <^ 

39 

38.6 

78 

57.7 

3 

.59.3 

4 

03.8 

39 

37.9 

78 

58.2 

4 

03.4 

4 

07.9 

9 

10  

39 

37.3 

78 

58.5 

3 

57.9 

4 

02.4 

1  a 

i*     1  ^ 

39 

3.5.7 

78 

59.5 

3 

.53.3 

.57.8 

11 

"  14  

39 

3.5.1 

78 

59.9 

3 

54.3 

3 

.58.8 

12 

"  15  

39 

34.7 

79 

00. 1 

3 

54.6 

3 

59.1 

1.3 

"  18  

39 

33.0 

79 

01.2 

3 

.56.4 

4 

00.9 

14 

39 

32.8 

79 

01.3 

3 

.55.6 

4 

00.1 

1.5 

"  21  

39 

31.8 

79 

01.9 

3 

51.3 

3 

55.8 

16 

"  22  

39 

31.0 

79 

02.4 

3 

51.2 

3 

55. 7 

17 

"  23   

39 

30.1 

79 

03.0 

3 

48.5 

3 

.53.0 

18 

"  24  

39 

29.7 

79 

03.3 

3 

47.5 

3 

.52.0 

19 

"  26  

39 

28.8 

79 

04.0 

3 

40.1 

3 

44.6 

20 

"  27 

39 

28.8 

79 

04.0 

3 

07.1 

3 

11.6 

21 

39 

28.0 

79 

02.7 

3 

11.1 

3 

15.6 

These  observations  were  made  in  connection  with  the  survey  of 
the  boundary  line  in  the  summer  of  1898,  L.  A.  Bauer  being  Chief 
of  Party  and  W.  M.  Brown,  obser\-er.  Mr.  Brown's  readings  taken 
with  the  needle  to  his  engineers  transit  were  reduced  to  the  mean 
of  day  and  referred  to  the  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey  magnetometer 
Xo.  18.    See  Report  on  the  Boundary  Line. 

Description  of  Stations. 
TABLE  I. 

1.  Cumberland. — In  the  large,  open  area  on  Camp  Hill,  north  of  Rose  Hill 
Cemeterj-  and  south  of  Wills  Creek.  To  find  station,  go  75  paces  along  the 
north  iron  fence  of  cemetery,  starting  from  northeast  corner,  then  75  paces 
at  right  angles  towards  Wills  Creek.  According  to  town  map,  this  area  is 
subdivided  into  lots  and  streets,  but  no  sign  of  the  latter  on  the  ground  at 
present.  Station  may  have  been  between  Sedgewick  and  Niagara  Streets. 
According  to  the  map  it  is  about  4,C67  feet  due  west  of  middle  point  of 
Decatur  Street,  on  which  Mosman's  astronomical  and  magnetic  stations  of 
1864  were  located.    Station  is  also  about  2,744  feet  west  of  court  house  and 


MARYLAND  QEOLOGICAL  SURVEY.  ALLEGANY  COUNTY.    PLATE  XXIII. 


MAKYI,A>'D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


255 


about  1,2S0  feet  north,  and  may  possibly  be  over  a  cement  mine.  Site  was 
selected  in  the  absence  of  the  County  Surveyor  by  Thomas  L.  Patterson. 

2.  CrMBEELAXD. — At  the  South  Meridian  Stone  of  the  County  Meridian 
Line  on  the  Poor  House  Farm.  [See  Keport  of  Establishment  of  ;Meridian 
Line.] 

3.  Westeicvport. — On  the  north  side  of  hill,  along-  road  leading  down  to 
the  river  from  W.  Va.  K.  R.  station,  and  about  100  j-ards  east  of  last  house. 

4.  Lo>'ACOia>"G. — In  the  south  part  of  baseball  field,  south  of  Maryland 
Coal  Company's  office.  The  precise  point  is  marked  by  a  locust  stake  and 
can  be  pointed  out  by  Mr.  F.  E.  Bracket,  Superintendent  of  the  Coal 
Company. 

5.  Paw-Paav. — Morgan  County,  W.  Va.,  near  the  frame  house,  on  the  hill 
in  the  large,  open  field  opposite  the  E.  R.  station.  The  precise  point  was 
37  feet  from  northwest  corner  of  fence,  67  feet  from  northeast  corner,  and 
29  feet  in  front  of  gate. 

TABLE  n. 

1.  Mound  on  Mason  and  Dixon  line.  "  On  the  summit  of  Big  Backbone  or 
Savage  mountain,  where  that  mountain  is  crossed  by  Mason's  and  Dixon's 
line."  Reached  hy  mountain  road  from  Mount  Savage  railroad  station.  A 
more  roundabout  way,  but  a  better  road,  is  from  Frostburg  by  way  of 
Finzell  postoffice.  The  gate-house  of  the  Standard  Oil  Pipe  Line  is  about 
50  yards  to  the  north  of  the  mound.  The  mound,  consisting  of  stone  en- 
tirely, was  built  between  two  rocky  ledges.  Xo  hole  could  be  dug,  as  the 
precise  point  was  in  the  crevice  of  a  large,  deeply  embedded  sandstone  rock. 
The  subsurface  marks  are  two  iron  expansion  bolts '  in  this  rock,  one  of 
the  bolts  being  9  inches  to  the  east  of  the  precise  point,  and  the  other  9 
inches  to  the  west.  The  precise  subsurface  point  is  therefore  midway  be- 
tween the  crosses  on  the  bolts.  The  crevice  was  enlarged  sufficiently  so 
that  the  surface  stone  (a  rough  sandstone  3  feet  high  and  about  70  inches 
square)  could  be  wedged  into  the  lower  rock.  Around  this  stone  was 
thrown  up  a  substantial  mound  consisting,  in  the  absence  of  earth,  of 
large  and  small  stones.  A  half-inch  hole  in  the  top  of  the  stone  marks  the 
precise  point.  In  order  that  this  stone  might  be  replaced  easily  in  case  it 
should  be  thrown  out  of  position  in  some  manner,  two  good  solid  sandstone 
rocks  jutting  out  of  the  ground  along  the  line  were  marked  by  iron  ex- 
pansion bolts  placed  in  true  line.  The  first  bolt  is  15.18  feet  back  of  hole  in 
stone;  the  second,  22.84  feet  in  front  of  it  (toward  mouth  of  Savage  river). 
Besides  this  a  bolt  was  placed  forward  in  line  in  sandstone  rock  154%  feet. 

2.  Mound  on  Mount  Savage  fire-claj-  hill.  About  500  feet  from  second 
dump  on  fire-clay  incline  plane.  Most  easily  reached  from  Mount  Savage 
or  from  Finzell.  Marking  stone  is  Sy,  feet  high  and  8  x  10  inches  square, 
with  a  hole  in  top  marking  precise  center.  Mound,  trench,  subsurface 
stone  as  prescribed.  Pitch  pine  tree  18  inches  in  diameter  stands  about  9 
feet  north  of  moiind. 

3.  Mound  on  Piney  Hill,  better  known  as  Cranberry  Hill.    About  300  feet 


^  These  bolts  wedge  tight  in  driving;  the  head  is  one  inch  square,  and 
they  are  %  inch  in  diameter  and  2^4  inches  long. 


256 


THE  MAGXETIC  DECLINATION  IN  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


east  of  mountain  road  known  as  Cranberry  road,  running  north  from 
National  Pike  to  fire-clay  mine.  The  subsurface  stone  is  about  5  inches 
thick  with  center  marked  on  it:  on  this  was  placed  a  stone  21/,  feet  high 
and  5  x  10  inches  square  w  ith  hole  in  top.  Mound  and  trench  around  the 
stone  as  usual. 

4.  Mound  on  Koaring-  Hill.  About  %  mile  north  of  National  Pike,  where 
old  toll-g-ate  formerly  was.  not  far  from  house  occupied  at  present  by  John 
Workman.  A  subsurface  stone  (with  center),  mound  and  trench  as  usual. 
The  upper  stone  is  2  feet  long-  and  5  x  12  inches  square,  the  longer  dimension 
being  along  the  line.  A  drill  hole  started  in  top  of  stone  marks  precise 
point. 

5.  Mound  on  National  Pike.  1'/,  mile  from  Frost  burg,  on  south  side  of 
pike  and  about  50  feet  west  of  iron  columns  marking  site  of  old  toll-gate. 
The  principal  stone  is  dressed,  of  white  marble.  3  feet  long  and  C  x  fi  inches 
square,  with  corners  rounded  off  to  prevent  chipping.  A  Vi-inch  hole  in 
top  marks  precise  point,  and  the  top  of  stone  is  lettered  as  follows: 

Md.  G.  S.  : 

•     1S98  : 


On  the  east  side  of  stone  is  the  letter  .1  and  on  the  west  side  G.  The  monu- 
ment rests  on  a  flat  rock  (the  subsurface  mark)  and  is  set  in  a  mixture  of 
broken  stone  and  hydraulic  cement.  The  usual  mound  and  trench  sur- 
round the  monument. 

6.  Mound  on  hill  south  of  National  Pike.  About  %  of  a  mile  south  of  pike, 
between  two  runs,  on  level  piece  of  cleared  ground  near  an  old  road  and 
near  Frostburg  pipe  line  for  water  supply,  and  not  many  feet  west  of 
artesian  well.  The  upper  rock  is  feet  long  and  about  C  inches  square  on 
top.  A  drill  hole  started  in  top  marks  center.  Subsurface  stone,  mound 
(9  feet  in  diameter)  and  trench  as  usual. 

7.  Mound  near  old  Braddock  road,  on  hill  north  of  Winebrenner  Run,  IVi 
mile  north  of  Midlothian.  The  mound  is  about  50  yards  north  of  the  Brad- 
dock  road.  The  upper  stone  is  about  .3  feet  long,  S  inches  square,  rudely 
dressed  and  with  center  marked  in  top.  Subsurface  mark,  mound  and 
trench  as  prescribed. 

8.  Mound  on  hill  south  of  Winebrenner  Run.  ^/^  of  a  mile  northwest  of 
^fidlothian.  On  the  face  of  hill  sloping  toward  N.  E.  upon  lower  part  of 
spur,  about  half-way  to  toji  of  hill  and  near  an  old  log  road,  one  quarter  of 
a  mile  south  of  Benjamin  Filer's  house,  which  is  in  sight.  The  upper  stone 
is  2.2  feet  long  and  S  inches  square  on  top  with  center  marked.  Subsurface 
stone,  niOLind  and  trench  as  usual. 

9.  Mound  on  hill  north  of  Staub  Run.  About  %  of  a  mile  northwest  of 
Carlos,  on  farm  belonging  to  William  Filer.  In  the  wootls.  about  100  yards 
south  of  rail  fence  at  brow  of  hill,  where  miner's  path  intersects  fence. 
This  path  leads  down  to  road  coming  out  at  Carlos.  The  upper  stone  is  a 
red  sandstone,  about  5  inches  thick  and  about  2V2  feet  long,  with  hole 
drilled  in  top.  Subsurface  stone,  mound,  trench.  Mound  had  to  consist 
chiefly  of  stone. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


257 


10.  First  mound  on  hill  south  of  Staub  Eun.  About  %  of  a  mile  west  of 
Carlos.  Take  road  as  far  as  William  Filer's  house,  then  follow  miner's  path 
to  mine  opening  about  14  mile,  then  bear  to  the  right  to  cutting.  The  hill 
belongs  to  the  Consolidation  Coal  Company. 

11.  Second  mound  on  hill  south  of  Staub  Eun.  About  26S  paces  south  of 
first  mound.  The  two  mounds  were  placed  so  near  to  each  other  so  as  to  give 
intervisible  points  to  the  north  and  south.  From  north  motmd,  mounds 
9,  7,  4  and  1  are  visible  (or  can  be  made  so),  and  from  south  mound  Xo.  12 
can  be  seen. 

12.  iNIound  on  north  side  of  Koontz  Hill.  South  of  Wright's  Eun  and 
reached  from  either  Lonaconing.  Midland  or  Ocean.  A  road  passes  within 
20  yards  of  the  mound  and  continues  northward  on  down  the  hill  to  Ocean, 
or  southward  past  Cutter's  barn  down  the  hill  to  Lonaconing.  Not  a  very 
good  looking  stone,  but  a  substantial  one,  forms  the  principal  stone.  The 
mound  consists  chiefly  of  stone. 

13.  :Mound  on  south  side  of  Koontz  Hill.  About  2  miles  northwest  of 
Lonaconing.  On  the  south  side  of  lane  leading  to  the  west  of  gate  to  Cut- 
ter's barn  and  house,  and  70  yards  from  the  gate.  The  farm  belongs  to  the 
New  Central  Coal  Co.,  and  is  rented  by  Barney  Cutter,  whose  brother.  Henry, 
is  at  present  living  on  the  place.  The  precise  point  is  marked  by  a  cross  cut 
in  stone,  314  feet  long  and  about  7x7  inches  square.  In  center  of  cross  was 
drilled  a  %-inch  hole.  From  this  mound,  mound  Xo.  15  can  be  seen  bj' 
planting  a  pole  on  top  of  it. 

14.  Mound  on  Pea  Eidge  road.  On  the  north  side  of  the  road  leading  from 
Lonaconing  to  Pea  Eidge,  about  IV2  mile  from  Lonaconing.  Center  stone  is 
about  13  inches  square  and  about  31/2  feet  long,  resting  about  2  feet  in  the 
ground.  Precise  point  was  marked  with  a  pick  in  center  of  stone.  Xo  sub- 
surface mark.  Mound  about  11/2  foot  high  and  6  feet  in  diameter,  consisting 
of  earth  and  stone  thrown  up  against  center  stone. 

15.  Mound  on  hill  west  of  Lonaconing.  On  property  of  ]Maryland  Coal 
Company;  near  fence  on  west  side  of  meadow  south  of  house  occupied  by 
Mr.  Weir,  who  is  the  present  tenant  of  the  farm.  Precise  point  is  marked 
by  a  cross  and  14-inch  hole  in  center  of  top  of  central  stone  of  mound. 
Subsurface  stone,  mound  and  trench  as  usual.  From  this  mound  are  visible 
several  points  in  the  line  as  far  south  as  Franklin  Hill. 

16.  Mound  on  Detmold  Hill.  On  the  west  end  and  on  the  highest  point  of 
the  hill.  Eeached  by  iMiller  road  running  from  Detmold  to  Grantsville,  with- 
in about  1/4  of  a  mile  to  the  west  of  mound.  Mound  is  built  on  an  undis- 
turbed, solid  stone  with  subsurface  mark  on  it,  and  around  a  smooth,  up- 
right stone,  3  feet  long  and  6x9  inches  on  top. 

17.  Mound  near  Miller  Eoad.  South  of  Detmold  Hill,  between  Laurel  Eun 
and  Miller  Eoad,  which  runs  from  George's  Creek  road  to  Grantsville;  one 
rod  north  of  road  and  about  14  of  a  mile  from  Eobert  Green's  farm.  The 
precise  point  is  marked  by  a  hole  in  the  central  stone,  which  is  3  feet  long 
and  8  X  10  inches  on  top.    Subsurface  mark,  mound,  trench. 

18.  Stone  on  Xorth  Pickell  Hill.  About  14.  mile  to  the  north  of  next 
mound  (Xo.  19).  Xo  mound  was  built,  but  simply  a  stone  2  feet  long  and 
4  X  14  inches  on  top  was  set  in  the  ground  and  stones  firmly  packed  around 
it.  The  stone  is  north  of  a  road  to  meadow  on  hill.  Coal  mines  are  on 
fire  on  this  hill. 

17 


258 


THE  MAOXETIC  DECLINATION  IX  ALI.EGAXY  COrXTY 


19.  ground  on  South  Piokell  Hill.  Reached  from  Barton  by  takin<r  county 
road  to  Grantsville,  or  also  from  Moscow,  mound  being  about  2  miles  west 
of  latter  point.  Constructed  in  the  usual  manner.  Precise  point  is  a  cross 
cut  in  top  of  central  stone. 

20.  Mound  on  Bartlett  Road.  On  county  road  leadin<r  from  Barton  to 
Grantsville.  about  ly^  rod  north  of  road,  on  land  owned  by  \Vm.  Sommer- 
ville.    Constructed  in  the  prescribed  manner. 

21.  Mound  on  Swanton  Hill.  Reached  from  Barton  b\-  a  very  steep  road 
to  top  of  hill.  Mound  is  about  40  paces  north  of  barbed-wire  fence  dividing 
the  American  Coal  Co.  property  from  that  of  the  Swanton  Coal  Co.  The 
precise  location  can  be  pointed  out  by  Peter  Shaw,  who  lives  on  top  of  hill. 
The  central  stone  of  the  mound  has  a  cross  cut  in  the  top  and  the  letters 
A  and  G  rudely  cut  in  the  sides.  Franklin  Hill  mound  (Xo.  24)  can  be  seen 
from  this  point;  also  Xo.  15. 

22.  ifound  on  Phoenix  Hill.  Reached  from  Morrison  switch  by  taking 
Phoenix  Hill  road.  It  is  on  the  summit  of  the  hill  in  a  meadow  owned  by 
Davis  Coal  Co.  and  leased  by  John  Lannon.    Built  in  the  usual  manner. 

23.  Monument  on  county  road  south  of  Phoenix  Hill.  Reached  from 
Franklin  railroad  station.  On  the  north  side  of  the  road.  A  good,  sub- 
stantial stone  firmlj-  set  in  the  ground  and  smaller  stones  packed  around  it. 
The  mound  is  about  three  rods  east  of  U.  P.  Gannon's  house. 

24.  Mound  on  north  side  of  Franklin  Hill.  On  the  highest  point  of  the 
hill  reached  bj-  the  line.  About  50  feet  to  the  south  the  hill  breaks  off  verj- 
abruptly  and  only  a  short  distance  beyond  the  tramway  curves  around  the 
hill  to  the  west.  The  central  stone  is  about  21/,  feet  long  and  about  12 
inches  square.  A  cross  cut  in  the  top  marks  the  precise  point.  Subsurface 
stone,  mound  and  trench. 

25.  Mound  on  south  side  of  Franklin  Hill.  About  20  yards  north  of  county 
road  where  it  crosses  bridge  over  the  Davis  coal  mine  plane.  The  subsur- 
face mark  is  a  cross  cut  in  a  sandstone  about  1*4  foot  long,  S  inches  wide 
and  10  inches  thick,  lying  with  the  longer  dimension  at  right  angles  to  the 
line.  On  this  solid  stone  rests  a  dressed  marble  post  214  feet  long  and  6 
inches  square.  Around  the  stone  is  a  mound  S  feet  in  diameter,  consisting 
of  earth  and  stone;  a  trench  encircles  the  mound.  The  stone  is  lettered  on 
top: 

'■  Md.  G.  S.  : 

'■       1S98  : 

On  the  west  side  is  the  letter  G  and  on  the  east  side  A.  The  precise  center 
is  marked  by  a  half-inch  hole  drilled  in  the  top  of  the  stone. 

26.  Mound  at  mouth  of  the  Savage.  On  the  south  side  of  the  road  leading 
to  Bloomington  about  100  feet  above  the  Savage  River.  The  central  stone 
is  a  dressed  marble  post,  21/2  feet  long  and  0  inches  square,  marked  and 
lettered  as  in  the  case  of  Xo.  24. 

27.  Bolt  in  rock  at  mouth  of  Savage  River.  Set  with  plaster  of  Paris  in 
a  good,  firm  rock  close  to  the  river.  Bolt  is  %  inch  in  diameter:  head  about 
1>4  inch  round.  For  references  and  distances  to  other  marks  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Savage,  see  page  33. 


MAEYLAI^D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


259 


Ox  THE  ESTABLISHJIEIJT  OF  THE  SuEVEYOr's  MeRIDIAN  LiNE  AT 

Cumberland/ 

In  compliance  with  the  instructions  received  by  the  State  Geologist 
from  the  Board  of  County  Commissioners  through  their  clerk,  Mr. 
W.  J.  Miller,  under  the  date  of  July  21,  1897,  the  -writer  established 
and  permanently  marked  a  true  meridian  line  in  Cumberland, 
August  13-14,  1S9T.  An  act  of  the  Assembly,  passed  at  the  session 
of  1870 '  and  codified  in  1882,'  authorizes  the  County  Commissioners 
to  have  such  a  line  established  at  the  expense  of  the  county. 

Test  observations  made  in  the  City  Park,  near  the  court  house, 
where  an  im official  meridian  line  had  already  been  mai'ked  by  the 
U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  proved  conclusively  that  this  site  was  not  a 
suitable  one  for  the  objects  of  a  surveyor's  meridian  line.*  Upon  the 
suggestion  of  Mr.  Thomas  Patterson,  it  was  finally  decided  to  put 
the  line  on  the  County  Poor  House  Farm.  When  subsequently 
informed,  Governor  Lowndes  signified  his  approval  of  the  selected 
site. 

The  method  employed  in  obtaining  the  meridian  line  was  that  of 
alt-azimuth  observations  on  the  sun ;  these  observations  were  made  on 
August  14,  1897,  the  same  instruments'  being  used  as  in  the  mag- 
netic work  of  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey.  The  accuracy  aimed 
at  was  that  the  meridian  line  shall  be  correct  to  one  minute. 

The  monuments  marking  the  ends  of  the  line,  which  is  404.94  feet 
long,  as  substantial  granite  posts  7  inches  square  and  4^  feet  long; 
they  are  suitably  lettered  and  firmly  planted.  In  the  center  of  each 
monument  is  leaded  a  brass  dowel,  1  inch  in  diameter  and  3  inches  in 

'  A  MS.  copy  of  this  report  was  forwarded  to  the  Count}'  Commissioners 
upon  the  completion  of  the  work. 

'  Laws  of  Maryland,  1870,  chapter  359. 

'  Maryland  Code,  1888,  vol.  i,  art.  25,  sections  77-82. 

*  An  electric  car  line  passes  directly  in  front  of  the  park.  ^Magnetic  obser- 
vations made  in  the  vicinity  of  the  south  meridian  stone  of  the  U.  S.  Geologi- 
cal Survey  Line  gives  the  value  of  the  magnetic  declination  fully  14°  too 
high. 

^  The  instruments  belong  to  the  V.  S.  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survej'  and 
have  been  loaned  temporarily  to  the  Marjiand  Geological  Survey.  For  de- 
scriptions and  illustrations  of  them,  see  ^Maryland  Geological  Survey  Report, 
vol.  i,  part  v. 


260  THE  MAGNETIC  DECLIXATIOX  IX  ALLEGAXr  COCXTY 


length.  The  line  passing  through  the  centers  of  the  crosses  cut  on 
these  bolts  is  the  true  north  and  south  line. 

Tlie  magnetic  declination  (variation  of  the  compass)  reduced  to 
its  average  value  for  the  dav  (24  hours)  was  found  to  l^e  at  the  south, 
or  reference,  monument: 


Date. 


August  14,  1S97  4' 


Amount. 

0G.4'  west. 


This,  as  will  be  seen  by  referring  to  Table  I,  agrees  very  well  with 
the  value  that  was  obtained  on  October  10,  1S90.  on  Camp  Hill, 
near  Rose  Hill  Cemetery,  viz.,  4°  02'. 7.  K  we  refer  this  value  to 
August  14,  1897,  we  get  4°  05'. 2.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that 
the  site  selected  on  the  Coimty  Poor  House  Farm  is  free  of  local 
disturbing  influences. 

The  annual  change  of  the  magnetic  declination  may  be  taken 
to  be  at  the  present  time  as: 

3'  (three  minutes). 

The  table  *  below  shows  how  the  magnetic  declination  has  changed 
at  Cumberland  between  the  vears  1750  and  1900. 


Year. 


Needle 
pointed 


Year. 


Needle 
pointed 


Year. 


Needle 
pointed 


1750    2  03  W. 

1755   i  1  41  W. 

1760   I  1  22  W. 

1765   I  1  03  W. 

1770   I  0  41  W. 

1775   !  0  21  W. 

1780    0  02  W. 

1785    0  13  E. 

1790    0  25  E. 

1795    0  35  E. 

1800    0  4  2  E. 


ISOO   0  42  E. 

1S05    0  45  E. 

1810    0  46  E. 

1815    0  45  E. 

1820    0  43  E. 

1825    0  33  E. 

1830    0  20  E. 

1835    0  03  E. 

1840    0  15  W. 

1845    0  33  AV. 

1850    0  49  W. 


1850    0  49  W. 

1855    1  OS  W. 

1860    1  27  W. 

1865    1  47  W. 

1870    2  OS  W. 

1875    2  2<.i  W, 

1880    2  5(1  W. 

1885    3  11  W. 

1890    3  32  W. 

1895    3  .53  W. 

1900    4  12  W. 


These  figures  enable  the  surveyor  to  ascertain  the  precise  amount 
of  change  of  the  magnetic  declination  or  pointing  of  the  compass 
between  any  two  dates  between  1750  and  1900.    It  should  be  empha- 


'  Extracted  from  Report  of  Maryland  Geological  Survey,  vol.  i.  pt.  v.  p.  482. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  STTRVET 


261 


sized,  however,  that  when  applying  the  quantities  thus  found  in  the 
re-running  of  old  lines,  the  surveyor  should  not  forget  that  the  table 
cannot  attempt  to  give  the  correction  to  be  allowed  on  account  of  the 
error  of  the  compass  used  in  the  original  survey. 

To  reduce  an  observation  of  the  magnetic  declination  to  the  mean 
value  for  the  day  of  24  hours,  apply  the  quantities '  given  in  the  table 
below  with  the  sign  as  affixed: 


Month. 

6 
A.  M. 

8 

9 

10 

11 

z 
Z 

1 

3 

4 

5 

6 
p.  -M. 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

/ 

January .... 

-o'l 

+  0.2 

+  1.0 

+  2.1 

+  2.4 

+  1.2 

—  1.1 

-3.6 

-3.1 

-1.3 

-0.2 

+  0.2 

February  . . 

+  0.6 

+  0.7 

+  1.5 

+  1.9 

+  1.4 

—0.1 

—  1.5 

-2.1 

-3.5 

—  2.0 

—  1.2 

-O.S 

-0.4 

+  1.2 

+  2.0 

+  3.0 

+  2.8 

+  1.6 

—  0.6 

-2.5 

-3.4 

-3.7 

-3.3 

-2.3 

-1.2 

—0.5 

April  

+  2.5 

+  3.1 

+  3.4 

+  3.6 

+  0.8 

—  2.1 

—  4.0 

-4.1 

-t? 

-3.6 

-2.3 

-1.2 

-0.2 

Mav  

+  3.0 

+  3.8 

+  3.9 

+  3.6 

+  0.1 

—  2.4 

-4.0 

-.5.0 

—  4..0 

—3.6 

-2.3 

-0.9 

+  0.1 

June  

+  2.9 

+  4.4 

+  4.4 

+  3.3 

+  1.1 

-2.0 

—  3.6 

—4.5 

—4.5 

—3.8 

-2.6 

—  1.2 

—  0.2 

July  

+  8.1 

+  4.6 

+  4.9 

+  3.9 

+  1.8 

-1.2 

-3.4 

—4.4 

—  4.7 

-4.3 

-3.8 

-1.3 

-0.3 

August  .... 

+  2.9 

+  4.9 

+  5.4 

+  3.7 

+  0.4 

-3.8 

—4.7 

-5.1 

—  4.9 

-3.7 

—  1.9 

-0.6 

+  0.3 

September  . 

+  1.8 

+  2.8 

+  3.4 

+  3.5 

+  0.3 

-3.7 

—  4.4 

-4.6 

-4.2 

-4.0 

—  L4 

—  0.3 

-0.1 

October. . . . 

+  0.5 

+  1.6 

+  3.1 

+  2.8 

+  1.4 

—  1.0 

-3.7 

-3.3 

-3.4 

-3.4 

-1.3 

-0.4 

—  0.4 

November. . 

+  0.5 

+  1.3 

+  1.7 

+  1.8 

+  1.1 

-0.5 

-3.0 

-2.7 

—3.6 

-1.8 

-1.0 

-0.2 

+  0.3 

December  . . 

+  0.3 

+  0.3 

+  0.8 

+  1.8 

+  1.8 

0.0 

-1.6 

-3.4 

—2.3 

-1.8 

—  1.1 

-0.3 

+  0.1 

TEUE  BEARINGS  TAEIN  AT  SOUTH  MERIDIAN*  STONE. 

Tip  of  Court  House  Tower  12°  28'  E.  of  S. 

Spire  of  St.  Patrick's  Catholic  Church,  middle 

of  ball  (  6  )   31   53  E.  of  S. 

The  latitude  of  the  south  meridian  stone  may  be  taken  to  be 
39°  40'  and  the  longitude  76°  46'  TT.  of  Greenwich  or  1°  45'  W.  of 
TTashington.  To  obtain  true  local  mean  time,  subtract  from  eastern 
or  standard  time  15  minutes  and  4  seconds. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  well  to  state  the  purposes  of  the  meridian 
line.    They  are: 

1.  To  enable  the  surveyor  to  determine  readily  at  any  time  the 
declination  or  the  variation  of  the  compass "  at  the  County  Seat 
and  thus  to  provide  the  means  for  determining  the  amount  of  change. 

'  From  Eeport  of  Marjiand  Geological  Survey,  vol.  i,  pt.  v,  p.  437. 


202 


THE  MAGN?:TIC  DECUXATKiX  IX  ALLEGANV  COUNTY 


2.  To  furnish  a  common  line  whose  magnetic  bearing  from  year 
to  year,  as  well  as  its  true  one,  has  been  accurately  determined,  on 
which  surveyors  can  from  time  to  time  test  and  compare  their  com- 
passes. 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  able  assistance  ren- 
dered in  the  establishment  of  the  line  by  Messrs.  Patterson  and 
Shriver,  snn-eyor?. 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 

BY 

GEO.  B.  SUDWORTH 


Introduction. 

An  explanation  of  the  circumstances  under  which  this  investigation 
took  place  seems  proper.  The  earnest  desire  of  Professor  William 
B.  Clark,  State  Geologist  of  Maryland,  to  develop  all  the  economic 
resources  of  the  state,  naturally  led  to  a  consideration  of  the  forests. 
The  writer  was  detailed  to  examine  the  forests  of  Allegany  coxmty 
as  a  beginning  of  this  work.  The  co-operation  of  the  U.  S.  Division 
of  Forestry  in  this  work  was  deemed  proper  on  the  ground  that  the 
information  obtained  would  be  of  mutual  value  both  to  the  Division 
of  Forestry  and  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey. 

With  the  exception  of  the  photographs  taken,  all  expenses  attend- 
ing this  field  work  were  defrayed  by  the  Maryland  Geological  Survey. 
These  photographs,  some  of  which  are  reproduced  for  the  present 
paper,  number  about  ninety,  and  remain  the  property  of  the  Division 
of  Forestry. 

The  purpose  of  this  investigation  was  to  supply  infoi*mation  as  to 
the  condition,  composition,  character  and  uses  of  the  forests  of  this 
county.  The  relation  of  timber-cutting,  grazing,  and  forest  fires 
to  reproduction  were  also  subjects  of  special  study,  with  a  view  to 
pointing  out  a  means  of  abating  their  evil  effects,  and  thus  increasing 
the  productiveness  of  Allegany  forests. 

The  examination  of  this  county  Avas  accomplished  by  personal 
travel  either  on  foot,  by  rail,  or  by  team  and  wagon.  As  only  the 
southern  and  western  boundaries  of  the  county  are  accessible  by  rail, 
most  of  the  necessaiy  travel  was  performed  on  foot  and  by  team. 

The  county  is  well  provided  with  private  and  public  wagon-roads 


264 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY 


aiul  trail.'*,  giving  abundant  opportunity  for  thoroughly  exploring  the 
region  from  east  to  west  and  from  north  to  south. 

The  method  of  examining  the  county  was,  briefly,  to  gain  first  a 
general  impression  of  the  topography  and  location  of  the  wooded 
portions  by  inspection  from  the  summits  of  the  highest  mountains 
or  hills.  A  careful  study  of  the  various  forest  growths,  the  effects 
of  fires,  timber-cutting,  and  mining  was  then  carried  out  by  actual 
travel  over  representative  portions  of  the  wooded  sections,  including 
all  of  the  larger  mountains.  The  photographs  taken  illustrate  the 
main  features  studied. 

Several  coimty  officials  and  other  residents  of  the  county  identified 
with  railway  and  mining  interests  have  kindly  supplied  important 
data  on  the  local  prices  of  lumber  and  the  amount  of  timber  con- 
sumed for  mining  props.  Thanks  are  due  for  such  information  to 
Mr.  Somerville  of  Lonaeoning,  Messrs.  Davidson,  Armstrong,  and 
B.  S.  Eandolph  of  Frostburg,  and  to  Mr.  J.  "W.  Cook  of  Cumberland. 
Special  thanks  are  due  Mr.  B.  S.  Eandolph  for  his  cordial  attention 
to  the  writer  while  visiting  the  mines  and  timberlands  of  the  Con- 
solidation Coal  Company. 

Location. 

Washington,  Allegany  and  Gan-ett  coimties  form  the  western, 
tongue-like  portion  of  Maryland.  Allegany  county  constitutes  the 
middle  or  nan-owest  section,  with  Garrett  on-  the  west  and  Wash- 
ington on  the  east.  The  south  boimdary  of  Allegany  county  is 
defined  by  the  Potomac  river;  the  east  boundary,  by  Sideling  Hill 
Creek;  the  north  boundary,  by  Pennsylvania  (roughly  between  longi- 
tude 78°  20'  and  79°  55');  while  the  west  boundary  is  formed  by  a 
straight  line  from  the  crest  of  Savage  Mountain  at  the  Mason  and 
Dixon  Line  to  the  mouth  of  Savage  river. 

The  area  of  this  coimty  is  477  square  miles,  or  305,280  acres. 

Topographic  Features. 

The  surface  of  this  county  is  uniformly  broken  into  low  moun- 
tains and  hills,  trending  mostly  in  a  northeasterly  and  southwesterly 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY.  ALLEQANY  OOUNTY.    PLATE  XXIV. 


MAEYLA>-D  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


265 


direction.  The  intervening  Talleys  are,  for  the  most  part,  narrow", 
merging  into  low  foothills  which  form  the  lower  slopes  to  the  higher 
mountains. 

The  salient  features  in  the  topography  are  the  long  high  ridges 
known  as  Town  Hill,  Warrior  Kidge,  Wills  Moimtain  and  Dans 
Mountain.  Sideling  Hill  and  Savage  Mountain  are  equally  promi- 
nent barriers  on  the  east  and  west,  but  are  mainly  outside  of  Alle- 
gany county.  The  west  boundary  of  the  county  Hes  on  the  east 
slope  of  Savage  Mountain,  while  the  east  boundary  lies  at  the  bottom 
of  the  west  slope  of  Sideling  HUl.  The  elevation  of  these  mountains 
ranges  from  1,000  to  2,900  feet. 

Most  of  the  larger  mountains  have  long  and  gradual  slopes,  in- 
cluding also  broad  flat  benches  at  elevations  of  SOO  to  1,200  feet. 
Less  commonly,  the  moimtain  slopes  are  precipitous,  notably  on  the 
south  border  of  the  county.  The  surface  of  the  mountains  and 
higher  hills  is  often  broken  by  exposed  boulders  of  quartzite  and 
sandstone.  The  summits  of  the  mountains  are  marked  by  mostly 
bare  rocky  cliffs. 

Soil. 

The  soil  of  nearly  all  the  hills  and  mountain  slopes  is  thin,  being 
composed  largely  of  fine  slaty  shale.  Cultivated  portions  are  rap- 
idly worn  out,  and  even  where  the  timber  gTOws  the  soil  is  often  poor 
in  humus.  This  poor  top-soil  under  forest  cover  is  due  partly  to  a 
necessarily  slow  disintegration  of  the  substratum  of  pure  shale  and 
broken  rock  which  lies  close  to  the  surface  and  partly  to  the  fre- 
quent forest  fires  which  continually  destroy  the  emiching  leaf  mould. 

The  soil  of  the  lower  hills  and  valleys  is  rocky,  but  deeper  and 
richer.  The  best  agi-icultural  lands  are,  therefore,  situated  mostly 
in  the  valleys  and  on  low  adjacent  hills  (Plate  XXY,  Fig.  2).  Con- 
siderable land  has  been  cleared  on  the  higher  moimtain  slopes,  but  it 
is  far  less  productive  than  the  lower  areas. 

Water  Flow. 

The  county  is  well  watered  by  numerous  rocky  streams  fed  by 
innumerable  cold  springs  among  the  low  hills  and  on  the  higher 


26C 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


moiintain  sides.  All  are  tributary  to  the  Potomac  river.  The 
most  important  of  these  streams  are  Sideling  Hill  Creek,  Fifteen-Mile 
Creek,  Flint  river,  Town  Creek,  and  Georges  Creek.  They  vary  in 
width  from  twelve  to  tweuty-tive  feet  and  carry  from  six  to  fifteen 
inches  of  water.  At  high  water  their  volume  is  increased  to  two  or 
three  times  the  normal  flow. 

The  water  of  most  of  these  streams  is  pure  and  wholesome.  That 
of  Georges  Creek  and  several  of  its  tributaries  is,  however,  so  strongly 
impregnated  with  iron,  sulphur  and  drainage  from  coal  and  fire-clay 
mines  as  to  be  unwholesome.    Xo  fish  exist  in  these  waters. 

In  earlier  days  these  streams  supplied  waterpower  for  small  saw- 
mills and  flour-mills  throughout  this  region.  Few  of  these  mills  are 
in  existence  now.  The  flow  of  streams  is  chiefly  important  to  farmere 
in  affording  an  abimdant  and  convenient  supply  of  water  for  stock. 
The  small  transient  steam  sawmills  also  depend  on  this  source  of 
water  supply.  The  maintenance  of  the  numerous  springs  peculiar  to 
this  region  is  of  prime  importance  to  neai'ly  all  farmers  and  residents 
of  the  smaller  towns,  many  of  which  depend  on  this  source  of  water 
supply. 

At  present  these  resources  are  well  protected  by  forest  cover,  as 
arc  also  the  headwaters  of  all  the  streams  draining  the  coimty. 

As  indicating  the  close  relationship,  however,  between  water  flow 
and  forest  cover  it  is  interesting  to  note  in  this  connection  that  the 
oldest  inhabitants  of  this  region  assert  the  existence  of  a  greater  rush 
of  water  in  the  spring  and  fall  of  recent  years  than  was  formerly 
observed,  when  the  country  was  more  continuously  wooded.  In 
earlier  times  the  larger  streams  are  said  to  have  carried  a  uniform 
flow,  with  little  or  no  sudden  increase  diiring  spring  and  fall.  The 
heavy  rains  and  melting  snow  under  present  conditions,  however, 
occasion  an  immediate  and  often  dangerous  rise  of  water  in  the  larger 
streams  at  certain  points.  The  rise  of  water  sometimes  prevents 
farmers  crossing  fords  for  a  week  or  more,  thiis  cutting  off  their 
communication  with  markets,  etc.  To  obviate  such  difficulties,  the 
county  has  built  a  few  new  roads  to  avoid  impassable  fords. 

The  explanation  of  this  rush  of  water  is  simple.    Increased,  indis- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXV. 


Fig.  2.— farm  and  forest  land,  martin  mountain. 
FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


SIARYXAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


267 


criminate  clearing  of  woodland,  especially  on  the  larger  slopes,  brings 
about  a  more  direct  and  rapid  drainage  than  was  permitted  by  the 
original  close  forest  cover  of  the  coimty. 

AVooDED  Regions. 

With  the  exception  of  a  few  treeless  swampy  meadows  of  small 
size,  the  entire  county  was  once  a  continuous  forest.  The  heaviest 
timber  existed  in  the  coves,  on  tlie  low  hills,  and  on  the  lower  slopes 
and  benches  of  the  mountains,  where  the  soil  is  deepest  and  most 
porous.  The  rocky  upper  slopes  and  summits  appear  to  have  borne 
a  forest  of  small  stunted  trees. 

The  wooded  portions  of  tlie  county  are  now  confined  to  the  larger 
hills  and  moimtain  ridges,  with  irregular  extensions  into  the  valleys. 
Most  of  the  streams  also  bear  fringes  of  forest  growth.  Roughly 
estimated,  the  agricultural  land  of  this  county  is  about  thirty  per 
cent  of  the  entire  area,  the  remainder  being  mostly  in  forests  with  a 
small  per  cent  of  brush  land.  The  latter,  however,  contains  forest 
tree  species  of  brush  size,  and  is,  therefore,  to  be  classed  sti'ictly  as 
reforested  land. 

The  forests  of  the  mountains  form  for  the  most  part  a  continuous 
cover  down  to  the  usually  cleared  valleys  (Plate  XXV).  Only  occa- 
sional clearings  and  worn-out,  abandoned  farms  are  seen  on  the 
mountain  sides;  but  wherever  these  cleared  lands  have  been  long- 
neglected,  they  are  already  reforested,  or  are  rapidly  becoming  so 
as  shown  in  Plate  XXVIII,  Fig.  1. 

Charactek  of  the  Torests. 

The  character  of  the  forests,  changeable  throughout,  varies  especi- 
ally from  north  to  south.  The  prevailing  growth  is  deciduous,  but 
this  is  conspicuoxisly  mingled  with  patches,  and  often  large  areas 
of  conifers,  the  latter  being  somewhat  more  abundant  in  the  central 
and  southern  parts  of  the  coimty. 

Small  detached  hills  in  these  regions  bear  a  pure  growth  of  conifers 
as  seen  in  the  region  of  Pine  Hill  and  Piney  Grove,  while  portions 
of  surrounding  slopes  are  covered  largely  with  deciduous  forest.  In 


268 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


other  cases  similar  bills  bear  a  growth  chiefly  of  conifers  on  their 
north  slopes  and  a  deciduous  forest  on  their  south  slopes.  As  a  rule 
the  larger  mountain  slopes  bear  a  variously  mixed  growth  of  conifers 
and  deciduous  trees,  sometimes  evenly  mingled  or  with  the  conifers 
in  alteiTiating  vertical  belts.  The  slopes  near  the  larger  waterways 
also  bear  conspicuous  fringes  of  conifers,  which  give  way  to  the 
hardwoods  higher  up  on  adjacent  slopes. 

Composition  of  Forests. 

The  peculiar  position  of  "Western  Maryland,  intermediate  be- 
tween the  Xorth  and  the  South,  gives  Allegany  coimty  a  forest  flora 
rich  in  species.  The  higher  summits,  coves  and  valleys  exhibit  a 
climate  and  soils  closely  similar  to  those  of  the  more  northern  states, 
while  the  climate  and  soils  of  the  lower  valleys,  glades  and  hills  are 
characteristic  also  of  the  adjacent  southern  states.  As  a  result,  there 
is  a  conspiciious  association  of  northern  and  southern  tree  species. 
This  association  is  of  more  than  passing  interest,  since  the  kinds 
represented  are  of  economic  importance.  Conifers  and  hardwoods 
of  the  middle  South  and  North  mingle  here  almost  on  the  same 
ground. 

The  following  is  a  complete  list  of  coniferous  and  hardwood  trees 
of  Allegany  county: 

CONIFERS. 

1.  White  Piue  Pinng  sirobus. 

2.  Pitch  Pine  Piuns  rigida. 

3.  Scrub  Pine  Finug  virginiana. 

4.  Table-Mountain  Pine  Phius  pungenx. 

5.  Shortleaf  Pine  Phius  erhinata. 

6.  Hemlock   T.niga  canadensis. 

7.  Red  Juniper  Jnniperus  virginiana. 

HARDWOODS. 

8.  Butternut  Juglans  cinerea. 

9.  Black  Walnut  Jiiglans  nigra. 

10.  Bitteruut  Hickory  Hicoria  minima. 

11.  Shairbark  Hickory  Hicoria  ovata. 

12.  Mockernut  Hickory  Hicoria  alba. 

13.  Pii;nut  Hickory  Hicoria  glabra. 

14.  Small  Piirnut  Hickory  Hicoria  odorata. 

15.  White  Willow  ".  Salit  alba. 

16.  Larire-tooth  Aspen  Populus  grandideniata. 

17.  River  Birch  Betula  nigra. 

18.  Sweet  Birch  Beliila  lenla. 

19.  Hornbeam  Ostrya  virginiana. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


269 


20.  Blue  Beech  Carpinns  caroliniana. 

21.  Beech  Fagus  atropunicea. 

22.  Chestnut  Cnxtauea  deiitala. 

23.  White  Oak  Qiienuis  a!b». 

24.  Post  Oak  Quercus  minor. 

2.5.  Chestnut  Oak   Qiiercua  prinux. 

26.  Swamp  White  Oak  Quevcus  pUilunoides. 

27.  Red  Oak     Quercus  nibrn. 

28.  Scarlet  Oak  Quo-ctis  cocchtea. 

29.  Yellow  Oak  Qtierois  veluiimi. 

30.  Pin  Oak  Quercxs  paluntris. 

31.  Barren  Oak  Quercits  pnmihi. 

32.  Slippery  Elm  I'lmii.i  piibe.'iceus. 

33.  American  Elm  Ulm>is  americaiia. 

34.  Hackberry    Celli.s  occkleittalix. 

3.5.  Red  Mulberry   Jforux  rubra. 

36.  Cucumber-tree  Mugiiolia  acumhiata. 

37.  Tulip-tree    Luioden<3ron  iuUpifera. 

38.  Papaw   Asimina  triloba. 

39.  Sassafras  Sa.<<safras  Mx.'tafras. 

40.  Witch  Hazel  Hantiimelis  virgiiiiana. 

41.  Sycamore  Platuiuts  occideiitalis. 

42.  Sweet  Crab  Pyra.^  coroiiaria. 

43.  Serviceberry  Amehmeliier  canadensis. 

44.  Cockspur  Crataegus  crits-gnUi. 

4.5.  Scarlet  Haw   Crataegus  coccinea. 

46.  Pear  Haw    Crataegus  tomentosa. 

47.  Small-leaf  Haw  Crataegus  unijiora. 

48.  Wild  Plum  Prunus  americana. 

49.  Wild  Red  Cherry  Prunus  pennsylvaniea. 

50.  Sour  Cherry  Prunus  cerasus. 

51.  Black  Cherry  Prnims  serolina. 

52.  Redbud  Cercis  canadensis. 

53.  Honey  Locust  Oleditsia  triaranthos. 

54.  Locust  Robiuin  pseudacacia. 

55.  Ailanthus  AiJanthns  graudulosa. 

56.  Staghorn  Sumach    Rhus  hirta. 

57.  Dwarf  Sumach  Rlius  copallina. 

58.  Mountain  Maple  Acer  spicatum. 

59.  Striped  Maple  Acer  pennsylvaiiicum. 

60.  Susrar  Maple  Acer  saccharum. 

61.  Silver  Maple  Acer  saccharinnm. 

62.  Red  Maple  Acer  rubrum. 

63.  White  Basswood  TiHo  heterophylJa. 

64.  Dogwood  Cornus Jlorida. 

65.  Black  Gum  Xgssa  sylvatica. 

66.  Mountain  Laurel  Kalmia  latifolia. 

67.  Rhododendron   RItododcudron  maximum. 

68.  Persimmon  Diospyros  rirginiana. 

69.  Black  Ash  Frnxinvs  nigra. 

70.  White  Ash  Fraxinus  americana. 

71.  Green  Ash  Frnxiniis  lanceolata. 

72.  Nannyberry  Viburmtm  prunifolinm. 

General  Distribctiox  of  Forest  Trees. 
The  limitation  of  certain  trees  to  particular  areas  forms  somewhat 
conspicuous  features  in  the  composition  of  the  forests  of  this  region. 
There  are,  of  course,  no  very  sharp  lines  of  separation  between  the 


270 


THE   FORESTS  OF  ATXEOAXY  COUNTY 


ranges  of  tree  species,  hut  within  general  limits,  at  which  there  is 
more  or  less  overlapping  or  mingling  of  two  or  more  species,  it  may 
be  noticed  that  finally  one  kind  of  tree  disappears  and  another  ap- 
pears. For  example,  in  ascending  one  side  of  a  mountain,  Beech, 
Maple,  Basswood,  etc.,  may  appear  at  the  base  of  the  mountain. 
Above  these  a  succeeding  zone  may  contain  Chestnut,  Sweet  Birch, 
etc.;  and  the  next  higher  zone,  Chestnut  Oak,  Table-mountain  Pine, 
TVild  Red  Cherry,  etc.  These  zones  blend  into  each  other  more  or 
less  by  the  mingling  of  the  trees  peculiar  to  each  zone.  Similarly 
defined  areas  of  tree  growth  of  still  other  species  may  be  met  with 
on  the  opposite  slope  of  the  same  mountain.  Or  in  passing  from 
deep  valleys  on  a  moimtain  side  to  adjoining  ridges  or  benches  at  the 
same  altitude,  often  there  may  be  found  an  assemblage  of  trees 
peculiar  to  each  of  these  dissimilar  localities. 

The  explanation  of  these  phenomena  is  believed  to  lie  in  the  fact 
that  certain  trees  have  become  so  completely  adapted  to  a  given  kind 
or  condition  of  soil  (dry,  moist,  loose  or  compact),  or  climate,  that 
they  cannot  exist  where  the  required  soil  and  climate  are  wanting. 
Thus  the  presence  of  a  northern  climate  in  portions  of  this  region 
appears  to  account  for  the  presence,  by  extension,  of  northern  trees 
into  this  coimty  which  are  prevalent  in  their  wider  northern  range 
under  the  same  conditions.  The  more  cosmopolitan  trees  of  this 
region  are  conspicuous  over  a  greater  area,  while  the  less  widely 
adapted  kinds  appear  within  narrower  limits. 

The  part  also  which  some  trees  and  shrubs  play  by  taking  first 
possession  of  denuded  lands,  thus  rendering  the  soil  favorable  by 
protection  of  moisture  for  the  introduction  of  still  other  trees,  is  a 
most  interesting  and  practical  consideration  in  the  distribution  of 
trees.  This  is  especially  true  where  fire  and  the  axe  have  destroyed 
a  part  or  the  whole  of  an  original  forest.  The  full  value  of  all  the 
trees  in  a  region  cannot  be  determined  without  a  knowledge  of  the 
relationship  of  species  in  their  natural  succession. 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  PRINCIPAL  TIMBER  TREES. 

The  most  conspicuous  of  the  timber  species  are  the  Wliite  Oak, 
Chestnut  Oak,  Red  Oak,  Chestnut  and  White  Pine.    They  form 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY.  ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXVL 


Fig.  1.— wooded  hill  in  southwestern  allegany  county. 


Fig.  -i.— narrow  agricultural  valley  in  southeastern  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MAEYLA^'D  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  271 

forests  in  which,  according  to  exposure  and  altitude,  the  one  or  the 
other  predominates;  in  fewer  instances  areas  occur  with  mixtures  of 
all  five  species,  together  with  other  kinds  which  do  not  form  forests. 

The  White  Oak  occurs  on  all  the  low  hills  and  on  the  lower  and 
middle  slopes  and  benches  of  the  high  mountains.  Originally  it  also 
occupied  the  high  valleys  now  cleared.  Its  presence  usually  indi- 
cates the  deeper,  richer,  and  less  rocky  soils. 

The  Chestnut  Oah  appears  commonly  on  all  the  upper,  rocky, 
gravelly  slopes  and  summits  of  the  mountains  and  hills.  It  grows 
persistently  even  on  precipitous  slopes  where  the  surface  consists  en- 
tirely of  broken  quartzite  and  sandstone ;  but  here  the  trunks  are  short 
and  gmarled.  The  larger  and  better  formed  trees  are  foimd  where 
the  rock  is  broken  and  carries  a  thin  cover  of  soil.  The  White  and 
Chestnut  Oak  often  occur  together,  but  in  most  cases  the  one  or 
the  other  prevails  under  the  peculiar  conditions  which  suit  it  best. 
Few  and  scattering  "White  Oaks  are  found  on  the  rocky  sites  chosen 
by  the  Chestnut  Oak,  and  vice  versa. 

Chestnut  is  confined  chiefly  to  poor,  dry,  gravelly,  southern,  east- 
em  and  western  slopes.  It  is  sometimes  mingled  with  Chestnut 
Oak,  but  more  often  constitutes  the  principal  gi-owth  over  a  consid- 
erable area,  giving  way  in  richer  moist  coves  and  on  benches  to 
White  Oak  and  other  hardwoods,  and  appearing  again  on  the  thinner 
soils.  As  with  Chestnut  Oak,  the  best  growth  occurs  on  the  middle 
and  lower  slopes;  that  found  on  and  near  the  summits  of  the  moun- 
tains is  short  and  of  small  diameter. 

The  Red  Oak  is  a  constant  associate  of  the  White  Oak,  Chestnut 
Oak  and  Chestnut,  but  far  less  abundant  than  these  species.  In 
stands  of  60  to  80  trees  to  the  acre  the  Red  Oak  forms  only  from 
five  to  ten  per  cent.  It  is  a  tree  singularly  well  adapted  to  a  variety 
of  soils,  often  producing  well-formed  trunks  even  in  the  deep  crevices 
of  almost  bare  rock.  The  largest  trees  occur  in  rich  coves  and  sinks 
where  the  underlying  rock  is  broken. 

The  White  Pine  occurs  almost  entirely  on  northern  and  eastern 
slopes,  ascending  to  the  summits  of  the  highest  mountains  (Mt. 
Savage,  Warrior  Ridge  and  Dans  Mountain).    It  is  especially  con- 


272 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAXT  COUXTY 


spicuous  along  the  rocky  north  slopes  of  streams,  often  forming 
dense,  narrow  belts  of  pure  growth  down  to  the  water's  edge 
(Fig.  14).  Higher  up  on  the  slopes  it  is  usually  mingled  with  hard- 
woods. The  White  Pine  forest  shown  in  Fig.  l-t  is  composed 
chiefly  of  young  timber  (25  to  75  years  old),  ranging  from  6  to  occa- 
sionally 15  inches  in  diameter,  and  under  GO  feet  in  height.  A 
much  older,  scattered  growth  of  this  pine  is  found  among  hardwoods. 
Under  these  conditions  the  trunks  are  IS  to  30  inches  in  diameter 


Fig.  14. — Pure  growth  of  white  near  Flii.i-;.  u- 


and  80  to  100  feet  high.  The  White  Pine  of  this  county  grows  best 
in  moist,  well  drained,  clayey  loam  soils,  such  as  produce  the  finest 
White  Oak. 

DISTKIBUTIOX  OF  SUBORDINATE  TIMBER  TREES. 

The  next  most  conspicuous  timber  trees  are,  among  conifers,  the 
Pitch  Pine,  Shortleaf  Pine,  Table-mountain  Pine  and  Scrub  Pine. 
Of  hardwoods,  the  principal  remaining  species  are  Sugar  Maple,  Red 
Maple,  Shagbark  Hickory,  Tuli]>trce,  White  Ash,  White  Basswood, 
Locust,  Black  Gum  and  American  Elm.    The  pines  commonly  pass 


MAEYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUEVEY 


273 


for  one  species.  Together,  they  constitute  an  important  element 
in  the  forest  cover  of  A-erv  exposed,  bare,  rocky,  southern  slopes. 

The  Scrub  Pine  forms  a  dense  cover  in  the  poorest  shaly  soils  on 
the  lower  southern  slopes  of  the  high  ridges,  or  more  frequently  on 
the  south  side  of  low  hills  throughout  the  middle  and  southern  sec- 
tions of  the  county  (Plate  XXVII,  Fig.  2).  It  is  peculiarly  adapted 
to  exposed,  sterile  soils,  often  taking  possession  of  abandoned,  worn- 
ont  fields  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  species.  In  richer  soils  and  less 
exposed  localities  it  gives  way  to  patches  of  hardwoods.  Most  of  the 
Scrub  Pine  now  standing  is  of  small  size,  ranging  from  two  to  six 
inches,  with  occasional  trees  eight  to  fourteen  inches  in  diameter. 
The  largest  trees  which  grow  on  least  exposed  sites  have  straight 
clear  tnmks  twenty  to  thirty  feet  long.  The  growth  found  on  the 
most  exposed,  precipitous  sites  is  usually  low,  crooked,  and  much 
branched. 

At  higher  elevations,  comprising  the  middle  benches  and  summits 
of  the  mountains.  Pitch  and  T able-mount ai 71  Pine  occupy  sterile, 
rocky  situations  on  southern,  southeastern  and  southwestern  ex- 
posures. Scattered  individuals  also  occur  mingled  with  hardwoods 
on  the  low  shaly  hilltops  adjacent  to  the  mountains  (Plate  XXIX, 
Figs.  1,  2).  "Where  these  pines  form  the  principal  growth,  the  two 
species  are  usually  mingled  in  about  equal  numbers.  Xot  infre- 
quently, however,  the  Table-mountain  Pine  forms  pure  open  stands 
of  ten  to  fifty  acres  on  narrow,  rocky  benches  high  up  on  the  moun- 
tain sides.  In  exceptional  instances  also,  stunted  Shortleaf  Pine  is 
to  be  seen  among  these  mountain  groves,  notably  on  Town  Hill. 
Little  merchantable  timber  is  produced  by  the  Pitch  Pine  and  Table- 
mountain  Pine,  as  their  principal  growth  is  low  and  much  branched 
and  the  wood  coarse-gi'ained  and  knotty. 

The  hardwoods  of  this  group  appear  more  or  less  scattered  among 

the  deciduous  species  already  mentioned  as  forming  forests.  One 

of  the  most  abundant  of  these  is  the  Sugar  Maple.    It  occurs  in  all 

the  moist  rocky  coves  and  in  the  vicinity  of  streams  throughout  the 

county.    Its  ability  to  thrive  in  the  seams  of  almost  bare  limestone 

and  quartzitic  rock  is  remarkable.    Well-formed  large  trees  were 
18 


274 


THE   FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


frequently  met  wliere  only  a  scanty  deposit  of  soil  had  filled  the 
narrow  crevices  in  the  rock. 

Closely  associated  with  the  Sngar  ;^[aple,  but  in  fewer  numbers, 
are  the  Red  Maple,  White  Basswood,  White  Ash,  Shagbark  Hickory, 
Locust,  Tulip-tree  and  Beech.  These  scantily  represented  species 
form  open  forests  in  which  none  occur  abimdantly  or  continuously, 
but  at  irregular  and  often  long  intervals.  These  trees  were  doubtless 
more  abundant  in  former  years.  The  present  economic  value  of  this 
growth  is  small,  except  for  fuel,  as  no  considerable  yield  of  any  one 
kind  can  be  secured  without  very  wide  culling. 

DISTRIBUTION  OF  OCCASIONAL  TIMBER  TREES. 

Still  less  prominently  represented  are  a  few  other  valiuible  timber 
trees,  notably  the  Black  "Walnut,  Butternut,  Moekernut  and  Pignut 
Hickory,  Swamp  White  Oak,  Cucumber-tree,  Black  Cherry,  Syca- 
more, Black  Ash  and  Eed  Juniper.  Excepting  the  Black  Ash  and 
Swamp  White  Oak,  which  are  j>eculiar  only  to  swampy  glades  of 
the  high  valleys,  all  of  these  trees  are  found  as  stragglers  among 
the  preceding  more  abundant  kinds.  Very'  probably  the  original 
forests  of  this  region  contained  much  larger  numbers,  as  the  special 
conditions  favorable  to  their  growth  are  prevalent. 

The  other  trees  enumerated  are  nearly  all  small  and  of  little  im- 
portance. They  are  generally  distributed  among  the  more  conspicu- 
ous forest  growth.  A  feAV  only  are  confined  to  certain  localities,  and 
interesting  because  of  their  rarity  in  this  region,  or  special  usefulness 
in  establishing  a  cover  imder  which  better  kinds  may  grow.  Among 
those  species  are  the  Sweet  Birch  and  Wild  Red  Cherry,  which  occur 
only  on  tlie  highest  summits.  The  latter  is  not  a  tree  of  economic 
value  and  is  mentioned  only  on  account  of  its  rarity.  The  Sweet 
Birch  supplies  an  important  furniture  wood  in  mountainous  parts 
of  the  adjacent  states  where  the  rocky  soil  is  deep  and  rich.  The 
timber  produced  is  of  large  size.  In  Allegany  county,  however,  this 
Birch  is  necessarily  small  on  account  of  the  present  extremely  sterile 
soil. 

The  Barren  Oak  is  the  most  conspicuous  of  small  trees  in  the 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY.  ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXVII. 


Fig.  1.— scrub  pine,  near  oldtown. 


Fig.  2.— defective  large  white  pine  in  young  hardwood,  fifteen  mile  creek, 
forests  of  allegany  county. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


275 


region.  It  forms  low,  dense,  brnsliy  thickets  high  iip  on  the  moun- 
tains and  ridges  wherever  the  original  deciduous  forests  have  been 
entirely  cut  or  burned  off.  Being  partial  to  the  poor,  shaly  soils  of 
these  high  elevations,  it  serves  a  useful  pui-pose  in  establishing  a 
ground  cover,  which  prevents  "\dolent  Avasliing  of  the  soil.  Useful 
timber  species  soon  follow  imder  the  protection  of  the  more  hardy 
Ban'en  Oak. 

Finally,  the  Hackberry,  Sweet  Crab,  Thorny  Haws,  Wild  Plum, 
Servicebeny,  Eedbud,  !N"aiinybeny  and  Sumachs  are  small  fore- 
runners in  the  natural  reforestation  of  abandoned  cleared  lands  in 
the  valleys  on  the  lower  hills.  Together  with  briai-s  and  other  shrubs, 
these  small  trees  take  complete  possession  of  such  lands  in  from  ten 
to  fifteen  or  more  years.  Following  this  gTOwth  may  be  seen  the 
slow,  sure  introduction  of  the  better  kinds  of  forest  trees. 

Important  Tijlber  Trees:  Their  Abundance  and  Uses. 

The  most  abundant  and  commercially  important  timber  trees  of 
this  region  are  White  Pine,  Shortleaf  Pine,  Hemlock,  "White  Oak, 
Chestnut  Oak,  Ked  Oak,  Chestnut,  Shagbark  Hickory,  Sugar  Maple, 
White  Ash,  Tulip-tree,  Basswood  and  Black  Walnut.  Other  species 
represented  supply  much  useful  timber,  but  occur  too  sparingly  to 
afford  large  supplies. 

The  original  forests  of  this  county  produced  considerable  White 
and  Shortleaf  Pine  and  large  quantities  of  White  Oak,  Yellow  Poplar 
and  Hickory  timber,  together  with  an  abundance  of  Chestnut  Oak 
and  Hemlock  tan-bark.  The  timber  was  large  and  of  excellent 
quality,  and  is  estimated  to  have  frequently  given  an  acre  yield  of 
from  8,000  to  10,000  board  feet,  over  large  areas,  or  possibly  more 
in  some  localities. 

The  old,  slow  water  sawmills  made  but  small  inroads  upon  this 
supply;  but  evidence  is  everywhere  present  of  the  nearly  complete 
culling  made  later  by  portable  steam  sawmills  (Fig.  15).  The  latter 
have  so  completely  lumbered  out  the  large  sound  timber  on  all  the 
principal  streams,  in  the  once  heavily  wooded  coves  and  on  the  rich 
mountain  benches  and  gentle  slopes,  that  at  present  sizable  timber 
of  good  quality  is  scarce  and  distant  from  public  roadways. 


276 


THE  FOBESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COCXTY 


Most  of  the  large  White  Pine  is  now  gone.  Defective  old  AVhite 
Pines  are  frequently  seen  scattered  over  slopes  now  covered  with 
young  hardwood  forest?  (Plate  XXVIT.  Fig.  2);  only  an  occasional 
sound  "White  Pine  is  to  be  found. 

Shortleaf  Pine  is  similarly  exhausted.  Small  groups  and  scat- 
tered single  trees  are  to  be  found  in  patches  of  hardwoods  on  farms 
in  the  lower  hill  country,  or  forming  thin  belts  skirting  the  lower 
slopes  of  the  higher,  wooded  mountains.    Only  occasional  large 


Fig.  15. — Portable  steam  sawmill. 

trees  are  to  be  found  (Plate  XXX,  Fig.  1).  The  majority  are  now 
too  few  or  of  too  small  size  to  furnish  any  considerable  amount  of 
timber. 

The  saw  timber  now  available  consists  chiefly  of  White  Oak,  Chest- 
mit  Oak,  Red  Oak  and  Chestnut,  with  only  occasional  logs  of  second 
growth  White  Pine,  Shortleaf  Pine,  Pitch  Pine,  Basswood  and  Shag- 
bark  Hickory.  The  approximate  acre  yield  of  timber  now  standing 
amounts  to  from  less  than  500  to  about  2,000  board  feet;  exceptional, 
isolated  small  bodies  would  cut  from  3,000  to  6,000  feet  per  acre. 
These  supplies  occur,  however,  at  long  intervals,  and,  as  already 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


277 


stated,  are  profitably  reached  only  by  small  portable  sawmills,  Avhich 
find  employment  mostly  for  only  a  few  months  in  one  place.  Siz- 
able timber  is  especially  scarce  near  railways  and  the  principal 
wagon-roads,  over  which  the  original  stock  has  largely  been  taken. 

A  few  portable  sawmills  are  cutting  small  quantities  of  the  above- 
mentioned  timber  at  various  points  through  the  northern  and  middle 
portions  of  the  county.  In  some  cases  the  output  is  a  mixed  cut  of 
hardwoods  and  pine,  while  in  other  localities  the  cut  is  principally 
either  oak  or  pine.  The  best  quality  of  lumber  produced  is  oak. 
The  pine  cut  is  very  knotty  and  of  second-  or  third-rate  quality. 
Owing  most  likely  to  the  absence  of  convenient  railway  connections, 
a  comparatively  low  price,  $8.00  to  $12.50  per  1,000  board  feet,  is 
received  for  the  average  local  output  of  lumber. 

The  demand  for  mining  props  and  railway  ties  is  apparently  large 
and  relatively  more  profitable  to  the  producer  than  liuuber.  The 
output  of  this  material  is,  however,  confined  chiefly  to  localities  near 
the  coal  and  fire-clay  mines  and  the  railways  in  the  western  part  of 
the  county,  and  to  the  region  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad 
and  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal.  Poor  roads  and  high  hills  render 
it  unprofitable  to  haul  such  heavy  material  from  the  more  distant 
interior  sections  lying  to  the  north. 

The  mining  props  cut  show  that  nearly  all  the  trees  of  the  region 
contribute  to  this  material.  The  species  commonly  cut  are  White 
Oak,  Chestnut  Oak,  Scarlet  Oak  and  Eed  Oak,  Shagbark  Hickory, 
Pignut  Hickory  and  Mockernut  Hickory,  Chestnut,  Red  Mulben-y, 
Locust,  Sugar  Maple,  Red  Maple,  Black  Gum,  "White  Ash,  Black 
Cherry,  White  Pine,  Pitch  Pine,  Scrub  Pine,  Table-mountain  Pine 
and  Shortleaf  Pine.  All  are  used  without  distinction,  but  those  most 
highly  prized  for  their  strength  and  durability  are  White  Oak, 
Chestnut  and  Locust.  The  props  range  from  five  to  seven  inches 
in  diameter  at  the  butt,  and  are  nine  feet  long.  It  is  rare,  therefore, 
that  a  tree  furnishes  more  than  three  props.  The  present  stand  of 
young  timber  fit  for  this  purpose  affords  a  yield  of  35  to  50  props 
per  acre.  Where  the  stand  is  largely  Chestnut  and  Locust,  which 
is  often  the  case,  such  cuttings  may  be  made  approximately  every 


278 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAJfY  COUNTT 


ten  to  fifteen  years.  For  young  forests  containing  mixtures  of  the 
other  species  mentioned,  a  cutting  for  mining  props  can  be  made 
in  from  fifteen  to  eigliteen  or  more  years.  E.xcluding  the  conifers, 
much  of  this  material  is  supplied  by  coppice  sprouts,  the  Chestnut 
and  Locust  far  outstripping  the  other  hardwoods  in  growth.  The 
remainder  of  the  props  comes  from  pole  stock,  grown  from  seed,  25  to 
30  years  old.  The  annual  consumption  of  mining  props  in  the  coal 
and  fire-clay  mines  of  western  Allegany  county  is  roughly  esti- 
mated at  about  1,000,000.  This  represents  an  annual  culling  of 
about  2S,000  acres. 

The  wastefulness  of  cutting  such  timber  as  White  Oak,  Hickories, 
Maples,  "White  Ash  and  "White  Pine  at  the  short  interval  of  fifteen 
to  eighteen  years  should  be  apparent,  and  will  be  discussed  later. 
The  use  of  the  other  less  valuable  timber  species,  and  especially  the 
rapid  growing  Chestnut  and  Locust  is  more  advisable. 

This  county  has  produced  large  quantities  of  Chestnut  Oak  tan- 
bark  and  considerable  Hemlock  in  the  western  part.  The  sources 
of  supply  are,  however,  now  greatly  diminished  or  exhausted.  No 
bodies  of  Hemlock  exist  in  the  county.  The  small  quantity  of 
young  timber  scattered  along  rocky  north  slopes  of  streams  in  west- 
ern Allegany,  is  insuflicient  to  supply  tan-bark. 

The  once  abimdant  stand  of  Chestnut  Oak  has  likewise  been 
nearly  exhausted  by  bark  i>eelers.  The  comparative  lightness  of  this 
product  has  enabled  producers  to  secure  bark  from  even  the  steep, 
rocky  slopes  of  the  highest  mountains,  from  which  the  hauling  of 
heavier  saw-timber  would  have  been  improfitable.  The  large  tanning 
establishment  wliich  continiied  for  many  years  at  Gilpintown,  in 
the  north  central  part  of  the  county,  had  to  be  abandoned  a  number 
of  years  ago  for  lack  of  tan-bark. 

AVith  scarcely  an  exception,  the  exploitation  of  tan-bark  in  the 
past  was  attended  by  a  total  waste  of  the  timber,  and  most  of  the 
bark  peeling  of  the  present  time  leaves  the  trunks  unused.  The  only 
exception  observed  by  the  writer  was  in  recent  work  on  the  lands 
of  the  Consolidated  Coal  Company  in  the  western  part  of  the  county. 
Here  all  peeled  Chestn\it  Oak  is  being  sawed  up  for  mining  timber 
witli  the  other  timber  stripped  from  coal-bearing  land. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SUmTY 


279 


Relation  of  Lumberixg  and  Mining  to  Reproduction. 

It  wonkl  be  difficult  to  find  a  region  in  which  the  useful  timber 
has  been  *more  generally  removed  than  in  this  county,  and  at  the 
same  time,  one  in  which  so  much  forest  cover  has  been  left  intact. 
Doubtless  only  the  non-agricultural  nature  of  the  greater  part  of  the 
original  forest-bearing  regions  has  prevented  an  almost  complete 
deforestation.  In  cutting  the  timber  no  pains  were  taken  to  assist 
the  reproduction  of  original  timber  species.  The  purpose  of  all  cut- 
tings was  the  same,  whether  for  sawlogs,  tan-bark,  ties,  or  mining 
props;  the  largest  amount  of  useful  material,  regardless  of  conse- 
quences, was  the  prime  object.  That  all  but  the  twenty-five  or  thirty 
per  cent  of  arable  land  in  the  comity  has  continued  to  bear  a  forest 
cover,  is  evidence  of  the  greatest  natural  persistence  in  reproduction, 
which  often  takes  place  under  very  unfavorable  conditions. 

The  reforesting  of  denuded  land  in  this  humid  region  is,  therefore, 
one  of  the  easiest  problems.  In  spite  of  abusive  methods  of  lumber- 
ing and  other  cutting  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  disappearance  of  any 
of  the  original  timber  species.  A  careful  study  of  the  young  tim- 
ber and  seedlings  shows  all  the  old  species  to  be  present  in  the  young 
growth.  The  absence,  however,  of  large-sized  trees  of  certain 
species,  in  fact,  sometimes  of  any  but  small  seedlings,  usually  sug- 
gests to  the  casual  obser^-er  that  once  prevalent  trees  have  perma- 
nently disappeared  from  a  region.  The  fact  also  that  the  commer- 
cial supply  of  such  timber  as  White  and  Shortleaf  Pine  appeal's  to 
remain  exhausted,  may  add  to  the  impression  that  these  trees  can 
never  again  produce  the  original  abundance  of  timber.  But  the 
natural  reproduction  of  these  trees  in  this  region  is  peculiarly  good. 
It  required  one  to  two  or  more  hundred  years  to  produce  the  supply 
of  large  White  and  Shortleaf  Pine  found  in  this  county  forty  years 
ago;  and  the  various  stages  of  struggle  between  the  contending  hard- 
woods and  pines  for  the  possession  of  this  ground  were  unseen  by  those 
who  cut  off  the  finally  dominant  pines.  Much  of  the  area  thus 
wooded  now  bears  a  principally  young  deciduous  forest  with  only 
scattered  remnants  of  the  once  abundant  pine;  trees  which  at  the 
time  the  larger  timber  was  taken  escaped  the  axe  either  because  they 


280 


THE   FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  C0U:TTY 


were  too  defective  for  use  or  of  undersize.  The  old  defective  trees 
have  continued  to  exist,  and  the  undersized  are  now  large  enough  for 
saw-timber,  but  generally  too  few  to  claim  attention. 

The  establishment  of  another  growth  of  pine  like  the  one  removed 
can  be  accomplished  only  by  another  long  struggle.  The  seed  trees 
left  standing  are  centers  of  reproduction.  But  each  of  the  pines 
must  spread  under  conditions  best  suited  to  its  reproduction.  The 
White  Pine  of  this  county  will  establish  itself  in  pure  growth  on 
cleared  land  on  exceptionally  moist,  protected,  portions  of  northern 
slopes,  and  elsewhere  only  under  the  moderate  shade  of  young  hard- 
woo<ls.  Once  established,  however,  the  young  pines  do  not  require 
further  protection;  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  must  remain  sup- 
pressed till  accident  or  desigTi  removes  enough  of  the  hardwoods  to 
allow  the  pines  to  grow  up. 

Tlie  Shortloaf  Pine  must  spread  from  the  few  seed  trees  left  here 
and  there  by  pushing  into  sunny,  partly  shaded  openings  among  the 
hardwoods.  It  makes  a  successful  stand  in  such  places,  if  it  outstrips 
or  keeps  up  in  height  growth  with  the  hardwoods. 

This  reproduction  of  pine,  which  is  going  on  now,  would,  if  unin- 
terrupted, require  so  many  years  that  the  generation  of  settlers  who 
saw  and  helped  to  remove  the  original  crop  of  pine  could  not  witness 
the  perfection  of  the  returning  crop.  Moreover,  the  commercial  condi- 
tions of  the  region  are  now  greatly  changed  from  those  attending  the 
former  growth.  The  present  increasing  and  constant  demand  for 
small-sized  timber  in  this  region  prevents  the  White  or  Shortleaf 
Pine  and  many  other  useful  timbers  from  reaching  mature  growth. 
Thousands  of  pine  props  are  made  from  very  yovmg  trees,  thus  cut- 
ting off  all  chance  for  the  production  of  the  more  valuable  mature 
timber. 

In  conclusion,  it  may  be  restated  that  while  the  present  and  past 
cutting  of  saw-timl>er,  ties,  mining  props  and  timber  for  tan-bark  has 
locally  depleted  or  entirely  exhausted  the  supply  of  timber,  it  has  not 
materially  changed  the  composition  of  the  forests  now  standing.  The 
original  species  remain,  and  the  hardwoods  promptly  increase  wher- 
ever the  axe,  fire  and  gi-azing  are  withheld;  the  conifers  come  back 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXVIII. 


Fig.  'Z— shortleaf  pine  and  pitch  pine,  town  hill. 
FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


281 


more  slowly.  Moreover,  as  already  shown,  where  cleared  agricul- 
tural land  is  long  abandoned,  this  land  quickly  reverts  to  the  original 
forested  condition. 

It  is  not  to  be  presumed,  however,  that  with  a  widespread  and 
complete  removal  of  existing  species  a  serious  change  would  not  be 
made  in  the  composition  of  the  subsequent  forest  gi'owth.  The 
reproduction  of  all  trees,  as  with  other  plants,  depends  emphatically 
on  the  presence  of  seed  trees,  be  they  far  from  or  near  the  cleared 
land.  But  the  lumbering  and  other  timber-consuming  industries  of 
previous  years  have  by  chance  left  enough  seed  trees  to  assure  the 
perpetuation  of  all  species  for  the  present. 

The  removal  of  large  deposits  of  coal  from  beneath  wooded  areas 
may  permanently  change  the  surface,  kill  the  existing  timber  and 
retard  subsequent  reproduction. 

As  is  well  known  to  those  familiar  with  these  coal-mining  opera- 
tions, as  much  as  possible  of  the  big  coal-veins,  about  6  to  9  feet 
thick  and  lying  in  a  horizontal  position,  is  taken  out  before  aban- 
doning the  mines.  In  agricultural  regions  these  worked-out  coal- 
'beds  may  doubtless  be  left  suflSeiently  shored  up  by  pillars  of  coal  to 
prevent  any  collapsing  of  the  surface.  In  the  rougher  hill  country, 
however,  mostly  with  bnisli  or  forest  cover,  such  expensive  precau- 
tions are  not  likely  to  be  taken.  The  coal  is  taken  out  and  the  sur- 
face left  to  sink  or  retain  its  position,  as  circumstances  permit.  When 
coal-beds  lie  over  one  hundred  feet  below  the  surface,  the  unsup- 
ported cavity  seems  not  to  result  in  any  but  an  irregular  depression 
in  the  surface.  Where  the  removal  of  deposits  is  nearer  the  surface 
(30  to  75  feet),  the  final  dropping  of  the  surface  is  usually  violent. 
Cavernous  pits  are  produced  which  engulf  the  forest  growth  in  min- 
gled masses  of  variously  tilted,  fallen  and  upright  trunks;  but  miich 
of  this  continues  to  grow.  The  timber  thus  involved  is  almost  en- 
tirely inaccessible.  These  break?  in  the  surface  are  gradually  nuich 
smoothed  in  their  more  abriqjt  portions  by  the  washing  and  sliding 
of  soil  and  rocks.  Smaller  vegetation  covers  the  bare  spots,  and  the 
undermined  rough  surface  is  finally  overgTOwn  with  brush  and  forest 
trees. 


282 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUN'TY 


Wherever  coal  lands  bearing  considerable  useful  timl)er  are  cou- 
tiolled  by  ownership,  the  usual  plan  is  to  remove  all  usable  timber 
before  the  coal  is  mined.  This  takes  all  sound  trees  down  to  about 
three  inches  in  diameter.  If  uninterrupted,  the  final  recovery  by 
original  species  is  well  assured.  For  when  carefully  examined,  the 
forest  floor  of  such  denuded  lands  is  found  to  contain  well  established 
seedlings  of  the  principal  timber  species  from  two  to  ten  years  old. 
In  addition  to  these,  much  of  the  sapling  growth  comprising  the  same 
kinds  survives  the  destructive  lumbering  methods  employed  and  also 
the  caving-in  of  the  surface. 

The  much  greater  value  of  the  coal  deposit  must  always  properly 
have  precedence  over  the  present  timber  crop  lying  above,  and  also 
over  that  which  would  have  been  possible  during  the  term  of  years 
necessary  for  the  land  to  recuperate  from  the  effects  of  the  under- 
mining. It  only  remains  to  be  said,  therefore,  respecting  the  rela- 
tionship of  coal-mining  operations  and  forest  reproduction  that  there 
is  an  appreciable  loss  in  timber  production  on  imdennined  forest 
land.  The  period  of  this  loss  will  vary,  according  to  the  piirpose 
for  which  the  timber  rotations  are  taken,  from  twenty  to  one  hundred 
or  more  years.  The  actual  annual  loss  of  timber  growth  for  the 
species  represented  could  not  be  accurately  stated  without  an  ex- 
tended study  of  the  productiveness  of  abandoned  coal  lands. 

Some  permanent  damage  is  also  to  be  mentioned  as  a  resiilt  of 
a  fixed  change  in  the  surface  of  undemiined  forest  lands.  The  inac- 
cessibility of  such  lands  for  future  lumber  operations  is  greatly  in- 
creased. In  many  places  the  timber  is  likely  to  be  difficult  to  get  at, 
and  the  building  of  roadways  is  expensive  on  so  broken  a  surface. 

Forest  Fires  axd  their  Relatiox  to  REPRODrcTiox. 

Forest  fires  have  Jjeen  widely  prevalent  in  this  county,  but  their 
effects  are  not  strikingly  evident.  Types  of  the  widespread  and  long- 
enduring  devastation  so  common  in  the  more  western  timbered  states 
are  nowhere  seen  in  this  region.  However  severe  the  damage  done 
may  be,  the  ravages  of  Allegany  county  fires  are  soon  greatly  con- 
cealed by  rapid  and  abimdant  reproduction.  Moreover,  very  little 
large  timber  appeai-s  to  have  been  killed  by  fire. 


MARYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SUEA'EY 


283 


Two  factors  explain  the  rapid  recoverv  and  small  injury  to  large 
timber.  The  largest  areas  of  timber  land  are  comprised  in  the  prin- 
cipal mountain  ranges.  The  most  prevalent  fires  have  occurred  in 
these  localities.  Xow  the  principal  reason  that  destructive  fires  do 
not  occur,  is  in  the  fact  that  there  is  no  deep  humus  and  little  accumi:- 
lated  debris  to  feed  a  deep  burning  fire.  In  its  present  condition,  the 
soil  and  humiis  cover  in  these  forests  is  only  from  one  to  two  inches 
deep  and  lies  on  bare  rock  and  shale.  Large  areas  bear  no  soil  or 
humus  at  all,  except  in  the  crevices  of  the  rock,  while  elsewhere  the 
bare  soil  is  composed  largely  of  slaty  shale. 

With  very  little  dry,  fallen  timber  or  brush,  the  fires  occurring  in 
these  sections  are  fed  mostly  by  the  heavy  fall  of  leaves.  The  ex- 
posed rock  and  shale  immediately  beneath  permits  only  a  surface 
fire,  which  almost  never  reaches  the  tree  roots  lying  deep  in  crevices 
or  beneath  the  shale. 

The  ordinary  effect  upon  the  larger  timber  ti'ees  is  a  noticeable 
but  harmless  scorching  of  the  thick  bark  from  two  to  six  feet  up;  the 
resin-covered  tnmks  of  the  Table-mountain,  Pitch  and  Shortleaf  Pine 
bear  the  higher  fire  marks.  The  greatest  damage  to  large  timber 
observable  within  recent  times  resulted  from  a  fire  which  occurred 
about  six  years  ago.  Considerable  dry,  down  timber  in  some  locali- 
ties where  selective  cutting  for  saw-timber  had  been  done,  attended 
by  a  dry  season,  resulted  in  an  unusually  severe  fire.  Few  large 
trees  were  killed,  but  many  were  badly  burned  in  spots  at  the  collar, 
evidently  from  the  burning  of  unused  logs  and  treetops  lying  near 
or  in  contact  with  gi-een  trunks.  While  these  burney  trees  sur- 
vived the  fire  perfectly,  the  trunks  are,  as  a  result  of  l:»urning,  with- 
out an  exception,  ■  decaying  at  the  heart  and  deteriorating  for  saw- 
timber. 

The  effect  of  surface  fires  on  seedlings  and  coppifce  sprouts  is  disas- 
trous in  killing  most  growth  from  one  to  ten  feet  high.  The  thin- 
barked  stems  of  all  species  are  severely  scorched  so  that  they  die 
down  to  the  gTound.  An  encouraging  feature  is,  however,  that  the 
roots  of  seedlings  over  one  year  old  are  rarely  killed.  They  pro- 
duce vigorous  sprouts  the  following  season.    The  scorching  of  Chest- 


284 


THE  FORESTS  OF   ALLEfiAXY  COrXTY 


nut  and  Oak  pprouts  is  often  so  slieht  as  to  kill  only  the  thin  hark, 
leaving  the  sapwood  uninjured;  a  few  immature  leaves  are  then  put 
forth,  but  the  stems  finally  die  down  to  the  ground. 

While  in  general  the  damage  by  fires  in  this  region  appears  not  to 
l)e  great,  especially  since  there  is  little  or  no  apparent  decrease  in  the 
forest  cover,  nevertheless,  the  combined  effects  xipon  all  ages  of 
growth  are  very  appreciable.  The  greatest  damage  is  done  in  the 
periodic  destruction  of  from  one  to  ten  or  more  years'  growth  of  seed- 
lings and  coppice  sprouts.  A  few  very  young  seedlings  are  also  killed. 
Clearly,  therefore,  the  productiveness  of  these  forests  is  much 
rediiced;  in  fact,  where  fires  nm  through  this  young  growth  at  short 
intervals  it  is  practically  held  at  a  standstill  for  many  years.  Actual 
growth  is  confined  only  to  such  saplings  and  older  trees  as  are,  from 
their  size,  capable  of  withstanding  light  fires.  The  direct  effect  of 
retarded  reproduction  would  be  much  more  apparent  to  consumers  of 
timber  in  the  region  than  it  is  now,  if  these  forests  were  systematically 
cut  over  for  the  fullest  utilization  of  timber.  The  present  timber- 
producing  stock  woiild  eventually  be  exhausted.  "Wooded  areas 
which  now  give  the  impression  to  many  of  being  constantly  stocked 
and  improving  would  soon  be  reduced  to  an  unproductive  state.  Many 
acres  of  woodland  are  thus  to  be  found  which  yield  practically  noth- 
ing, from  the  fact  that  all  small  stock  is  periodically  destroyed. 

Closely  related  to  this  retardation  is  the  fact  that  constant  destruc- 
tion of  humus  reduces  the  productive  power  of  the  forest  soil,  both  in 
point  of  richness  and  in  the  power  of  retaining  moisture.  A  loss  of 
the  latter  directly  affects  all  agricultural  lands  below  the  wooded 
mountain  slopes.  For  with  all  small  vegetation  and  absorbing  humus 
burned  off,  a  large  percentage  of  rain-  and  snow-water  rushes  over  the 
clean  surface  to  wash  and  erode  the  tilled  lands  below. 

The  common  belief  expressed  by  many  people  in  this  region,  that 
the  frequency  of  forest  fires  is  beneficial  in  rendering  each  succeed- 
ing fire  less  and  less  dangerous  is  a  pernicious  fallacy,  overlooking  the 
damage  just  recited. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXIX. 


MAEYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


285 


Managemeitt  and  Utilization  of  Forest  Resources. 

Without  a  inuch  more  detailed  examinatioii  than  was  possible  in 
the  brief  time  given  the  -work  by  the  ■writer,  it  would  not  be  possible 
to  formulate  an  adequate  plan  of  management  for  the  various  forest 
types  and  conditions  of  this  county.  The  needs  of  different  sections 
of  the  county  are  not  the  same,  and  would,  therefore,  require  special 
study.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  a  statement  of  some  of  the 
general  needs  of  Allegany  county  forests  in  point  of  treatment  and 
utilization  will  not  be  out  of  place,  and  may  even  prove  of  consid- 
erable practical  value  to  intelligent  owners  of  woodlots.  Indeed,  it 
is  gratifying  to  state  in  this  connection  that  the  farmers  and  other 
ownei-s  of  woodlands,  and  officers  in  charge  of  forest  lands  in  this 
region  are  remarkably  well  informed  upon  the  condition  and  com- 
position of  their  forests.  The  average  intelligent  farmer  is  per- 
fectly familiar  with  the  location  and  character  of  the  principal  timber 
trees  of  his  region,  and  recognizes  most  of  them  even  in  their  younger 
stages  of  growth.  Such  information  is  of  great  practical  value,  and 
with  the  suggestions  to  be  given,  will,  for  the  time  being,  enable 
thoughtful  men  to  improve  their  woodlots  considerably.' 

Xearly  sixty  years  of  constant  drain  upon  the  forests  of  this  county 
has  reduced  them  to  a  state  of  the  lowest  productiveness,  which  has 
in  turn  led  to  an  impression  among  many  people  that  this  resource  is 
irretrievably  gone.  As  already  pointed  out,  however,  the  rapid 
natural  reproduction  in  this  region  is  most  encouraging  for  a  recupera- 
tion of  these  depleted  forests  if  the  latter  can  be  placed  under  a  con- 
servative management.  Moreover,  it  is  believed  that  the  large  per- 
centage of  rocky  hills  and  mountain  land  now  in  forest  can  be  most 
profitably  held  in  this  condition ;  in  fact,  much  of  the  hill  and  moun- 
tain land,  once  cleared  and  now  abandoned,  was  evidently  neglected 
because  of  low  agricultural  productiveness. 

In  conclusion,  attention  is  called  to  the  following  general  recom- 

'  For  careful  improvement  and  utilization  of  their  forest  lands  owners 
are  especially  recommended  to  apply  to  the  Division  of  Forestry,  U.  S. 
Department  of  Ag-riculture,  for  Circular  21,  entitled  "  Practical  Assistance 
to  Farmers,  Lvimbermen  and  Others  in  Handling  Forest  Lands."  (1898.) 


28G 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEfiANY  COUNTY 


mendations  which  are  believed  to  be  important  in  the  management 
of  woodlands  in  this  county,  both  as  looking  to  increased  production 
of  timber  and  to  the  protection  of  agricultural  lands  from  erosion 
and  the  consequent  deterioration.  Discxissions  of  these  recommenda- 
tions follow  in  detail : 

1.  Protection  of  forest  lands  from  fire. 

2.  Exclusion  of  grazing  from  forest  lands. 

3.  Regulation  of  indiscriminate  cutting. 

4.  Regulation  of  indiscriminate  clearing. 

Protection  of  Forest  Lands  from  Fire. 

Sufficient  has  been  said  as  to  the  injury  to  forests  by  fires. 

Fires  in  this  region  are  commonly  believed  to  be  caused  through 
the  carelessness  of  pleasure  parties,  hunters,  woodsmen  and  other  peo- 
ple in  the  forests. 

The  penalty  imposed  by  the  Maryland  law '  for  wilfully  or  care- 
lessly setting  forest  fires  appears  to  be  adequate,  but  it  is  believed 
will  never  completely  control  the  evil.    The  great  difficulty  under 

'  By  an  early  statute  in  this  state,  it  was  forbidden  to  maliciouslj'  set 
on  fire  any  woods,  fences,  marshes,  lands,  leaves,  or  rubbish  thereon,  within 
the  counties  of  Baltimore,  Anne  Arundel,  Frederick,  Montgomery,  Allegajiy, 
Queen  Anne's,  Harford,  Cecil,  or  Prince  George's,  so  as  to  occasion  any  loss, 
damage,  or  injurj-  to  other  persons,  under  penalty  of  a  fine  not  exceeding 
$100,  one-half  to  the  informer  and  the  other  half  to  the  countj',  besides  the 
costs;  or,  if  unable  to  pa\-  this  fine,  by  imprisonment  not  over  six  mouths. 
A  slave  thus  convicted  might  be  punished  by  whipping,  not  exceeding  thirty- 
nine  lashes,  on  the  bare  back,  unless  his  owner  chose  to  paj-  a  fine  not 
exceeding  ten  pounds.  The  owner  of  property  injured  or  destroj'ed  by  such 
fires  might  recover  its  value  from  the  party  who  caused  it. 

By  an  act  passed  March  29,  1S3S,  entitled  "  An  act  to  repair  injuries  done 
by  fire  from  railroad  engines,"  it  was  provided,  that  if  any  woods,  fields, 
or  other  propert\',  real  or  personal,  be  burned  or  injured  bj"  fire  from 
engines,  the  company  should  pay  the  loss.  Actions  for  damages  under  this 
act  were  to  be  tried  at  the  first  term  of  the  court  in  which  they  are  brought, 
if  process  be  served  on  the  defendant  ten  dajs  before  the  court  convenes, 
or,  if  not,  then  at  the  court  next  following.  Service  might  be  had  upon 
any  director,  officer,  attorne\',  agent,  or  servant  of  the  defendant.  Upon 
failure  to  appear,  the  court  might,  after  the  second  term,  upon  proof  of 
service  by  the  sheritf's  return,  or  by  affidavit,  enter  a  judgment  by  default 
against  the  defendant,  by  a  jury  impanelled  at  bar,  as  in  cases  of  writs 
of  inquiry. 


MAKYLA>TD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


287 


the  present  status  of  securing  conviction  must  always  render  this  law 
an  inadequate  protection  unless  special  provision  be  made  to  enforce 
it.  This  can  be  accomplished  thoroughly  only  through  the  services 
of  special  officers. 

Protection  from  forest  fires  in  other  states  has  been  secured  by  the 
appointment  of  fire-wardens,  whose  duties  are  to  enforce  the  fire  law 
and  exterminate  forest  fires.  Chief  fire-wardens  are  now  regularly 
appointed  by  state  authoiity  in  Xew  York,  Pennsylvania  and  Minne- 
sota. In  other  states,  where,  as  yet,  these  officere  are  not  provided, 
local  officers  of  the  law  (constables,  etc.)  have  been  made  fire-wardens. 
The  benefit  of  these  systems  of  fire  service  in  states,  counties  and 
townships  possessing  woodland  is  unquestionably  great.  As  an 
example  of  this,  it  may  be  stated  that  the  work  of  fire-wardens  in  the 
Preserve  counties  of  northeastern  Xew  York  has  resulted  in  a  recent 
very  marked  control  and  reduction  in  the  number  of  foi'est  fires.  In 
addition  to  the  special  state  fire-warden  of  Xew  York,  over  two  hun- 
dred supervisors  in  these  counties  are  appointed  deputy  fire-wardens. 
The  state  provides  that  a  compensation  of  two  to  two  and  one-half 
dollars  a  day  be  paid  to  deputy  fire-wardens  for  actual  time  spent  in 
fighting  fires.  In  special  cases  of  need  these  officers  may  hire  a  tem- 
porary force  of  men  to  assist  in  subduing  fires;  and  for  such  service 
a  per  diem  rate  of  two  dollars  is  paid. 

The  establishment  of  a  fire  service  for  Western  Maryland  seems 
imperative.  This  section  combines  the  most  heavily  wooded  coim- 
ties — Washington,  Allegany  and  Gan'ett — and  should,  therefore, 
very  fitly  form  the  basis  for  establishing  such  protection.  It  is  be- 
lieved that  the  plan  of  combining  the  duties  of  fire-wardens  with 
those  of  supervisors  of  these  counties  would  be  thoroughly  feasible. 

Exclusion  of  Geazixg  FEOix  Fobest  Lands. 

The  damage  done  to  forest  land  by  gTazing  is  in  the  destruction 
of  seedlings,  by  tramping  and  browsing,  and  in  laying  bare  the 
surface,  which  is  afterward  dried  out  and  washed.  Under  these  con- 
ditions reproduction  is  either  seriously  checked  or  prevented. 

A  well-managed  forest  cannot  serve  for  two  pui-poses — good  pas- 


288 


THE  FOBESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUXTY 


ture  and  the  fullest  production  of  timber.  If  woodland  affords  good 
grass  pasture  it  is  proof  that  the  ground  is  not  fully  stocked  with 
trees;  and  if  trees  are  wanting  in  grassy  places,  most  likely  it  is  be- 
cause the  incoming  seedlings  have  been  trampled  down  from  season 
to  season  by  grazing  cattle  and  so  crowded  out  by  the  hardier  grasses. 
A  properly  stocked  forest  managed  for  short  rotations  of  small  tim- 
ber, such  as  mining  props,  ties,  etc.,  should  afford  no  forage  for  stock. 
Grazing  should  be  relegated  to  cleared  lands  or  to  brush  and  wood- 
lands intended  only  for  grazing. 

Regulatiox  of  Ixdiscrimixate  Cuttixg. 

The  injiiries  resulting  from  indiscriminate  cutting  are:  removing 
needed  seed  trees  of  the  most  useful  species,  the  leaving  of  old  trees 
which  are  suppressing  valuable  young  gi-owth,  and  neglecting  to  lop 
waste  tops  and  trunks  which  otherwise  fail  to  rot  and  supply  fuel  for 
fire. 

Timber-cutting  in  the  past  has  not  left  a  sufficient  number  of  seed 
trees  of  the  valuable  species.  The  loss  of  a  proper  number  of  seed 
trees  is  a  disadvantage  to  the  forest  in  depriving  it  of  immediate 
means  of  reproducing  the  kinds  thus  taken  out.  The  return  of 
species  from  distant  sources  is  slow  and  involves  a  loss  of  valuable 
time.  Care  should  be  taken,  therefore,  in  marking  trees  to  be  cut 
out,  that  three  to  four  seed  trees  of  all  the  original  useful  timber 
species  of  a  locality  be  left  evenly  distributed  on  every  acre. 

The  timely  removal  of  old  trees  which  are  suppressing  and  dam- 
aging young  timber  is  urgent.  The  need  of  such  discriminative 
cutting  is  very  apparent  in  the  forests  of  this  county.  As  an  example 
of  this  need  may  be  mentioned  the  suppression  caused  by  a  single 
large  "White  Oak  standing  on  the  lower  east  slope  of  Warrior  Moun- 
tain. Eight  large  sapling  White  Pines,  four  White  Oaks,  two  Hick- 
ories, two  Walnuts,  and  one  Shortleaf  Pine  were  all  entirely  over- 
topped by  the  heavy  crown  of  the  old  AVhite  Oak,  and  were  becoming 
stunted  and  twisted  in  their  efforts  to  reach  the  needed  light.  The 
removal  of  the  AVliite  Oak  would  have  allowed  these  saplings  to 
advance.    Failure  to  relieve  them  at  the  proper  time  has  already  pre- 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY. 


ALLEGANY  COUNTY,  PLATE  XXX. 


Fig.  1.— shortleaf  pine  and  hardwood,  near  pinev  grove. 


Fig.  2.— cut-over  hardwood  forest,  savage  mountain. 


FORESTS  OF  ALLEGANY  COUNTY. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


289 


vented  five  to  six  years  of  profitable  growth.  Suppi'ession  of  this 
kind  is  easily  recognized  and  remedied  by  any  intelligent  farmer  or 
woodsman. 

In  the  majority  of  cases  where  timber  is  cnt  for  sawlogs,  ties  and 
props,  from  10  to  30  per  cent  or  more  of  the  trees  is  left  on  the 
ground  as  waste  tops;  and  in  the  case  of  timber  cut  for  tan-bark,  the 
entire  trunks  are  commonly  left  xinnsed.  The  danger  of  neglecting 
unlopped,  waste  treetops,  especially  of  hardwoods,  is  that  the  timber 
is  iisnally  braced  np  from  the  ground  where  it  seasons  thoronghly  and 
rots  very  slowly,  affording  additional  fnei  for  forest  fires.  The 
burning  of  this  material  was  observed  to  have  done  severe  damage  to 
large  trees  standing  near  or  in  contact  with  it. 

Strict  economy  would  not  allow  hardwood  tops  to  be  wasted  Avhen 
they  can  be  cut  into  fuel.  But  if  circumstances  are  such  as  to  make 
this  entirely  impracticable  or  unprofitable,  the  refuse  should  be  cut 
and  disposed  on  the  ground  so  that  it  will  decay  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
The  essential  point  is  to  bring  it  all  in  contact  with  the  ground,  where 
it  will  decay.  To  accomplish  this  properly  it  will  be  necessary  to 
lop  all  large  limbs  which  stand  above  ground. 

Precaution  should  be  used  in  felling  large  timber  so  as  not  to  drop 
a  big  top,  which  must  be  left  unused,  near  or  in  contact  with  large 
standing  trees.  Such  refuse  tops  should  be  placed,  in  felling,  in 
open  places  distant  as  far  as  possible  from  standing  timber  in  order  to 
avoid  burning  the  latter  in  case  of  fire.  The  labor  of  properly  reduc- 
ing waste  hardwood  tops  will  often  be  considerable,  while  the  lopping 
of  the  much  smaller  branches  of  unused  conifer  tops  can  be  done 
more  quickly. 

Most  farmers  can  easily  carry  out  these  precautions  when  doing 
the  cutting  themselves  or  superintending  it.  It  will  be  difficiilt, 
however,  to  enforce  this  extra  work  in  contract  cutting,  except  under 
the  most  rigid  insistence.  In  the  case  of  timber  stolen,  which  not 
infrequently  occurs  in  the  moiuitain  forests,  attention  to  waste  tops 
will  of  coiirse  be  entirely  neglected. 


10 


290 


THE  FORESTS  OF  ALLEGAXY  COUNTY 


Regulation  of  Indisckiminate  Cleakikg. 

Examples  of  injudicious  clearing  are  to  be  seen  in  many  sec- 
tions of  this  county,  and  include  the  instances  where  narrow  hill- 
tops, mountain  ridges  and  steep  slopes  have  been  stripped  of  their 
forest  cover.  Heavy  surface  washing  and  deep  trenching  follow 
these  clearings  not  only  on  the  high  slopes  thus  cleared,  but  also  on 
the  better  lands  lower  down.  The  result  is  a  constant  impoverish- 
ment of  the  soil.  The  rapid  deterioration  of  these  naturally  thin 
hill  soils  imder  constant  surface  washing  is  abundantly  attested  in  the 
fact  that  many  acres  are  now  abandoned.  Reference  has  been  made 
also  to  the  increased  rise  of  water  in  streams  during  the  spring  and 
fall  as  a  result  of  indiscriminate  clearing. 


THE  FAUNA  AND  FLORA 

THE  LIFE  ZONES  AND  AREAS  OF  ALLEGANY 

COUNTY 

BY 

C.  HART  MERRIAM 


The  best  guide  to  the  agricultural  capabilities  of  a  region  is  aflforded 
by  the  distribution  of  the  native  animals  and  plants;  for  experience 
has  shown  that  areas  characterized  in  a  state  of  nature  by  the  presence 
of  particular  species  are  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  particular 
varieties  of  agTieultural  crops.  The  importance  of  this  fact  is  so 
great  that  the  national  government  has  been  engaged  for  years  in  a 
biological  survey  of  the  United  States  with  a  view  to  determining  the 
boundaries  of  the  areas  inhabited  by  different  associations  of  animals 
and  plants. 

It  has  been  found  that  Xorth  America  may  be  divided  primarily 
into  two  vast  regions :  a  northern  or  Boreal,  and  a  southern  or  Austral, 
according  to  the  sources  from  which  the  native  animals  and  plants 
were  derived.  The  boundary  between  these  areas  lies,  in  the  main, 
north  of  the  United  States,  but  disconnected  arms  or  tongues  of  the 
Boreal  area  push  far  southward  into  the  United  States  along  the  sum- 
mits of  the  higher  moimtain  ranges — the  Alleghanies  in  the  east 
and  the  Eocky  Mountains  and  Sierra-Cascade  system  in  the  far  west. 

The  state  of  Maryland,  owing  to  its  southern  position,  is  in  the 
southern  or  Austral  region,  but  the  high  mountains  in  the  western 
part  of  the  state  are  so  much  colder  than  the  lower  lands  on  the  east 
that  their  summits  are  in  places  inhabited  by  species  characteristic  of 
the  northern  or  Boreal  region.  Excepting  these  small  mountain 
summits,  the  total  area  of  which  is  insignificant,  Maryland  lies  wholly 


292 


THE   FAUNA   AND   H.ORA  OF   ALLEGANY  COUXTY 


within  the  Austral  region.  This  region  is  commonly  divided  into 
several  belts,  known  to  naturalists  as  Lower  Austral,  I'pper  Austral, 
and  Transition.  The  Transition,  as  its  name  implies,  is  a  belt  of 
overlapping  of  northern  and  southern  types.  The  Lower  Austral,  or 
Austroriparian,  belt  begins  on  the  east  coast  at  the  mouth  of  Chesa- 
peake Bay  and  takes  a  southerly  and  westerly  course  around  the  south- 
ern end  of  the  Alleglianies.  The  L'pper  Austral,  or  Carolinian,  belt 
extends  from  the  neighborhood  of  New  York  City  southerly  along 
the  coast  to  Chesapeake  Bay  and  includes  the  whole  state  of  Mary- 
land except  the  mountains.  The  mountains  fall  mainly  within  the 
Alleghanian  division  of  the  Transition  zone,  and,  as  already  remarked, 
a  few  of  their  higher  summits  are  strongly  tinged  with  Boreal  forms. 

While  the  Boreal  region  has  too  cold  a  climate  for  successful  agri- 
culture, all  of  the  Austral  zones  are  of  agricultural  importance.  The 
whole  of  the  state  of  ^Maryland,  therefore,  so  far  as  its  climatic  con- 
ditions and  life  zones  are  concerned,  is  an  agricultural  state — no  part 
being  too  cold  for  the  cultivation  of  crops.  The  rainfall  and  humidity 
also  are  neither  too  scanty  nor  too  excessive  for  agriculture;  hence, 
except  where  unfavorable  topographic  and  soil  conditions  prevent,  the 
whole  state  may  be  made  productive. 

A  very  hasty  examination  of  Allegany  and  Garrett  counties 
recently  made  by  my  assistants,  Vernon  Bailey  and  E.  A.  Prel)le,  at 
the  request  of  Professor  "William  Bidlock  Clark,  Director  of  the 
Maryland  Geological  Survey,  shows  that  Garrett  county  and  the 
western  part  of  Allegany  county  (west  of  Piney  Mountain  and  the 
Potomac  valley)  are  mainly  in  the  Alleghanian  area  of  the  Transition 
zone,  and  that  the  eastern  part  of  Allegany  county  (east  of  Cumber- 
land) is  mainly  in  the  Carolinian  area  of  the  Upper  Austral  zone. 

Tongues  of  the  Carolinian  fauna,  characterized  by  the  tulip  tree, 
sycamore,  red  bud,  sassafras,  sweet  gum,  dogwood,  and  scrib  pine,' 
occupy  the  narrow  valleys  of  the  North  Branch  of  the  Potomac 
river,  "Wills  Creek,  Jennings  Run  and  Braddock  Run,  and  reach  up, 

'  Amonsr  the  characteristic  animals  of  the  Caroliuiau  area  of  Maryland  are  the 
opossum,  fox  squirrel,  cardinal  bird,  Carolina  wren,  tufted  titmouse,  iruatcatchf r, 
Carolina  chickadee  and  summer  tanager. 


MAEYLA>T)  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


293 


as  a  rule,  to  an  altitude  of  1200  or  1300  feet.  Above  this,  the  whole 
county,  except  the  warmest  slopes,  which  are  tinged  with  Carolinian 
forms,  belongs  to  the  Transition  zone.  In  GaiTett  county,  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  Transition  zone  (above  2600  feet  altitude)  cold 
sphagnum  and  alder  swamps  abound.  These  swamps  contain  a  strong 
admixture  of  high  Transition  and  even  Boreal  species,  such  as  the 
Junco,  or  Slate-colored  Snowbird  (Junco  hyemalis),  Solitary  Vireo 
(Vireo  solitarius),  Magnolia  "Warbler  (Dendroica  maculosa), 
Canadian  "Warbler  (Wilsonia  canadensis),  Eedbreasted  !N'uthatch 
(Sitta  canadensis),  Hermit  Thi-ush  (Hylocichla  aonalaschkae  pallasii), 
Redbaeked  Mouse  (Evotomys  gapperi),  Canadian  "White-footed 
Mouse  (Peromyscus  canadensis),  two  species  of  Jumping  Mouse,  or 
Jerboa  (Zapus  hudsonius  and  Z.  insignis).  Varying  Hare  (Lepus 
americanus  virginianus),  and  the  northern  Sooty  Shrew  {Sorex 
fumeus),  all  of  which  were  obtained  by  E.  A.  Preble  at  Finzel  post- 
office,  six  miles  north  of  Frostburg.  Still  farther  west  the  Boreal 
tinge  is  even  stronger,  and  in  some  very  extensive  swamps  between 
Accident  and  Bittinger  (mainly  on  the  west  side  of  the  wagon  road) 
Mr.  Preble  found  spruce  trees  common.  The  cutting  off  of  the 
spruce  and  hemlock  from  these  small  boreal  islands  lets  in  the  hot 
sun  and  resvilts,  in  numerous  instances,  in  changing  the  fauna  and 
flora  from  Canadian  to  Alleghanian. 

The  fauna  of  Allegany  county  is  a  mixture  of  Carolinian  and  Alle- 
ghanian species  and  comprises,  so  far  as  known,  no  boreal  islands. 
The  Potomac  valley,  and  valleys  of  the  principal  streams,  are  Caro- 
linian; the  uplands,  Alleghanian. 


THE  SUMMER  BIRDS  OF  WESTERN  MARYLAND 

BY 

EDWARD  A.  PREBLE 


During  the  summer  of  1899  three  short  trips  were  made  to  west- 
ern Maryland  for  the  purpose  of  studying  its  fauna  and  flora  in  the 
joint  interests  of  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Agriculture  and  the  Mary- 
land Geological  Survey.  The  time  spent  in  the  field  aggregated 
about  a  month.  Special  attention  was  paid  to  birds  and  mammals — 
the  plants,  for  lack  of  time,  being  merely  noted  incidentally  with 
reference  to  their  bearing  on  the  different  life  areas  of  the  region. 

A  short  preliminary  trip  was  made  in  May.  Reaching  Frostburg, 
near  the  western  border  of  Allegany  county,  eleven  miles  west  of 
Cumberland,  a  suitable  place  for  a  few  days'  work  was  found  in 
Finzel,  a  postoffice  near  the  northeast  comer  of  Garrett  county,  about 
a  mile  and  a  half  west  of  the  main  ridge  of  Great  Savage  Mountain, 
at  this  point  having  an  altitude  of  nearly  3000  feet.  Finzel  lies  some 
400  feet  lower.  About  midway  in  distance  and  altitude  between 
Finzel  and  Great  Savage  lies  Little  Savage  Mountain.  These  ridges 
are  covered  with  a  rather  sparse  growth  of  oaks  and  chestnuts.  In 
the  shallow  depression  between  them  is  a  dense  swamp,  the  main 
source  of  Savage  river.  This  swamp  is  densely  grown  up  to  hemlock 
(Tsuga  canadensis),  black  spruce  (Picea  mariana),  tamarack  (Larix 
laricina)  and  several  other  species,  with  a  dense  undergrowth  com- 
posed mainly  of  Ehododendrm  maximum.  To  the  west  of  Finzel 
the  country  is  cut  up  by  numerous  ridges  mainly  covered  with  oak 
and  chestnut,  the  intervening  valleys  being  rather  swampy  and  tra- 
versed by  small  brooks,  and  usually  clothed  with  heavy  forest,  hem- 
lock and  rhododendron  predominating  and  often  extending  nearly  to 
the  summit  of  the  ridges  on  their  western  slopes. 


ilAEYXAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


295 


After  spending  several  days  about  Finzel,  mainlv  engaged  in  trap- 
ping mammak;  having  obtained  a  fair  knowledge  of  the  mamnaaliau 
fauna,  it  seemed  desirable  to  ascertain  the  conditions  in  other  por- 
tions of  the  county.  The  turnpike  road  was  traversed  westward  from 
Frostburg  across  Great  Savage,  Meadow  and  Xegro  mountains  to 
Keyser  Eidge,  and  thence,  leaving  the  turnpike,  the  country  was 
examined  southward  to  Accident,  across  Xegro  Mountain  to  Bittinger, 
thence  by  a  circuitoias  route  to  Grantsville,  and  back  to  Frostburg. 
Several  large  tracts  of  coniferous  woods  were  located  and  gave  promise 
of  interesting  results  if  visited  later  in  the  season. 

Beginning  June  ITth,  5  days  were  spent  in  studying  and  collect- 
ing the  birds  about  Finzel,  among  which  were  several  species  not  be- 
fore recorded  as  breeding  within  the  state.  On  June  22,  the  point  of 
study  was  shifted  westward  to  Grantsville  in  Garrett  county,  a  small 
town  situated  on  a  ridge  overlooking  the  valley  of  the  Castleman, 
about  two  miles  south  of  the  Pennsylvania  line,  and  a  point  of  de- 
parture was  located  at  a  farmhouse  about  two  miles  east  of  town  from 
which  the  valley  of  the  Castleman  and  the  ridges  to  the  eastward 
could  be  easily  worked.  Most  of  the  country  is  covered  with  a  rather 
heavy  growth  of  deciduous  trees,  oaks  and  chestnuts  predominating. 
A  good-sized  tract  of  hemlock  stands  near  the  turnpike  three  miles 
east  of  Grantsville  and  a  considerable  quantity  also  remains  on  the 
western  slopes  of  the  ridges  near  the  Castleman,  where  red-berried 
elder  and  rhododendron  abound.  At  this  point  the  valley  of  the 
Castleman  lies  at  an  altitude  of  about  2100  feet,  while  the  ridges 
in  the  vicinity  rise  four  or  five  hundred  feet  higher. 

White  pine  was  formerly  found  in  this  region  in  great  abundance, 
but  has  now  almost  entirely  disappeared.  The  axe  of  the  lumber- 
man has  latterly  been  directed  to  the  hemlock  and  spruce,  which  in 
turn  are  fast  disappearing. 

On  June  27  the  field  of  observation  was  transferred  to  Bittinger, 
a  postoffice  about  nine  miles  south  of  Grantsville  on  the  plateau  be- 
tween the  north  and  south  branches  of  the  Castleman.  Its  altitude 
is  about  2600  feet.  Considerable  tracts  of  hemlock  and  spruce  occur 
in  the  vicinity,  and  in  their  shade  were  foimd  Taxus  minor,  Dirca 


296 


THE  FAIXA  AND  FLOBA  OF  ALLEGAXY  COVSTY 


palustris,  Oxalis  acetosella  and  other  northern  plants,  and  also  many 
interesting  birds  to  be  mentioned  later. 

On  J uly  1  another  change  was  made  to  Mountain  Lake  Park  in  the 
southern  part  of  Garrett  county.  Here,  as  throughout  the  county, 
the  face  of  the  country  is  traversed  by  numerous  chestnut  ridges 
ha  ving  a  general  northeast  and  southwest  trend,  but  coniferous  for- 
ests are  entirely  absent.  In  the  vicinity  of  Kearney,  some  hemlock 
woods  still  remain  and  there  are  several  species  of  birds  not  observed 
at  ^Mountain  Lake  Park.  A  considerable  quantity  of  hemlock  occurs 
on  the  western  slopes  of  Great  Savage  Mountain  in  the  vicinity,  with 
an  undergrowth  of  Rhododendron  maximum,  Taxus  minor,  and 
Oxalis  acetosella. 

Study  and  collecting  trips  were  also  made  to  Rawlings,  Dans  Moun- 
tain, Oldtown,  and  Little  Orleans,  where  short  stops  were  made  to 
ascertain  what  birds  were  common  in  the  vicinity. 

Following  is  a  list  of  the  birds  observed  during  the  several  trips. 
They  were  all  seen  between  June  17  and  July  2-4  (with  the  exception 
of  Otocoris),  and  while  of  course  the  nests  of  all  the  species  were  not 
found,  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  were  breeding  in  the  vicinity.  A 
male  homed  lark  in  full  song,  observed  near  Accident  on  May  18, 
was  doubtless  breeding.  Several  olivebacked  thrushes  were  seen 
near  the  borders  of  the  tamarack  swamp  near  Finzel  on  May  15  and 
may  breed  there,  but  since  they  may  have  been  migrants,  and  since 
they  were  not  found  there  in  Jime,  the  species  is  not  included  in  the 
following  list.  The  wild  turkey  occurs  throughout  the  wilder  parts 
of  the  region  but  was  not  observed.  The  number  of  species  recorded 
would  doubtless  have  been  considerably  increased  had  it  been  possible 
to  devote  the  time  entirely  to  birds. 

LIST  OF  SUMMER  BIRDS  IX  WESTERN  MARYLAND. 

Ardea  virescens.  Gbeex  Hekox. — Though  doubtless  occurring 
elsewhere  in  the  region.  Green  Herons  were  observed  only  along  the 
Potomac  and  its  tributaries.  One  was  seen  near  Rawlings  and  a 
number  of  adults  and  young  were  observed  at  Little  Orleans  and  Old- 


MAKTLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


297 


town.  At  the  latter  place  two  broods  of  voimg,  which  had  left  the 
nests  and  were  climbing  about  among  the  branches,  were  seen. 

Philohela  minor.  Woodcock. — The  tracks  and  borings  of  a  "Wood- 
cock were  seen  at  the  edge  of  a  swamp  at  Finzel,  and  several  were 
seen  at  Grantsville  and  Mountain  Lake  Park. 

Actitis  macularia.  Spotted  Sandpiper. — Several  were  noticed 
on  the  shores  of  the  Castleman,  near  Grantsville,  and  also  a  number 
along  the  Potomac  at  Oldtown  and  Little  Orleans. 

Aegialitis  vocifera.  Killdeer  Plover. — A  pair  of  Killdeer 
Plovers  were  seen  in  a  field  near  Rawlings  on  July  21. 

Colinus  virginianus.  Quail. — This  species  seemed  to  be  fairly 
common  throughout  the  region.  It  was  heard  several  times  near 
Grantsville,  where  they  are  said  to  be  abundant  some  seasons.  Sev- 
eral were  heard  between  Grantsville  and  Bittinger,  and  the  species 
was  also  noted  at  Mountain  Lake  Park,  Rawlings,  Oldtown,  and  Little 
Orleans. 

Bonasa  umhellus.  Ruffed  Grouse. — This  species  was  abundant 
in  the  higher  parts  of  the  region.  Three  females  each,  with  a  brood 
of  young,  were  observed  near  Finzel  and  the  birds  seemed  equally 
abundant  near  Grantsville,  and  were  also  observed  at  Bittinger  and 
on  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings. 

Zenaidura  macroura.  Mourxixg  Dove. — The  Mourning  Dove 
was  noted  in  small  numbers  at  Bittinger,  Mountain  Lake  Park  and 
Swanton.    It  was  abundant  near  Rawlings  and  Oldtown. 

Cathartes  aura.  Turkey  Buzzard. — This  species  was  seen  in 
small  numbers  at  Bittinger,  Swanton,  Dans  Mountain,  Oldtow'n  and 
Little  Orleans. 

Accipiter  velox.  Sharp-shixxed  Hawk. — A  pair  seen  at  Moun- 
tain Lake  Park,  and  one  in  deep  woods  near  Swanton.  Its  actions 
seemed  to  indicate  that  it  had  a  nest  in  the  vicinity. 

Accipiter  cooperi.  Cooper's  Hawk. — One  was  seen  perched  in  a 
dead  tree  on  a  partially  cleared  hillside  near  Swanton.  I  decoyed  it 
quite  near  by  imitating  the  cry  of  a  bird  in  distress. 

Buteo  borealis.  Red-tailed  Hawk. — Only  seen  once,  a  few  miles 
north  of  Rawlings.    The  bird  was  sailing  about  over  the  valley. 


298 


THE  FAUXA  AND  FLORA  OF  ALLEGAXV  COUNTY 


Buteo  lineatus.  Red-shouldered  Hawk. — A  very  noisy  pair  seen 
daily  at  Finzel,  and  the  species  was  also  noted  near  Grantsville.  A 
nest  in  a  large  birch  in  deep  woods  near  Bittinger  had  probably  been 
occupied  by  a  pair  of  these  birds,  which  were  several  times  observed 
in  the  vicinity. 

Buteo  latissimus.  Broad-wtnged  Hawk. — One  was  taken  on  the 
summit  of  the  ridge  about  three  miles  east  of  Grantsville. 

Falco  sparverius.  Sparrow  Hawk. — This  species  was  noted  at 
Grantsville,  Bittinger  and  near  Mountain  Lake  Park,  only  one  being 
seen  at  each  place. 

Megascops  asio.  Screech  Owl. — The  familiar  notes  of  this  species 
were  heard  several  times  during  the  night  of  June  24,  at  Grantsville. 
Though  doubtless  found  throughout  the  region,  the  bird  was  not 
elsewhere  noted. 

Buho  virginianus.  Great  Horxed  Owl. — The  remains  of  a  brood 
of  full-grown  young  were  seen  in  the  woods  near  Finzel.  I  saw  one 
near  Bittinger,  one  evening  about  dusk,  perched  on  a  high  dead  tree, 
at  the  edge  of  the  forest.    It  soon  started  off  in  search  of  food. 

Coccyzus  americanus.  Yellow-billed  Cuckoo. — Several  were 
seen  and  heard  at  Finzel  and  one  was  taken  on  June  20. 

Coccyzus  erytliroplithalmus.  Black-bllled  Cuckoo. — One  was 
taken  near  Grantsville  on  June  26. 

Ceryle  alcyon.  Kingfisher. — One  was  seen  near  Oldtown  on 
July  23. 

Dryohates  villosus.  Hairy  "Woodpecker. — Fairly  common  over 
the  higher  portions  of  the  region.  One  was  taken  at  Finzel  and 
several  seen  in  oak  and  chestnut  woods  near  Grantsville.  A  pair, 
accompanied  by  young,  were  seen  in  deep  woods  near  Bittinger. 

Dryohates  pubescens.  Downy  "Woodpecker. — Evidently  not  com- 
mon. The  species  was  noted  at  Grantsville,  Bittinger,  and  near 
Eawlings,  only  a  single  individual  being  noted  in  each  case. 

Sphyrapicus  varius.  Yellow-bellied  Woodpecker. — Rather 
common  and  generally  distributed  over  the  higher  portions  of  the 
region.  A  few  were  noted  near  Finzel.  A  pair  seen  near  Grants- 
ville June  23  evidently  had  a  nest  near  by.    Old  birds,  accompanied 


MAKYLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


299 


by  young  not  long  from  the  nest,  were  seen  at  Bittinger  and  Moun- 
tain Lake  Park,  and  later  botli  old  and  young  birds  were  obsen-ed  at 
Swanton. 

Ceophloeus  pileatus  abieticola.  Xorthekn  Pileated  Woodpecker. 
— A  bird  of  this  species  was  seen  in  heavy  mixed  woods  near  Swanton. 
It  doubtless  occurs  sparingly  throughout  the  region,  as  it  was  heard 
in  several  places. 

21elanerpes  erytliroceplialus.  Eed-headed  Woodpecker.- — Quite 
generally  distributed  and  common  throughout  the  greater  part  of 
Garrett  county  traversed.  It  was  fairly  common  about  Grantsville 
and  abundant  at  Bittinger  and  Mountain  Lake  Park.  The  birds 
seemed  to  delight  in  the  tall  dead  oaks  and  chestmits  left  in  the  clear- 
ings. They  paid  frequent  A'isits  to  the  cultivated  cherry  trees  which 
are  common  throughout  the  region. 

Colaptes  auratus  luteus.  Xortherx  Flicker. — Very  common  and 
generally  distributed  throughout  the  regioir. 

Antrostomus  vociferus.  Whippoorwill. — Whippoorwills  were 
heard  nightly  at  Pinzel  and  near  Grantsville.  I  also  heard  several  at 
Swanton  during  the  night  of  July  18,  but  did  not  note  the  species 
elsewhere. 

Chordeiles  virginianus.  Xighthawk. — A  few  were  seen  at  Bit- 
tinger, Mountain  Lake  Park,  Swanton,  Rawlings  and  Oldtown. 

Chaetura  pelagica.  Chijcney  Swift. — This  species  was  very  gen- 
erally disti'ibuted  throughout  the  region  and  was  everywhere  common, 
and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  towns,  abundant. 

TrochiJus  coluhris.  Euby-throated  HuMiiiKGBiED. — The  ruby- 
throat  seemed  to  be  uncommon.  Only  one  was  seen  at  Bittinger  and 
one  near  Rawlings.  A  number  were  noted  at  Swanton  and  along 
the  roadsides  near  Oldtown. 

Tyrannus  tyrannus.  Kingbird. — Eather  common  and  generally 
distributed  throughout  the  region,  being  noted  at  all  the  places 
visited. 

Myiarchus  crinitus.  Crested  Flycatcher. — Rather  common 
near  Grantsville,  Mountain  Lake  Park,  Swanton  and  about  Rawlings 
and  Dans  Mountain. 


300 


THE  FAUNA   AND   FLORA  OF  ALLKGAXY  COUNTY 


Sayoniis  phoebe.  Phoebe. — Generally  distributed  but  rather  rare. 
With  the  exception  of  ^lountain  Lake  Park,  it  was  seen  in  small 
numbers  at  all  the  localities  visited. 

Contopus  virens.  "Wood  Pewee. — Pairly  common  and  very  gen- 
erally distributed,  being  noted  as  more  or  less  common  at  all  the 
localities  visited. 

Empidonax  virescens.  Acadian  Flycatcher. — This  species  was 
seen  on  only  one  occasion,  at  Oldtown. 

Empidonax  traillii  alnorum.  Alder  Flycatcher. — A  number 
were  seen  in  alder  thickets  in  the  meadows  and  springy  places  near 
Mountain  Lake  Park,  and  two  males  were  taken  July  3  and  4.  They 
were  rather  active  and  frequently  uttered  their  characteristic  note, 
but  were  shy  and  generally  kept  concealed  on  the  opposite  side  of  a 
thicket  of  alders,  and  the  specimens  taken  were  secured  with  some 
difficulty. 

Empidonax  minimus.  Least  Flycatcher. — One  was  seen  and 
taken  in  an  apple  orchard  near  Grantsville. 

Otocoris  alpestris  praticola.  Prairie  Horned  Lark. — AVhile 
driving  through  Garrett  county  on  May  18,  I  saw  a  male  bird  of  this 
species.  He  was  on  a  rail  fence  singing  lustily  and  was  not  at  all  shy. 
It  was  near  the  town  of  Accident,  about  ten  miles  from  the  northwest 
corner  of  the  county.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  l)ir(l  was 
breeding. 

Cyanocilta  cristata.  Blue  Jay. — This  bird  was  noted  as  common 
at  all  the  places  visited  except  Oldtown  and  Little  Orleans.  Young, 
not  long  from  the  nest,  being  fed  by  their  parents,  were  observed  at 
Bittinger  on  June  28.  They  had  notes  very  similar  to  those  of  young 
crows. 

C'orvus  corax  principalis.  Xortherx  Raven. — A  pair  of  ravens 
were  seen  on  several  occasions  at  Finzel.  They  were  said  to  have  a 
nest  in  a  large  hemlock  near  that  place  which  they  had  occupied  for 
several  successive  seasons. 

Corvus  americanus.  Common  Crow. — Fairly  common  and  gen- 
erally distributed,  being  noted  at  all  the  localities  visited.  Young 
birds  not  long  from  the  nest  were  seen  at  Grantsville  and  Bittinger 
late  h\  June. 


AlAKYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


301 


Dalichonyx  oryzivorus.  BoBOLI^"K. — A  pair  of  Bobolinks  were 
observed  in  a  field  near  Grantsville  on  June  23.  The  bii-d  is  said  to 
be  a  regular  summer  visitor,  but  is  not  common.  Xo  others  were 
seen. 

Molothrus  ater.  Cowbikd. — A  small  flock  of  Cowbirds  was  seen 
in  a  field  near  Rawlings  on  July  22. 

Agelaius  phoeniceus.  Redwinged  Blackbird. — Quite  common 
in  the  meadows  and  low  fields  in  the  valley  of  the  Castleman  near 
Grantsville.  A  few  were  also  seen  at  Mountain  Lake  Park,  Bit- 
tinger  and  Oldtown. 

Sturnella  magna.  Meadow  Lark. — Common  and  quite  gener- 
ally distributed  throughout  the  region.  Xumbers  were  seen  at 
Grantsville,  Bittinger,  Movmtain  Lake  Park,  Rawlings  and  Oldtown. 

Icterus  galbula.  pALTiiiORE  Oriole. — During  my  stay  near 
Grantsville  I  saw  several  in  a  cherry  tree  near  the  house.  At  Moun- 
tain Lake  Park,  I  took  one,  which  was  feeding  on  the  berries  of  the 
"  Service  Tree "  (Amelanchier).  Several  individuals,  evidently  a 
family,  were  seen  in  the  oak  woods  near  the  base  of  Dans  Mountain, 
near  Rawlings. 

QuiscaJiis  quiscula.  Purple  Grackle. — Several  bands,  consisting 
of  old  birds  accompanied  by  young  not  long  from  the  nest,  were  seen 
at  Bittinger.  They  seemed  interested  mainly  in  the  cherry  trees, 
which  at  the  time  were  loaded  with  ripening  fruit.  They  were  very 
noisy,  and  except  when  feeding,  were  quite  shy.  Specimens  taken 
were  intermediate  between  quiscula  and  aeneus,  as  might  be  expected. 
The  species  was  also  noted  at  Mountain  Lake  Park  and  Swanton. 

Astragalmus  tristis.  American  Goldfixch. — ^This  species  was 
common  and  very  generally  distributed  throughout  the  region,  being 
seen  almost  daily  at  all  the  places  visited. 

Pooecetes  gramineus.  Yesper  Sparrow. — This  species  was  abund- 
ant in  the  fields  about  Finzel,  Grantsville  and  Bittinger  and  was  also 
noted  at  Rawlings. 

Ammoclramus  sarannarttm  passermus.  Grasshopper  Sparrow. 
— A  number  of  these  birds  were  seen  along  roadsides  in  tlie  vicinity 
of  Rawlings. 


302 


THE  FAUNA  AND   FLORA  OF  ALLF.GAXY  COCXTY 


Spizella  socialis.  Chipping  Spareow. — This  familiar  species  was 
common  and  very  generally  distributed  throughout  the  region.  A 
nest  containing  four  fresh  eggs  was  found  at  Finzel  on  June  21. 

Spizella  pusilla.  Field  Spaeeow. — This  species  was  noted  in  con- 
siderable numbers  at  all  the  places  visited,  excepting  Oldtown  and 
Little  Orleans. 

Junco  hyemalis  caroUnensis.  CAROLrxA  Jcnco. — Fairly  common 
about  the  open  portions  of  the  hemlock  woods  in  the  vicinity  of 
Finzel.  It  was  also  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  a  hemlock  forest  about 
3  miles  east  of  Grantsville  on  June  22.  During  my  stay  at  Bittinger 
the  species  was  observed  daily  and  yoimg,  apparently  just  from  the 
nest,  were  seen  June  29. 

During  a  drive  through  Garrett  county,  on  May  18,  I  found  a  nest 
of  this  species  near  Bittinger,  containing  four  apparently  fresh  eggs. 
The  site  was  beneath  the  edge  of  a  mossy  bank  within  a  few  feet  of 
the  highway. 

Melospiza  fasciata.  Song  Spaeeow. — This  bird  was  noted  as 
common  at  all  the  places  visited. 

Pipilo  erythrophthalmus.  Towhee. — IN^oted  in  considerable  num- 
bers in  scmbby  oak  woods  in  the  vicinity  of  Finzel,  Grantsville,  ^Moun- 
tain  Lake  Park,  Swanton,  and  on  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings. 

Cardinalis  cardinalis.  Caedixal. — This  species  was  rather  com- 
mon in  the  valley  of  the  Potomac  near  Rawlings,  Oldtown  and  Little 
Orleans.  In  the  higher  portions  of  the  region  it  was  observed  but 
once,  in  the  valley  of  the  Castleman  about  three  miles  northeast  of 
Grantsville. 

Zamelodia  ludoviciana.  Rosebbeasted  Gbosbeak. — Rather  com- 
mon in  mixed  and  deciduous  woods  about  Finzel.  I  saw  a  pair  in 
mixed  woods  near  Bittinger,  and  one  near  Swanton. 

Cyanospiza  cyanea.  Indigo  Bunting. — Common  and  very  gen- 
erally distributed  throughout  the  region,  being  noted  at  all  the  places 
visited  excepting  Bittinger  and  Swanton,  where  it  was  probably  over- 
looked. A  nest  found  near  Grantsville  on  June  23  contained  yoimg 
just  hatched. 

Piranga  erylhromelas.  Scaelet  Tanagek. — Fairly  abundant  at 
all  the  places  visited  excepting  Oldtown  and  Little  Orleans. 


MAftVLAXD  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


303 


Progne  subis.  Purple  Martin. — Several  colonies  were  observed 
about  Mountain  Lake  Park,  and  a  colony  at  Frostbiirg  in  the  north- 
western part  of  Allegany  county. 

Petroclielidon  lunifrons.  Cliff  Swallow. — This  familiar  species 
noted  in  the  vicinity  of  nearly  every  farmhouse  throughout  the  higher 
part  of  Garrett  county.  It  was  common  near  Finzel,  Grantsville,  Bit- 
tinger  and  Mountain  Lake  Park.  Great  numbers  of  their  nests  were 
seen  beneath  the  overhanging  portions  of  the  old-fashioned  barns. 

Hirundo  erytlirogaster.  Barn  Swallow. — Generally  distributed 
and  common  throughout  the  region,  being  noted,  usually  in  large 
numbers,  at  every  place  visited,  excepting  Oldtown.  They  nested 
in  nearly  every  bam  through  the  country.  In  the  vicinity  of  Grants- 
ville, June  22-27,  great  numbers  of  young  birds  just  from  the  nest 
were  observed. 

Clivicola  riparia.  Bank  Swallow. — A  single  bird  was  seen  at 
Little  Orleans  on  July  24. 

Ampelis  cedrorum.  Cedar  Waxwixg.— Xoted  in  abundance  at 
Finzel,  Grantsville,  Bittinger,  Mountain  Lake  Park  and  Swanton. 
A  nest  found  at  the  latter  place  on  July  19  contained  three  eggs.  A 
few  individuals  were  also  seen  at  Oldtown. 

Yireo  olivaceus.  Eed-eyed  Yireo.- — This  species  was  very  abund- 
ant and  generally  distributed  throughout  the  region,  being  observed  at 
all  the  places  visited. 

Yireo  -ftarifrons.  Yellow-throated  Yireo. — A  number  were 
observed  in  thickets  bordering  the  Potomac  at  Oldtown. 

Yireo  soliiarius.  Solitary  Yireo. — This  species  was  fairly  com- 
mon in  hemlock  and  mixed  woods  near  Finzel,  Grantsville  and  Bit- 
tinger. I  took  a  specimen  near  Kearney,  a  few  miles  southeast  of 
Mountain  Lake  Park,  and  the  song  of  one  was  heard  at  Swanton.  I 
also  saw  several  on  Dans  Mountain.  Specimens  taken  at  Finzel  and 
near  Kearney  show  some  slight  approach  in  measurements  and  color 
of  upper  parts  to  Y.  s.  alticola,  but,  on  the  Avhole,  seem  much  nearer 
to  the  typical  form. 

Minotilta  varia.  Black  and  "White  "Warbler. — Common  and 
quite  generally  distributed.    It  was  seen  at  all  the  places  visited  ex- 


304 


Tire   KAINA   AM)   FLORA   OF   AI.LECiA.XY  COUNTY 


cepting  Grantsville  and  Little  Orleans,  wht-ro  it  was  probably  present, 
but  overlooked.  About  the  base  of  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings, 
a  number  were  seen  seareliin":  for  food  on  the  rail  fences,  often  at  a 
considerable  distance  from  the  roads. 

Hehnitherus  vermivorus.  Worm-eating  "Warbler. — One  was 
taken  about  half-wav  up  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings,  on  July  21, 
and  a  day  or  two  later  I  saw  one  at  Oldtown. 

Helminthophila  chrysoptera.  Golden-wixgf.d  "Warbler. — A  num- 
ber were  seen  and  one  taken  in  young  growth  near  Swanton,  and  I 
saw  several  on  Dans  Mountain  near  Rawlings. 

Composthlypis  americana.  Parula  "W^arbler. — One  was  seen  at 
Oldtown  on  July  23,  and  another  the  day  following  at  Little  Orleans. 

Dendroica  aestiva.  Yellow  Warbler. — A  pair  obserAcd  near 
Grantsville  late  in  June,  and  several  at  Oldtown  and  Little  Orleans, 
were  the  only  ones  noted  during  my  trip. 

Dendroica  caerulescetis.  Black-throated  Blue  Warbler. — 
Rather  common  at  Finzel  and  Bittinger,  where  deserted  nests  were 
noticed  and  at  Swanton.  I  also  took  an  individual  near  Kearney,  a 
few  miles  southeast  of  Mountain  Lake  Park.  Several  specimens 
taken  exhibit  considerable  black  on  the  back,  supposed  to  be  indicative 
of  subspecies  caii-nsii,  but  which  seems  more  likely  to  be  an  indication 
of  high  plumage  increasing  in  intensity  as  the  bird  grows  older. 

Dendroica  maculosa.  Magnolia  Warbler. — Common  in  the 
hemlock  and  spruce  forests  throughout  the  higher  portions  of  Garrett 
county.  It  was  noted  in  considerable  numbei-s  at  Finzel,  Bittinger 
and  Swanton,  and  several  seen  in  a  grove  of  hemlocks  near  Kearney 
several  miles  southeast  of  Mountain  Lake  Park.  A  nest  found  near 
Bittinger  on  June  27  contained  three  fresh  eggs;  another  was  depos- 
ited the  next  day.  The  nest  was  situated  in  a  small  hemlock  about 
four  feet  from  the  ground,  a  characteristic  situation.  The  late  date 
would  seem  to  indicate  a  second  litter,  though  I  saw  no  young  birds. 

Dendroica  pennsylranica.  Chestntjt-sided  Warbler. — A  com- 
mon bird  over  most  of  the  higher  portions  of  Garrett  county.  ^lany 
were  observed  at  Finzel,  and  a  newly-built  nest  was  seen.  It  was 
also  common  at  Grantsville  and  Mountain  Lake  Park,  and  young  birds 
were  taken  on  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings,  on  July  21. 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 


305 


Dendroica  hlackhurniae.  BLACKBrRXiAX  AVarblei:. — Rather  com- 
mon in  the  hemlocks  about  Finzel.  I  saw  one  near  Bittinger  on 
June  30  and  took  one  on  Dans  Mountain,  near  Ivawlings,  on  July  21. 

Dendroica  vivens.  Black-throated  Greex  AVarblee. — A  female 
was  seen  at  Finzel  on  June  18. 

Dendroica  discolor.  Prairie  Warbler. — Several  were  seen  in 
bushy  woods  at  Oldtown  July  22-23. 

Seiu7-us  aurocapillus.  Ovex-bird. — A  very  common  species 
throughout  the  region. 

Seiurus  itoveboracensis.  Watee-thrvsh. — This  species  was  fairly 
common  about  Finzel,  especially  in  a  swamp  between  Big  and  Little 
Savage  Mountains.  Xearly  every  small  stream  flowing  through  low 
woods  had  a  pair  or  two.    A  single  bird  was  observed  at  Swanton. 

Seiurus  motacilla.  Louisiaxa  T\"atee-theush. — Though  normally 
affecting  low  altitudes,  this  species  frequently  follows  small  streams 
up  to  their  source.  One  was  thus  observed  near  Finzel  along  a  brook 
flowing  through  a  dense  hemlock  forest,  whose  undergrowth  of  Rhodo- 
dendron and  Kalmia  also  afforded  a  congenial  shelter  to  S.  novebora- 
censis.  Several  were  seen  along  Crabtree  Run,  near  Swanton,  and 
I  took  a  specimen  on  Dans  Mountain  July  21. 

Geothlypis  trichas.  Maryland  Yellow-throat. — Xoted  in  rather 
small  numbers  at  Finzel,  Grantsville,  Mountain  Lake  Park,  Rawlings, 
Oldtown  and  Little  Orleans. 

Icteria  virens.  Yellow-beeasted  Chat. — A  pair  or  two  noted  in 
the  vicinity  of  Finzel.  It  was  rather  common  about  Mountain  Lake 
Park,  Swanton,  Rawlings,  Oldtown,  and  Little  Orleans. 

Wilsonia  mitrata.  Wilson's  Warblee.— In  thickets  of  young- 
growth  on  the  lower  slopes  of  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings,  this 
species  was  rather  common. 

^Vilsonia  canadensis.  Canadian  Wabblee. — This  was  the  most 
abundant  warbler  at  Finzel,  where  old  birds  were  seen  feeding  young 
just  from  the  nest  about  June  20.  The  species  was  rather  common 
in  the  rhododendrons,  which  abounded  in  favorable  situations  in  the 
valley  of  the  Castleman  near  Grantsville.  It  was  also  rather  com- 
mon about  Swanton. 

20 


306 


THE  FArX.V   AXD  FLORA  OF  ALLEOAXY  COrXTY 


Setophaga  ruticiUa.  Americax  Redstart. — A  pair  obsen-ed  at 
Finzel,  and  a  num"ber  seen  at  Swanton,  Rawlings,  Oldtown  and  Little 
Orleans. 

GaJeoscapfcs  airoliiiensis.  Catbird. — A  xery  abundant  breeder 
throiighout  the  region. 

Harporhynchvs  rufus.  Browx  Thrasher. — A  few  were  seen  near 
Finzel,  Grantsville  and  Bittinger. 

Thryothorus  ludoricinnus.  Carolixa  "Wrex. — One  was  noted  in 
a  garden  near  Oldtown. 

Thryomanes  bewickii.  Bewicks  Wrex. — I  saw  one  bv  the  road- 
side near  Bittinger  on  June  30,  and  found  both  old  and  young  birds 
rather  common  on  Dans  AEountain,  near  Rawlings,  on  Julv  21. 

Troglodytes  aedon.  House  Wrex. — A  male  in  full  song  was  seen 
several  times  about  Little  Orleans  on  July  24. 

Certhia  familiaris  fusca.  Brown  Creeper. — A  female  was  taken 
in  heavy  hemlock  woods  near  Bittinger  on  June  28. 

Sitta  cai-oli7iensis.  AVhite-breasted  Xuthatch. — Very  common 
and  generally  distributed  throughout  the  region. 

Sitta  canadensis.  Red-breasted  Xuthatch. — A  small  flock  of 
these  birds,  evidently  a  family,  was  seen  on  the  branches  of  a  tall 
dead  tree,  in  the  deep  woods  near  Bittinger.  It  was  also  seen  near 
Finzel  about  the  middle  of  May,  when  it  was  doubtless  breeding. 

Parus  hicolor.  Tufted  Titmouse. — A  number  were  seen  in 
thickets  beside  the  Potomac  near  Oldtown  on  July  23. 

Parus  atricapiUus.  Black-capped  Titmouse. — Rather  common 
about  Finzel,  Bittinger  and  Mountain  Lake  Park. 

Ilylocichla  mustelinus.  AVood  Thrush. — A  very  common  bird 
about  Finzel,  Grantsville,  Bittinger  and  Moimtain  Lake  Park.  Its 
song  was  also  heard  on  Warrior  Mountain  about  4  miles  north  of  Old- 
town. 

Hylocichla  fuscesceus.  "Wilsox's  Thrush. — Generally  distributed 
over  the  higher  portions  of  Garrett  county,  being  common  about 
Finzel,  Grantsnlle,  Bittinger,  Mountain  Lake  Park  and  Swanton.  A 
few  were  also  seen  on  Dans  Mountain,  near  Rawlings. 

Hylocichla  aonalaschkae  pallasii.    Hermit  Thrush. — Several  of 


MARYLAND  GEOLOGICAL  SUKA'EY 


307 


these  birds  were  heard  in  the  "  oak  barrens  "  near  Finzel.  Its  song 
■was  also  heard  once  near  Grantsville  and  once  at  Bittinger.  In  the 
Avhite  oak  woods  near  Mountain  Lake  Park,  several  were  heard  and 
two  taken. 

Merula  migratoria.  Eobix. — A  vey  common  breeder  thronghont 
the  region. 

Sialia  sialis.  Bluebird. — Common  and  generally  distributed 
throughout  the  region.  •  A  brood  of  young,  accompanied  by  their 
parents,  was  seen  near  Finzel  on  June  17. 


INDEX 


A. 

Abbe,  Cleveland,  Jr.,  17,  85. 
Abram  Creek,  discharge  of,  246. 
Acadian  Flycatcher,  occurrence  of, 
300. 

Agricultural  products  of  Allegany 

county,  198. 
Aiken,  Wm.  E.  A.,  61,  70. 
Alder    Flycatcher,    occurrence  of, 

300. 

Alexander,  J.  H.,  61,  62,  63,  70,  71. 

Allegany  county,  agricultural  pro- 
ducts of,  198. 

Allegany  county,  area  of,  264. 

Allegany  county,  birds  of,  293-307. 

Allegany  county,  boundaries  of,  23, 
264. 

Allegany  county,  climate  of,  217. 

Allegany  county,  economic  re- 
sources of,  24. 

Allegany  county,  flora  and  fauna 
of,  291. 

Allegany  county,  forests  of,  263. 
Allegany  county,  forest  needs  of, 
285. 

Allegany  county,  geographic  and 
geologic  relations  of,  57. 

Allegany  county,  geological  forma- 
tions of.  86. 

Allegany  county,  geology  of,  57. 

Allegany  county,  hydrography  of, 
233. 

Allegany  county,  important  moun- 
tains of,  57. 

Allegany  county,  important  streams 
of,  58. 

Allegany  county,  life  zones  and 
areas  of,  291. 

Allegany  county,  list  of  conifers 
and  hardwood  trees  of,  268. 

Allegany  county,  location  of,  23. 

Allegany  county,  magnetic  declina- 
tion in,  253. 

Allegan V  county,  mineral  resources 
of,  165. 


Allegany  county,  physical  features 

of,  21,  23. 
Allegany  county,  physiography  of, 

27. 

Allegany  county,  rainfall  in,  223. 
Allegany  county,  soils  of,  195,  265. 
Allegany  county  soils,  analyses  of, 
214-216. 

Allegany  county,  stratigraphy  and 
areal  distribution  of  forma- 
tions in,  85. 

Allegany  county  structure,  132. 

Allegany  county,  temperatures  of, 
219. 

Allegany  county,  topographic  feat- 
ures of,  264. 

Allegany  county,  topographic  map 
of,  64. 

Allegany  county,  waterflow  in,  265. 
Allegany  county,  wooded  regions  of, 
267. 

Allegany  Grove,  terraces  at,  51. 
Alleghany  Plateau,  27. 
Alleghanian  fauna,  293. 
Allegheny  coals,  171. 
Allegheny  formation,  31,  115,  166, 
169. 

Allegheny  formation,  composition 
of,  115. 

Allegheny  formation,  extent  of, 
115. 

Allegheny  formation,  sections  in, 

116,  117.  118. 
Allegheny  formation  soils,  210. 
Allegheny  formation,  thickness  of, 

115,  117,  118. 
Alluvial  and   other  late  deposits, 

130. 

Alluvial  soils,  212. 
American  Coal  Company,  179. 
American  Goldfinch,  occurrence  of, 
301. 

American  Redstart,  occurrence  of, 
306. 

Analysis  of  cement  rock,  186. 


310 


INDEX 


Analysis  of  effluent  from  Savage 

river,  247. 
Analyses   of  soils   from  Allegany 

county,  214-216. 

Andrews,   ,  65. 

Anticlinal  ridges,  36. 

Anticlines,   132-136,   138,   139.  140, 

142-146,  148,  149,  150,  152,  154, 

163. 

Appalachia,  58,  155. 
Appalachian  Province,  27,  58. 
Appalachian   Province,  boundaries 
of,  27. 

Appalachian  revolution,  54,  55. 
Appalachian  strata,  origin  of,  161. 
Appalachian  structure,  152. 
Archean  continent,  155. 
Areal    distribution    of  geological 

formations  in  Allegany  county, 

85. 

Argillaceous  sediments,  158. 

Armstrong,   ,  264. 

Armstrong,  S.  C,  78. 
Ashburner,  Chas.  A.,  78,  79,  80. 
Atkinson.  T.  C,  230. 
Austral  faunal  region,  291. 

B. 

Babb,  Cyrus  C,  81. 
Baily,  Vernon,  292. 
Baird,  G.  W.,  83. 

Baltimore    Oriole,    occurrence  of, 
301. 

Bank  Swallow,  occurrence  of,  303. 
Bannon,  Benj.,  74. 
Barkman,  Justin,  230. 
Barn  Swallow,  occurrence  of,  303. 
"  Barren  Measures."  118. 
Barren  Oak,  occurrence  of,  275. 
Bartlett  Road,  magnetic  station  on. 
258. 

Barton   (Four-foot)   coal,  119,  175. 
176. 

Bauer,  L.  A.,  7,  17,  84,  253,  254. 
Beech,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Bewicks  Wren,  occurrence  of,  306. 
Bibliography.  69. 
"  Big  Spring,"  192. 
Big  Spring  Run  syncline.  144. 
"  Big  Vein  "  coal,  65,  124,  177. 
Biological    survey    of    the  United 

States.  291. 
Birds  of  Allegany  county,  293-307. 


Black  Ash,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Black-billed  Cuckoo,  occurrence  of, 
298. 

Blackbird,  occurrence  of,  301. 
Blackburnian  Warbler,  occurrence 
of,  305. 

Black-capped  Titmouse,  occurrence 
of,  306. 

Black  Cherry,  occurrence  of,  274 
Black   Sheridan  Wilson  Company, 
179. 

Black  Spruce,  occurrence  of,  294. 

Black-throated  Blue  Warbler,  i  z- 
currence  of,  304. 

Black-throated  Green  Warbler,  oc- 
currence of,  305. 

Black  Walnut,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Blackwater  formation,  114. 

Black  and  white  Warbler,  occvr- 
rence  of,  303. 

Blcomington  (Railroad)  coal  seam, 
115,  170. 

Bluebaugh  coal  seam,  116,  172. 

Bluebird,  occurrence  of,  307. 

Bluegrass  land,  205. 

Blue  Jay,  occurrence  of,  300. 

Blue  Ridge  (Catoctin)  district.  27. 

Bobolink,  occurrence  of,  301. 

Bodfish.  S.  H..  67. 

Boettcherville.  elevation  of,  229. 

Boettcherville,  meteorological  s.a- 
tion  at,  229. 

Booth,  Jas.  C,  63,  70. 

Borden  mine.  126. 

Borden  Mining  Co.,  125. 

Boreal  faunal  region,  291. 

Brackett,  F.  E.,  255. 

Eraddock.  General.  60. 

Braddock  Road,  magnetic  station 
on,  256. 

Breccia,  162. 

Breccia,  limestone  chert,  131. 
Brick.  181,  182,  184. 
Broad  Top  anticline,  141. 
Broad-winged     Hawk,  occurren:3 

of,  298. 
Brown,  F.  F.,  222,  229. 
Brown  Creeper,  occurrence  of,  3C6. 
Brown,  Thomas.  76,  77. 
Brown    Thrasher,    occurrence  of, 

306. 

Brown.  W.  M.,  254. 
Bruce,  Oliver  H..  229. 
Bruce,  Webster,  228. 


311 


Buckwheat,  210. 

Buffalo  Creek,  discharge  of.  245. 
Buffalo  Lumber  Company,  246. 
Building-stone  in  Allegany  county, 

165,  187,  188.  194. 
Bunbury.  C.  J.  ¥.,  64,  72,  130. 
Butternut,  occurrence  of,  274. 

C. 

Cain,  Peter.  76. 
Cambrian  time,  early,  155, 
Cameron,  F.  K..  201. 
Canadian  Warbler,  occurrence  of. 
305. 

Carboniferous,  109. 
Carboniferous  shales,  183. 
Cardinal  bird,  occurrence  of,  292. 
302. 

Carolina  Chickadee,  292. 
Carolina  Junco,  occurrence  of,  302. 
Carolina  Wren,  occurrence  of,  292, 
306. 

Carolinian  fauna  in  Maryland.  292. 
Carroll    White    Sulphur  Springs, 
192. 

Catbird,  occurrence  of.  306. 
Cedar  Waxwing.  occurrence  of.  303. 
Cement,  93,  165,  185,  194. 
Cement  rock,  analysis  of.  186, 
Channel-cutting  stage.  49. 
Chemung  Upper  Conglomerate.  142. 
Chert,  96,  99,  100,  103,  131,  194. 
"  Chert  lintel."  99. 
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  Canal,  25. 
Chestnut,  occurrence  of,  271,  294. 
295. 

Chestnut  Oak,  occurrence  of,  271. 

Chestnut-sided  Warbler,  occur- 
rence of,  304. 

Chimney  Swift,  occurrence  of,  299. 

Chipping  Sparrow,  occurrence  of. 
302. 

Clarion  coal  seam,  116. 

Clark,  Wm,  Bullock,  7,  9,  17,  68, 
69,  81,  83,  84,  165,  263,  292, 

Clarke,  J.  M.,  67,  79,  159. 

Clays,  87,  130,  165,  184,  194,  200. 

Clays,  residual.  184. 

Clays,  sedimentary,  184. 

Clearing,  regulation  of  indiscrimi- 
nate, 290. 

Clearsville  syncline,  141. 

Cliff  Swallow,  occurrence  of,  303. 

Climate  of  Allegany  county.  217. 


Climate,  influence  on  soils  of,  197, 
Clinton  formation,  153,  158,  190, 
Clinton  formation,  composition  of, 
89. 

Clinton  formation,  description  of, 
89. 

Clinton  formation,  section  in,  90, 
91. 

Clinton    formation,    thickness  of, 

90-91. 
Clinton  soils,  202. 
Close  folding,  district  of.  59. 
Clover.  203,  205, 

Coal,  113,  115-129,  162,  165-180,  194, 

Coal  basin,  description  of,  166. 

Coal  basin,  history  of  its  develop- 
ment, 167, 

Coal  basin,  names  used  for,  168. 

Coal,  first  shipment  of.  167. 

Coal  Measures.  153.  161. 

Coal  Measures  limestone,  188, 

Coal  Measures  Period,  162. 

Coal  Measures  strata,  190. 

Coal-mining,  effect  on  forest 
growth  of,  281, 

Coal  veins,  position  of,  169. 

Collier  Mountain  anticline.  144. 

Collier  Run  syncline,  144,  153, 

Commission,  5. 

Conemaugh  coals,  175. 

Conemaugh  formation,  118,  119, 
120,  121,  122,  123,  166,  169,  176, 
186,  187,  190. 

Conemaugh  formation,  composi- 
tion of,  118. 

Conemaugh  formation,  extent  of, 
118, 

Conemaugh    formation,  thickness 

of,  122. 
Conemaugh  soils,  211, 
Conglomerate,    102,    106,    107,  109, 

110,  130,  142.  160,  162,  187, 
Conifers,  267. 

Consolidation   Coal    Company,  19, 

125-127,  179. 
Contents.  11. 
Corn.  203.  204,  208,  209. 
Cook.  George  H,.  75. 
Cook,  J.  W.,  264. 
Cook.  R.  S..  67,  78. 
Cooper's  Hawk,  occurrence  of.  297. 
County  Commissioners.   Board  of, 

259. 

Cowbird.  occurrence  of.  301. 


312 


INDEX 


Crested  Flycatcher,  occurrence  of, 
299. 

Cretaceous  peneplain,  163. 

Crow,  occurrence  of,  301. 

Cuckoo,  occurrence  of,  298. 

Cucumber-tree,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Cumberland  basin,  report  on  bi- 
tuminous coal  of,  65. 

Cumberland,  chart  showing  rain- 
fall at,  227. 

Cumberland,  climate  of,  218. 

"  Cumberland  Coal  Region,"  168. 

Cumberland,  diagram  showing  dis- 
charge of  North  Branch  at, 
241. 

Cumberland,  magnetic  station  at, 
254,  255. 

Cumberland,    drainage    about,  on 

Schooley  plain.  48. 
Cumberland,    drainage    about,  on 

Shenandoah  plain,  44. 
Cumberland,  elevation  of.  218. 
Cumberland,  establishment  of  sur- 
veyor's meridian  line  at,  259. 
Cumberland,    fluctuations    in  the 

mean  annual  rainfall  at,  226. 
Cumberland,  fluctuations  in  mean 

annual  temperature  at,  223. 
Cumberland  Hydraulic  Cement  and 

Manufacturing  Company,  185. 
Cumberland,  meteorological  station 

at,  228. 

Cumberland,  monthly  estimated 
discharge  at,  240. 

Cumberland,  observations  of  flow 
of  water  at,  234. 

Cumberland  and  Pennsylvania 
Railroad,  25. 

Cumberland  and  Potomac  Cement 
Company,  185. 

Cumberland,  present  drainage  in 
vicinity  of,  41. 

Cumberland,  rating  tables  for  Po- 
tomac river  at,  239. 

Cumberland,  table  showing  dis- 
charge measurements  of  Poto- 
mac river  at,  239. 

Cumberland,  table  of  rainfall  at, 
224. 

Cumberland,  terraces  at,  50. 
Cumberland  Turnpike  Road,  24. 
Current,  speed  of.  236. 
Cutting,  regulation  of  indiscrimi- 
nate forest.  288. 


D. 

Daddow,  S.  H.,  74. 
Dana,  J.  D.,  76,  83,  96. 
Darton,  N.  H.,  69,  84,  106,  113. 

Davidson,   ,  264. 

Davis  Coal  and  Coke  Company, 
171,  179. 

Davis  (Six-foot)  coal  seam,  116, 
173. 

Davis,  Arthur  P.,  243. 
Davis,  Wm.  M.,  33. 
Day,  D.  T.,  79. 

Deflected  lower  courses  of  streams, 
39. 

Domond,  C.  D.,  68,  83. 
Description  of  the  coal  basin,  166. 
Description  of   magnetic  stations, 
254. 

Description  of  meteorological  sta- 
tions, 228. 

Detmold  Hill,  magnetic  station  on, 
257. 

Devil  s  Backbone  section,  97. 

Devonian  formations,  94,  151. 

Devonian  Shale  Period.  160. 

Diagram  showing  discharge  of 
North  Branch  of  the  Potomac 
at  Cumberland,  241. 

Dip  of  strata,  152. 

Discharge  of  Abram  Creek,  246. 

Discharge  of  Evitts  Creek,  251. 

Discharge  of  Frog  Hollow.  251. 

Discharge  of  Georges  Creek.  248. 

Discharge  of  New  Creek,  249. 

Discharge  of  North  Branch,  meas- 
urements of.  245. 

Discharge  of  Patterson  Creek,  251. 

Discharge  of  Pursley  Run,  251. 

Discharge  of  Savage  river,  247. 

Discharge  of  Sideling  Creek.  251. 

Discharge  of  Stony  river,  245. 

Discharge  of  Town  Creek,  251. 

Discharge  of  tributaries  of  North 
Branch,  measurements  of,  245. 

Dorsey,  C.  W.,  18,  195. 

Douglas,  D.  B.,  63. 

Dove,  occurrence  of,  297. 

Downs.  Newton  T.,  230. 

Downy  Woodpecker,  occurrence  of, 
298. 

Drainage  about  Cumberland  on 
Schooley  plain,  48. 


313 


Drainage    about    Cumberland  on 

Shenandoah  plain,  44. 
Drainage    about    Cumberland  at 

present,  41. 
Drainage  of  Plateau  District,  30. 
Drainage  of  Ridge  District,  37. 
Ducatel,  J.  T.,  61,  62,  63,  69,  72. 
Dunkard    formation,    32,  128-130, 

186,  189. 

Dunkard  formation,  composition 
of,  128. 

Dunkard  formation,  extent  of,  128. 
Dunkard  formation,  thickness  of, 
129. 

Dunkard  soils,  212. 

E. 

Economic  materials,  miscellaneous, 
192. 

Eckhart  mine,  168. 

Eldredge,  N.  T.,  71. 

Elk  Garden  District,  169. 

Elkgarden  (Fourteen-foot  or  Big 
Vein)  coal  seam,  177. 

Elevation  of  valleys  in  Ridge  Dis- 
trict, 36. 

Elevations  of  the  Plateau  District, 

table  of,  29. 
Enameled  brick,  182. 
Erickson,  Capt.,  71. 
Evitts  Creek,  discharge  of,  251. 
Evitts  Creek  syncline.  146. 
Evitts  Mountain  anticline.  14.5,  152. 

F. 

Fassig.  O.  L.,  18,  217. 
Faults,  153. 

Faunal  zones,  description  of,  292. 
Featherstonhaugh,  G.  W.,  61,  70. 
Felling  timber,  289. 
Field  Sparrow,  occurrence  of,  302. 
Fifteenmile    Creek,    discharge  of, 
251. 

Firebrick,  67,  68,  182. 
Fires,  laws  against  setting,  286. 
Fire-clay,  67,  68,  162,  165,  171,  181, 
182. 

Fire-clay,  use  of,  67,  182. 

Fires,  forest,  and  their  relation  to 

reproduction  of  forests,  282. 
Fire-wardens,  287. 
Flint,  194. 


Flintstone,  meteorological  station 
at,  230. 

Flintstone  Sulphur  Spring,  191. 

Flora  and  fauna  of  Allegany 
county,  291. 

Flow  of  water  at  Cumberland,  ob- 
servations of,  234. 

Fluctuations  in  mean  annual  tem- 
perature at  Cumberland,  223. 

Flycatcher,  299,  300. 

Fontaine,  Wm.  M.,  75,  76,  129,  130. 

Formations  in  Allegany  county, 
table  of,  86. 

Forests  of  Allegany  county,  263. 

Forests,  character  of,  267. 

Forests,  composition  of,  268. 

Forest  fires,  law  against  setting, 
286. 

Forest  fires  and  their  relation  to 
reproduction  of  forests,  282. 

Forest  lands,  exclusion  of  grazing 
from,  287. 

Forest  lands,  protection  from  fire 
of,  286. 

Forest  resources,  management  and 

utilization  of,  285. 
Forest  trees,   general  distribution 

of,  269. 

Forestry  survey,  method  of,  263. 
Fort  Hill  anticline,  150. 
Fox  Squirrel,  occurrence  of,  292. 
Franklin     ( Dirty-Xine-foot)  coal 

seam,  176. 
Franklin  Hill,  magnetic  station  on, 

258. 

Frazer,  Persifor,  Jr.,  76. 

Frog  Hollow,  discharge  of,  251. 

Frostburg,  elevation  of,  230. 

Frostburg.  mean  annual  tempera- 
ture of,  218. 

Frostburg.  meteorological  station 
at,  230. 

Frostburg  syncline,  150. 

"  Frost  Town,"  62. 

G. 

Gage,  description  of,  235. 
Gannett,  Henry,  78,  81,  83. 
Garrett  county,  creation  of,  23. 
Genesee  shales,  183. 
Geographic  and  geologic  relations, 
57. 

Geology  of  Allegany  county,  57. 


314 


IXDEX 


Georges  Creek  coal  area,  early  men- 
tion of,  62. 

Georges  Creek  Coal  and  Iron  Com- 
pany, 62,  179,  189. 

Georges  Creek  basin,  coal-beds  of, 
54. 

Georges  Creek  Coal  Region,  168. 
Georges  Creek,  discharge  of,  248. 
Georges    Creek    and  Cumberland 

Railroad,  25. 
Georges  Creek  syncline,  150,  153. 
Georges  Creek,  valley  of.  30. 
Gilman,  Daniel  C,  5. 
Glass-sand,  192. 
Gnatcatcher,  292. 

Golden-winged     Warbler,  occur- 
rence of,  304. 
Goldfinch,  occurrence  of,  301. 
Gorges,  transverse,  38. 
Grass,  203,  204. 

Grasshopper    Sparrow,  occurrence 

of,  301. 
Gravel,  30,  50,  130,  212. 
Grazing,  exclusion  of.  from  forest 

lands,  287. 
Green  Heron,  occurrence  of,  296. 
Great-horned   Owl,   occurrence  of. 

298. 

Great  Savage  Mt.,  altitude  of,  294. 
Greater  Appalachian  Valley,  27. 
Greenbrier  formation,  32,  110,  111. 
112,  155. 

Greenbrier  formation,  composition 
of,  110. 

Greenbrier  formation,  extent  of. 
110. 

Greenbrier  formation,  section  in. 
Ill,  112. 

Greenbrier-Mauch  Chunk  soils.  210. 
Greenbrier     formation,  thickness 
of,  112. 

Greenbrier  limestone,  187,  188. 
Griswold,  W.  T.,  67. 
Grouse,  occurrence  of,  297. 
Gypsum,  occurrence  of,  159. 

H. 

Hackberry,  occurrence  of,  275. 
Hackett,  Merrill,  67. 
Hairy  Woodpecker,  occurrence  of. 
298. 

Hall,  James,  65,  74,  75,  79,  96,  102, 
158. 


Hamilton  shales,  183. 

Hampshire  formation,  32,  36,  132, 

135,  136,  151,  160. 
Hampshire  formation,  composition 

of,  108. 

Hampshire    formation,    extent  of. 
108. 

Hampshire  formation,  thickness  of, 

109.  » 
Hampshire  soils.  208. 
Hawks,  occurrence  of,  297,  298. 
Helderberg  formation,  94,  97,  143, 

146,  149,  153,  155,  184,  186. 
Helderberg   formation,  description 

of,  94. 

Helderberg    formation,  thickness 

of,  97. 
Helderberg  Period,  159. 
Helderberg  soils,  204. 
Hemlock,  occurrence  of.  294.  295, 

296. 

Henry,  Joseph,  217. 
Hering,  Joshua  W.,  5. 
Heron,  occurrence  of,  296. 
Higgins,  James,  73,  198,  205,  208, 
209. 

Hill,  R.  T.,  81. 

Historical  review  of  geologj'  of  Al- 
legany county,  60. 
Historical  sketch  of  soil  work.  198. 
Hodge.  James  T.,  65,  74. 
Hofman,  H.  O.,  68,  83. 
Hofman  mine,  118. 
Hoffmann  s  Sons  Company,  246. 
Homewood  sandstone,  181. 
House  Wren,  occurrence  of,  306. 
Howard,  A.  B.,  81. 
Howell,  L.,  63. 
Hughes.  Geo.  W.,  63.  70,  73. 
Hummingbird,  occurrence  of,  299. 
Hydraulic  cement,  185. 
Hydrography  of  Allegany  county, 
233. 

I. 

Illustrations,  15. 

Indigo  Bunting,  occurrence  of.  302. 
Industrial    uses    of    streams  and 

springs.  234. 
Interpretation  of  the  sedimentary 

record.  155. 
Iron  ore,  90,  105,  119,  120,  165.  186, 

189. 


IlfDEX 


315 


J. 

Jennings  formation,   136,  141,  154. 

155,  160,  185. 
Jennings    formation,  composition 

of.  106. 

Jennings  formation,  extent  of,  106. 
Jennings  formation,  thickness  of, 
108. 

Jennings  shales,  183. 
Jewell.  L.  E.,  19. 

Johns  Hopkins  University,  investi- 
gations by,  68. 

Johnson.  Walter  R.,  64,  72,  73. 

Jones,  Howard  Grant,  66,  77. 

Jones,  John  H.,  80,  81. 

Juniata  formation,  86,  87.  156. 

Juniata  formation,  composition  of, 
86,  87. 

Juniata  formation,  description  of. 
86. 

Juniata  formation,  thickness  of,  87. 
Juniata  soils,  201. 

K. 

Kemp,  James,  83. 
Keyes,  Chas.  R.,  80. 
Keyser,  W.,  82. 
Kingbird,  occurrence  of,  299. 
Killdeer  Plover,  occurrence  of,  297. 
Kingfisher,  occurrence  of,  298. 
Kinnecut,  L.  P.,  80. 
Koontz   (Waynesburg)   coal  seam. 
124,  179. 

Koontz  Hill,  magnetic  station  at. 
257. 

Koontz  mine.  126. 

L. 

Lark,  occurrence  of,  300,  301. 
Law  against   setting  forest  fires, 
286. 

Least  Flycatcher,  occurrence  of, 
300. 

Lesley,  J.  P.,  73,  77,  78,  81,  87,  111, 
191. 

Levant  Red  Sandstone,  86. 

Life  zones  and  areas  of  Allegany 
county,  291. 

Lime,  165,  185,  194. 

Limestone,  44,  46.  51,  62,  89,  90,  91, 
92,  95,  96,  105,  110,  112,  119,  125, 
126,  128,  129,  131,  155,  156,  159, 
160,  162,  186,  187,  188,  203,  204, 
205,  212. 


Limestone  clay  soils,  199. 
List  of  birds  in  Allegany  county, 
296. 

List  of  conifers  and  hardwood 
trees  in  Allegany  county,  268. 

Little  Clarksburg  Vein,  176. 

Loams,  193,  201,  203,  205,  210,  211. 

Loamy  soils,  199. 

Locust,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Lonaconing,  magnetic  station  at, 
255,  257. 

Lonsdale,  W.,  72. 

Louisiana  Water-thrush,  occur- 
rence of,  305. 

Lowdermilk.  Will  H.,  76. 

i^ower  Carboniferous  Period.  162. 

Lower  Kittanning  coal,  116. 

Lower  Pentamerus  sub-formations, 
96. 

Lowndes,  Lloyd,  24.  259. 
Lumbering,   relation   of.  to  repro- 
duction of  timber,  279. 
Lyell,  Chas.,  64,  72. 

M. 

MacFarlane,  James,  75,  80. 
Magnetic  declination  in  Allegany 

county,  253. 
Magnetic   declination,  changes  in. 

260. 

Magnetic  declinations,  table  show- 
ing, 253,  254. 

Magnetic  stations,  descriptions  of. 
254. 

Magnetic  station  on  Bartlett  Road, 
description  of,  258. 

Magnetic  station  on  Braddock 
Road,  description  of,  256. 

Magnetic  station  at  Cumberland, 
description  of,  254,  255. 

Magnetic  station  on  Franklin  Hill, 
description  of.  258. 

Magnetic  station  on  Koontz  Hill, 
description  of,  257. 

Magnetic  station  at  Lonaconing. 
description  of,  255,  257. 

Magnetic  station  at  mound  on  Ma- 
son and  Dixon  Line,  descrip- 
tion of,  255. 

Magnetic  station  on  Miller  Road, 
description  of,  257. 

Magnetic  station  at  Mount  Savage, 
description  of,  255. 


310 


INDEX 


Magnetic  station  on  National  Pike, 

description  of,  256. 
Magnetic  station  on  North  Pickell 

Hill,  description  of,  258. 
Magnetic  station  at  Paw  Paw,  de- 
scription of,  255. 
Magnetic    station    on    Pea  Ridge 

Road,  description  of,  257. 
Magnetic  station  on  Phoenix  Hill, 

description  of,  258. 
Magnetic    station    on    Piney  Hill, 

description  of,  255. 
Magnetic  station  on  Roaring  Hill. 

description  of,  256. 
Magnetic  station  at  mouth  of  Sav- 
age river,  description  of,  258. 
Magnetic   station   on    Staub  Run, 

description  of,  257. 
Magnetic  station  on  South  Pickell 

Hill,  description  of,  258. 
Magnetic  station  on  Swanton  Hill, 

description  of,  258. 
Magnetic  station   at  Westernport, 

description  of,  255. 
Magnetic  station  on  Winebrenner 

Run,  description  of,  257. 
Magnolia  Warbler,  occurrence  of, 

304. 

Mahoning  sandstone,  118. 
Manufacture  of  fire-clay,  182. 
Marcellus  formation.  103. 
Marcellus  shales,  183. 
Martin  Mountain  anticline,  144. 
Martin    Spring    Branch  syncline. 
144. 

Martinsburg  formation,  156. 

Maryland  Agricultural  Experiment 
Station.  199. 

Maryland  Coal  Company,  179. 

Maryland  Geological  Survey,  or- 
ganization of,  69. 

Maryland  Mining  Company,  63. 

Maryland  Weather  Service,  47,  227. 

Maryland  Yellow-throat,  occur- 
rence of,  305. 

Mason  and  Dixon  Line,  descrip- 
tion of  magnetic  station  on,  255. 

Mathews.  Edward  B.,  7.  84,  85. 

Matthes,  Gerard  H..  243. 

Mauch  Chunk  formation,  32. 

Mauch  Chunk  formation,  composi- 
tion of,  112. 

Mauch  Chunk  formation,  extent  of, 
112. 


Mauch  Chunk  formation,  thickness 
of,  113. 

-Mauch  Chunk  shale,  183. 

McCreath,  Andrew  A.,  76. 

Meadow  Lark,  occurrence  of,  301. 

Measurements  of  discharge  of 
North  Branch,  245. 

Measurement  of  water  height,  235. 

Mechanical  analyses  of  soils  and 
subsoils  from  Allegany  county, 
214-216. 

Mercer,  Chas.  Fenton,  70. 

.Meridian  line,  establishment  of  the 
surveyor  s,  at  Cumberland,  259. 

Meridian  line,  method  used  in  ob- 
taining, 259. 

Merriam,  C.  Hart,  18,  291. 

Merrill,  G.  P.,  79. 

Merrill,  Wm.  E.,  75. 

Meteorological  stations  in  Alle- 
gany county,  table  of,  231. 

Meteorological  station  at  Boettch- 
erville,  229. 

Meteorological  station  at  Cumber- 
land, 228. 

Meteorological  station  at  Flint- 
stone.  230. 

Meteorological  station  at  Oldtown, 
230. 

Meteorological  station  at  Mt.  Sav- 
age. 230. 

Meteorological  station  at  Western- 
port.  229. 
Middlesex  Leather  Company,  246. 
Miller,  S.  A.,  79. 
Miller,  W.  J.,  259. 

Miller  Road,  magnetic  station  on, 
257. 

Mineral  products,  list  of  operators 
in.  194. 

Mineral  resources  of  Allegany 
county.  165. 

Mineral  Springs,  165,  191. 

Mining,  relation  of  to  reproduction 
of  timber,  278. 

Mockernut,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Mcnoclinal  ridges,  36. 

Monongahela  formation,  166,  16y, 
176,  189.  190. 

Monongahela  formation,  composi- 
tion of.  125. 

Monongahela  formation,  extent  of, 
124. 


IXUEX 


317 


Monongahela  formation,  section  in, 
126.  127. 

Monongahela  formation,  thickness 

of,  126-128. 
Monongahela  soils,  211. 
Monthly    discharge    of  Potomac 

river   at   Cumberland  (table), 

240. 

Mt.  Savage  bricks,  181. 
Mt.   Savage,  magnetic  station  at, 
255. 

Mt.  Savage,  meteorological  station 
at,  230. 

Mt.  Savage  Enameled  Brick  Com- 
pany, 182. 

Mt.  Savage  fire-clay,  68. 

Mountains,  important,  in  Allegany 
county,  57. 

Mountain  Pasture  soils,  207. 

Mourning  Dove,  occurrence  of,  297. 

N. 

"  The  Narrows,"  49,  148. 
National  Pike,  magnetic  station  on, 
256. 

National  Road,  anticlines  on,  133. 
Nautilus  Ledge,  105. 
New  Central  Coal  Company,  179. 
New  Creek,  discharge  of,  249. 
New  York  Coal  and  Iron  Company, 
189. 

"  New  Detmold     mine,  126. 
Newell,  F.  H.,  18,  83,  85,  233. 
Niagara  formation,  91,  155. 
Niagara  formation,  composition  of, 
91. 

Niagara  formation,  description  of, 
91. 

Niagara  formation,  section  in,  92. 
Niagara   formation,   thickness  of, 
92. 

Niagara  limestone,  188. 
Niagara  Period,  158. 
Niagara  soil,  203. 
Nicolls,  Wm.  Jasper,  84,  85. 
Nighthawk,  occurrence  of,  299. 
North  Branch,  description  of,  243, 
247-250. 

North  Branch,  measurements  of 
discharge  of,  245. 

North  Branch,  pollution  of,  243. 

North  Pickell  Hill,  magnetic  sta- 
tion on,  257. 


Northern  Flicker,  occurrence  of, 
299. 

Northern  Pileated  Woodpecker,  oc- 
currence of,  299. 

Northern  Raven,  occurrence  of, 
300. 

Nuthatch,  occurrence  of,  306. 
0. 

Oak,  occurrence  of,  294,  295. 
Oats,  203,  205,  208,  209,  211,  212. 
O'Harra,  C.  C,  7,  17,  57,  165. 
Oldtown,  meteorological  station  at, 
230. 

Oldtown  and  Pratt  Valley  folds, 
139. 

Open  folding,  district  of,  59. 
Operators  in  mineral  products,  194. 
Opossum,  292. 

Oriskany  formation,  36,  38,  98,  138, 
144,  146,  149,  153,  155,  187,  188, 
192. 

Oriskany  formation,  composition 
of,  99. 

Oriskany  formation,  extent  of,  99. 
Oriskany  formation,  description  of, 
98. 

Oriskany  formation,  section  in, 
101,  102. 

Oriskany  formation,  thickness  of, 
101. 

Oriskany  period,  160. 
Oriskany  soils.  206. 
Orleans  anticline.  132. 
Oven-bird,  occurrence  of,  305. 
Owl,  occurrence  of,  298. 
O.ralis  acilosclla,  296. 

P. 

Paint  rock,  193. 

Paleozoic  Period,  the  early,  155. 

Paleozoic  Period  and  The  Appala- 
chian Revolution,  54. 

Paleozoic  sea.  55. 

Paleozoic  strata,  32. 

Parker,  E.  W.,  81-85. 

Parker  coal  seam.  116.  172. 

Parula  Warbler,  occurrence  of,  304. 

Potomac  Basin,  altitude  of.  246. 

Potomac  river,  236,  237,  238. 

Potomac  river  at  Cumberland, 
table  showing  daily  gage 
height  of,  236,  237,  238. 


318 


IXDEX 


Patterson,   ,  262. 

Patterson  Creek,  discharge  of,  251. 
Patterson,  T.  L.,  223,  226. 
Paul,  E.  G.,  243. 

Paw  Paw,  magnetic  station  at, 
255. 

Peale,  A.  C,  78,  81. 

Pea  Ridge  Road,  magnetic  station 

on,  257. 
Peat.  163. 
Peneplains,  163. 
Pennsylvania  Railroad,  25. 
Permian  formations,  128. 
Pewee,  occurrence  of,  300. 
Phillips,  G.  Jenkins,  73. 
Phoebe  bird,  occurrence  of,  300. 
Phoenix  Hill,  magnetic  station  on, 

258. 

Phoenix     Mining  Manufacturing 

Company,  64. 
Phosphate  rock,  193. 
Physical     features     of  Allegany 

county,  21,  23. 
Physiography  of  Allegany  county, 

27. 

Physiographic  divisions,  28. 
Piedmont    Pulp    and    Paper  Mill 

Company,  247. 
Pignut  Hickory,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Pilsbry,  H.  A.,  131. 
Piney   Hill,   magnetic   station  on 

255. 

Pitch  of  strata,  152. 
Pitch  Pine,  occurrence  of,  273. 
Pittsburg  Vein,  178. 
Plateau  District,  drainage  of.  30. 
Plateau  District,  table  of  elevations 
of,  29. 

Plateau  District,  topography  of.  28. 

Plateau  District,  stream  adjust- 
ment in,  33. 

Plateau  District,  structure  of,  32. 

Pleistocene,  The,  130. 

Pocono  formation.  31,  32.  34.  36,  49. 
136,  155.  162. 

Pccono  formation,  composition  of, 
109. 

Pocono  formation,  extent  of,  109. 
Pocono    formation,    thickness  of, 
109. 

Pocono  Plateau.  109. 
Pocono  sandstone,  49. 
Pocono  soils,  209. 
Polish  Mt.  syncline,  141. 


Pomeroy,  Samuel  Whyllys,  61.  69. 

Portage  formation,  106. 

Portage  shales,  183. 

Potatoes,  206,  211,  212. 

Potomac  Bottom  soils,  199. 

Porter,  Dwight,  85. 

Pottsville  coals,  170. 

Potts ville  formation,  29,  31,  32,  34, 

49,  151,  155,  166,  169,  181,  187. 
Pottsville    formation,  composition 

of,  114. 

Pottsville  formation,  extent  of,  113. 
Pottsville    formation,    section  in, 
114,  115. 

Pottsville  formation,  thickness  of, 
114. 

Pottsville  sandstone,  29. 
Pottsville  soils,  210. 
Powell,  John.  63. 

Prairie   Horned   Lark,  occurrence 
of,  300. 

Prairie  Warbler,  occurrence  of,  305. 
Pratt  Valley,  139-141. 
Preble,  Edward  A.,  18,  292,  294. 
Preface,  17. 

Present  or  Channel-cutting  stage, 
49. 

Prosser,  Charles  S.,  7,  122. 
Pumpelly,  R.,  78. 

Purple  Grackle,  occurrence  of.  301. 
Purple  Martin,  occurrence  of.  303. 
Pursley  Run,  discharge  of,  251. 

Q. 

Quail,  occurrence  of,  297. 
Quartz.  109,  110. 

Quartzite.  33.  87,  88,  89,  106,  130, 
145,  148,  153,  187. 

B. 

Railroad  coal  seam,  115. 
Rainfall    affected    by  topography, 
226. 

Rainfall,  table  of  average  monthly 

and  annual.  225. 
Rainfall  in  Allegany  county,  223. 
Rainfall    at    Cumberland  (chart), 

257. 

Rainfall  at  Cumberland,  table  of, 
224. 

Rainfall,  fluctuations  in  the  mean 

annual,  at  Cumberland,  226. 
Randolph,  B.  S.,  264. 


IXDEX 


319 


Rankin,  Robt.  G.,  65,  73. 

Rating  tables  for  Potomac  river  at 

Cumberland,  239. 
Raven,  occurrence  of,  300. 
Rawlings  syncline,  149. 
Redbird,  occurrence  of,  275. 
Red-breasted  Nuthatch,  occurrence 

of,  306. 

Red-eyed  Yireo,  occurrence  of,  303. 

Red-headed  Woodpecker,  occur- 
rence of,  299. 

Red  Juniper,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Red  Maple,  occurrence  of,  274. 

Red  Medina,  86. 

Red  Oak,  occurrence  of,  271. 

Red  sandstone  soils,  199. 

Red-shouldered  Hawk,  occurrence 
of,  298. 

Redstart,  occurrence  of,  306. 
Redwinged    Blackbird,  occurrence 

of,  301. 
Reforesting,  279. 

Relation  between  waterflow  and 
forest-cover,  266. 

Reproduction,  relation  of  lumber- 
ing and  mining  to,  279. 

Residual  clays,  184. 

Review,  historical,  of  the  geology 
of  Allegany  county,  60. 

Rhododendron  nia.rimum,  294,  295, 
296. 

Ridge  District,  drainage  of,  37. 
Ridge  District,  elevation  of  valleys 
in,  36. 

Ridge  District,  stream  adjustment 
in,  40. 

Ridge  District,  structure  of,  40. 
Ridge  District,  topography  of,  34. 
Ries,  H.,  17,  83,  165. 
Riordan,  O.,  76. 

Riser,   ,  Frostburg  coal  discov- 
ered by,  167. 

River  height,  observations  of,  235. 

Road-metal,  165,  188,  189. 

Roaring  Hill,  magnetic  station  on, 
256. 

Robin,  occurrence  of,  307. 

Rogers,  H.  D.,  64,  72,  73,  161. 

Rogers,  J.  F.,  80. 

Rogers,  W.  B.,  64,  77. 

Romney  formation,   139,   144,  149, 

160,  185,  188. 
Romney  formation,  composition  of, 

104. 


Romney  formation,  extent  of,  103, 
105. 

Romney- Jennings  soil,  207. 

Romney  shales,  183. 

Rosebreasted  Grosbeak,  occurrence 
of,  302. 

Rowe,  R.  B.,  7,  17,  93,  165. 

Ruby-throated  Hummingbird,  oc- 
currence of,  299. 

Ruffed  Grouse,  occurrence  of,  297. 

Rumbarger  Company,  J.  L.,  246. 

Run-off,  234. 

Rye,  202,  204,  205,  208,  211,  212. 
S. 

Salina  formation,  92,  143,  146,  153, 

154,  155,  159,  185. 
Salina  formation,  composition  of, 

92. 

Salina  formation,  description  of, 
92. 

Salina  formation,  thickness  of,  93. 

Salina  soils,  203. 

Salt  in  Allegany  county,  159. 

Sand,  30,  202. 

Sandpiper.  297. 

Sandstone,  29,  32,  33,  36,  38,  43,  46, 
54,  86,  87,  89,  91,  99,  100,  101, 
104,  106,  108,  110,  112,  114,  115, 
118,  119,  120,  125,  128,  143,  145, 
146,  154,  155,  159,  160,  162,  165, 
187,  201,  204,  206,  207,  209,  210, 
211,  212. 

Savage  river,  analysis  of  effluent 
from,  247. 

Savage  river,  magnetic  station  at 
mouth  of,  258. 

Savage  river,  discharge  of,  247. 

Savage  river,  pollution  of,  247. 

Scharf,  J.  Thomas,  77.  80,  81,  199. 

Scarlet  Tanager,  occurrence  of,  302. 

Schooley  Plain,  48. 

Schooley  Plain  stage,  53. 

Schoot,  Chas.  A.,  75. 

Schuchert,  Chas.,  79. 

Schumann,  C.  H.,  81. 

Screech  Owl,  occurrence  of,  298. 

Scrub  Pine,  occurrence  of,  273. 

Section  showing  position  of  lead- 
ing coal  veins,  169. 

Section  in  Allegheny  formation, 
116,  117,  118. 

Section  in  Barton  coal  seam,  176. 


INDEX 


Section  in  Bloomington  coal  seam, 
170. 

Section   in   Bluebaugh   coal  seam, 
172. 

Section  in  Big  Vein  coal  seam,  177. 
Section  in  Clinton  formation,  90, 
91. 

Section  in  Conemaugh  formation, 
119,  120. 

Section  in  Davis  coal  seam,  173. 
Section  in  Franklin  coal  seam,  176. 
Section   in   Greenbrier  formation, 

111,  112. 

Section  in  Monongahela  formation, 

126,  127,  128. 
Section   in   Helderberg  formation, 

97. 

Section  in  Niagara  formation,  92. 
Section  in  Oriskany  formation,  101, 
102. 

Section    in    Pottsville  formation, 
114,  115. 

Section  in  Parker  coal  seam,  172. 
Section  in  Salina  formation.  93. 
Section  in  Thomas  coal  seam,  174. 
Section  in  Tyson  coal  seam,  179. 
Section  in  Westernport  coal  seam, 
171. 

Sedimentary  clays,  184. 
Sediments,   general  character  and 

variation  of,  155. 
Sedimentary  record,  interpretation 

of,  155. 

Serviceberry,  occurrence  of.  275. 
Shagbark  Hickory,  occurrence  of, 
274. 

Shales,  36,  44,  51,  62,  86,  87,  89,  90, 
91,  99,  104,  105,  106,  108,  110. 

112,  115,  118,  119,  125,  128,  144, 
155,  156,  158,  162,  165,  182,  184, 
194,  202,  204,  207,  211. 

Shaly  Red  Sandstone  soils,  199. 
Sharp-shinned    Hawk,  occurrence 
of,  297. 

Shavers  Creek  anticline,  141. 
Shenandoah  Plain,  49.  52. 
Shenandoah  Plain  epoch.  46. 
Shenandoah  Plain  stage,  51. 
Shepard,  C.  U.,  64. 
Sheppard,  Forrest,  64,  71. 
Sherwood,  B.  F.,  66,  75. 
Shipley.  H.  C.  230. 
Shriver,   ,  262. 


Shriver,  Edwin  Thomas,  217,  219, 

223,  224,  228. 
Shriver,  Howard,  68,  83,  228,  229. 
Shriver,  Jas.,  69. 

Sideling  Creek,  discharge  of,  251. 

Sideling  Hill  syncline,  132. 

Silliman,  Benj.,  63,  71,  72. 

Silvester,  R.  W.,  5. 

Silurian  formations,  86,  142. 

Silurian  limestone,  159. 

Silurian  Period,  Later,  158. 

Silurian  rocks,  151. 

Smith.  John  Walter,  5,  9. 

Smithsonian  Institution,  establish- 
ment of,  217. 

Smock,  J.  C,  77. 

Snyders  Ridge  anticline,  141. 

Soils  of  Allegany  county,  195,  265. 

Soil,  composition  of,  195. 

Soil,  external  and  internal  condi- 
tions of,  197. 

Soil  formations,  200. 

Soil,  formation  of,  195. 

Soils,  mechanical  analyses  of,  214- 
216. 

Soil  work,  historical  sketch  of,  198. 

Solitary  Vireo,  occurrence  of,  303. 

Somerville,  R.  L.,  264. 

Song  Sparrow,  occurrence  of.  302. 

South  Pickell  Hill,  magnetic  sta- 
tion on,  258. 

Sparrow,  occurrence  of.  301,  302. 

Sparrow  Hawk,  occurrence  of,  298. 

Speed  of  current,  256. 

Spencer,  A.  C,  156. 

Spencer,  S.  B.,  82. 

Split-six  coal  seam,  116,  174. 

Spotted  Sandpiper,  occurrence  of, 
297. 

South  Cumberland  Brick  Works, 
184. 

Staub   Run,   magnetic  station  on, 

256,  257. 
Stephens,  Thos.,  75. 
Stevenson,  J.  J.,  66,  67,  76,  77,  79, 

82,  130,  141,  142. 
Stony  river,  discharge  of,  245. 
Stratford  Ridge  anticline,  138,  139. 
Stratigraphy  and  areal  distribution 

of  Allegany  county,  85. 
Streams  of  Allegany  county.  58. 
Stream  adjustments  in  the  Plateau 

District,  33. 


INDEX 


321 


Stream  adjustments  in  the  Ridge 

District,  40. 
Stream-pollution,  234. 
Stream-revival,  48. 
Strike  of  strata,  152. 
Structure  in  Allegany  county,  132. 
Structure  of  Plateau  District,  32. 
Structure  of  Ridge  District,  40. 
Structure  sections,  explanation  of, 

154. 

Subsequent  history  of  sedimenta- 
tion, 163. 

Subsequent  valleys,  37. 

Sudworth,  G.  B.,  18,  263. 

Sugar  Maple,  occurrence  of,  273. 

Sumachs,  occurrence  of,  275. 

Summer  birds  of  western  Mary- 
land, 294. 

Supervising  Surgeon-General  of 
the  Marine  Hospital,  243. 

Swain,  Geo.  F.,  78. 

Swallow,  occurrence  of,  303. 

Swamp  White  Oak,  occurrence  of, 
274. 

Swank,  Jas.  M.,  78,  79,  190. 
Swanton  Hill,  magnetic  station  on, 
258. 

Sweet  Birch,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Sweet  Crab,  occurrence  of,  275. 
Sycamore,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Synclines,  133,  136-138,  141,  144,  146, 

149,  150,  153,  163. 
Synclinal  ridge,  36. 
Snyder,  Henry  L.,  66,  75. 

T. 

Table  of  Allegany  county  forma- 
tions, 86. 

Table  of  average  monthly  and  an- 
nual rainfall,  225. 

Table  of  elevations  of  the  Plateau 
District,  29. 

Table  showing  daily  gage  height  of 
Potomac  river  at  Cumberland, 
236,  237,  238. 

Table  showing  discharge  measure- 
ments on  Potomac  river  at 
Cumberland,  239. 

Table  showing  estimated  monthly 
discharge  of  Potomac  river  at 
Cumberland,  240. 

Table   showing   magnetic  declina- 
tions, 253,  254. 
21 


Table  of  meteorological  stations  in 

Allegany  county,  231. 
Table  of  monthly  and  annual  mean 

temperatures    at  Cumberland, 

220. 

Table-Mountain  Pine,  occurrence 
of,  273. 

Table  of  rainfall  at  Cumberland, 
224. 

Table  of  temperature  data,  221,  222. 

Taff,  Joseph  A.,  69,  84,  113. 

Talus,  88.  100,  111. 

Tamarack,  294. 

Tanager,  292,  302. 

Ta.jus  minor,  295,  296. 

Taylor,  R.  C,  73. 

Temperature  of  Allegany  county, 
219. 

Temperatures  at  Cumberland,  table 
of  monthly  and  annual  mean, 
220. 

Temperature  data,  table  of,  221, 
222. 

Temperature,  highest  record  of  in 

Allegany  county,  222. 
Temperature,  lowest  record  of  in 

Allegany  county,  223. 
Tentaculite  limestone,  96. 
Terrace-forming  stage,  50. 
Tertiary  peneplain,  163. 
Thomas    (Three-foot)    coal  seam, 

116,  174. 

Thorny  Haws,  occurrence  of,  275. 

Thrush,  occurrence  of,  306. 

Timber  trees,  276,  277. 

Timber  trees,  distribution  of  occa- 
sional, 274. 

Timber  trees,  distribution  of  prin- 
cipal, 270. 

Timber  trees,  distribution  of  sub- 
ordinate, 272. 

Titmouse,  occurrence  of,  306,  392. 

Topographic  cycle,  157,  158. 

Topography,  effect  of  on  rainfall, 
226. 

Topographic  features   of  Allegany 

county,  264. 
Topographic  history,  stages  in,  49. 
Topography,  influence  on  soils  of, 

197. 

Topography  of  Plateau  District,  30. 
Towhee,  occurrence  of,  302. 
Town  Creek,  discharge  of,  251. 


322 


INDEX 


Town  Creek,  recent  geologic  his- 
tory of,  42. 

Town  Hill  syncline,  136,  153. 

Townsend,  G.  G.,  230. 

Transition  faunal  zone.  292,  293. 

Transmittal,  letter  of,  9. 

Transverse  gorges,  38. 

Tributaries  of  North  Branch, 
measurements  of  discharge  of, 
245. 

Tufted    Titmouse,    occurrence  of, 

292,  306. 
Tulip-tree,  occurrence  of,  274. 
Turkey  Buzzard,  occurrence  of,  297. 
Tuscarora  formation,  87.  142,  145, 

148,  153,  155,  156.  158,  160,  189. 
Tuscarora  formation,  composition 

of,  88. 

Tuscarora  formation,  description 
of,  87. 

Tuscarora  formation,  thickness  of, 
89. 

Tuscarora  quartzite,  187,  192. 
Tuscarora  soils,  201. 
Tussey  Mt.  anticline,  142,  152. 
Tyson  (Gas)  coal  seam,  section  in, 
179. 

Tyson,  P.  T.,  62,  65,  71,  74.  120,  126, 
127,  190. 

U. 

Upper  Clinton  iron  ore,  90.  190. 
Upper  Potomac  District,  169. 
Union  Mining  Company,  182. 
United    States   Leather  Company, 
249. 

U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  work  of  in 
Allegany  county,  67. 

V. 

Valleys,  elevation  of.  in  Ridge  Dis- 
trict, 36. 

Valleys  of  Allegany  county,  aver- 
age number  of  rainy  days  In, 
228. 

Vesper  Sparrow,  occurrence  of,  301. 
Vireo,  303. 

W. 

Walz,  F.  J.,  227. 
Warbler,  303,  304,  305. 
Ward,  Lester  F.,  79. 
Washington    county,  topographic 
map  of,  64. 


Washington,  George,  letter  of,  60. 
Waterflow  in  Allegany  county,  265. 
Watergaps,  43. 

Waterlime  formation,  96,  185. 
Water-thrush,  occurrence  of,  305. 
Watkins,  J.  Elfreth,  80. 
Weeks,  Joseph  D.,  68,  78,  83,  168. 
Weld,  Henry  Thomas,  71. 
Wellersburg  District,  169. 
Westernport  (Two-foot)  coal,  115, 
170,  17L 

Westernport,  magnetic  station  at, 
255. 

Westernport,  elevation  of,  229. 

Westernport,  meteorological  sta- 
tion at,  229. 

West  Virginia  Central  and  Pitts- 
burg Railway,  25. 

Wheat,  203,  208,  209. 

Whip  Cove  anticline,  132. 

Whippoorwill,  occurrence  of,  299. 

White,  L  C,  66,  67,  77,  79,  80,  85, 
115,  117,  129,  130.  131. 

White  Ash,  occurrence  of,  274. 

White  Basswood,  occurrence  of, 
274. 

White-breasted  Nuthatch,  occur- 
rence of,  306. 

White  Medina,  87. 

White  Oak,  occurrence  of,  271. 

White  Pine,  occurrence  of,  271. 

Whitney,  Milton,  18,  82,  84,  199,  205, 
207,  208,  209. 

Wilbur,  F.  A.,  77. 

Wild  Plum,  occurrence  of,  275. 

Wild  Red  Cherry,  occurrence  of, 
274. 

Willis,  Bailey,  58,  69,  82,  84,  160. 
Wills  Creek,  249,  250,  251. 
Wills  Creek  gorge  described,  62. 
Wills  Mt.  anticline,  46,  148,  152. 
Williams,  George  Huntington,  68, 

SO,  81,  82. 
Wilson,  M.  N.,  mills  of,  246. 
Wilson's    Thrush,    occurrence  of, 

306. 

Wilson's  Warbler,  occurrence  of, 
305. 

Winebrenner  Run,  magnetic  sta- 
tion on,  251. 

Woodcock,  occurrence  of.  297. 

Wooded  region  in  Allegany  county, 
267. 


INDEX 


323 


Woodpecker,    occurrence    of,  298, 
299. 

Wood  Pewee,  occurrence  of,  300. 
Wood  Thrush,  occurrence  of,  306. 
Worm-eating  Warbler,  occurrence 

of,  304. 
Wren,  occurrence  of,  306. 

Y. 

Yellow-breasted    Chat,  occurrence 
of,  305. 


Yellow-billed  Cuckoo,  occurrence 
of,  298. 

Yellow-billed  Woodpecker,  occur- 
rence of,  298. 

Yellow-throated  Vireo.  occurrence 
of,  303. 

Yellow  Warbler,  occurrence  of,  304. 
Z. 

Zeller,  Theodore,  66,  75. 


I)E122.A4A18  SCm 


3  5002  00110  9581 

Maryland  Geological  Survey. 
Allegany  County. 


122 

;.4A18  51793 


