✓ 


AMERICAN  SLAVERY 


DISTINGUISHED  FROM 


THE  SLAVERY  OF  ENGLISH  THEORISTS, 


AND 


JUSTIFIED  BY  THE  LAW  OF  NATURE. 


B  Y 


REV.  SAMUEL  SEABURY,  D.D., 

AUTHOR  OF  "DISCOURSES  ON  THE  SUPREMACY  AND  OBLIGATION  OF  CONSCIENCE.1 


"Atqui  nos  legem  bonam  a  mala  nulla  alia  nisi  Nature  Norma"  dividere 
possum  us.11 — Cicero  De  Leg.,  lib.  i.,  sect.  16. 

"Civil  Government  has  been,  in  all  ages,  a  standing  publication  of  the  Law 
of  Nature." — Bishop  Butler,  Ser.,  1  Tim.  ii.  1-2. 


NEW  YORK: 

MASON  BROTHERS, 

5   &   7   MERGER  STREET. 


1861. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1861,  by 
MASON  BROTHERS, 
In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  Uie  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of 
New  York. 


stereotyped  by 
Smith  &  MoDottoal, 
82  &  84  Beokman-st. 


PEFNTED  BY 

C.    A.  Alvord, 
15  Yandewater-st. 


PREFACE. 


The  evil  of  sectional  agitation,  foreshadowed  by  the 
Father  of  his  country,  is  upon  us ;  and  the  North  and 
the  South  are  arrayed  the  one  against  the  other. 

One  of  the  sources  of  our  dissensions  (in  my  judgment 
the  original  and  chief  source)  is  the  opinion  that  has 
been  extensively  propagated,  that  slavery  is  a  moral 
and  social  evil;  that  is  (though  the  words  are  not 
generally  used  in  their  full  significance),  that  it  is  wrong 
in  morals  and  disgraceful  in  Christian  and  civilized 
society. 

The  fact  that  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
covers  Slave  States  as  well  as  Free,  is  reason  enough,  in 
my  opinion,  why  every  man  that  lives  under  it  should 
assume  slavery  to  be  neither  morally  wrong  nor  socially 
disreputable.  Slavery  is  no  more  forbidden  by  Scrip- 
ture than  by  the  Constitution,  but  is  permitted  by  both ; 
and  I  can  not  but  think  that  modesty  and  good  sense 
should  have  taught  all  citizens  and  all  Christians  who 
could  not  see  the  reason  of  the  permission,  to  take  it 
on  the  authority  of  the  Constitution  of  their  country 
and  the  Rule  of  their  Faith,  without  an  appeal  to  a 
higher  law. 

It  is  clearly  repugnant  to  the  genius  of  our  govern- 
ment to  mix  up  questions  of  morality,  religion,  and  so- 
cial life,  with  our  national  politics;  and,  as  slavery,  in 
some  of  its  bearings,  is  a  legitimate  and  often  neces- 
sary object  of  municipal  legislation,  it  is  the  more  to  be 


iv 


PREFACE. 


regretted  that  it  should  be  complicated  with  questions 
of  morality,  religion,  and  social  reputation.  Neverthe- 
less, this  has  been  done ;  and  the  natural  consequences 
have  followed ; — rancor,  and  hatred,  and  deeply  rooted 
alienations,  such  as  no  merely  political  discussions  could 
engender. 

My  aim  is  to  help  to  withdraw  from  this  vexed  con- 
troversy, if  it  be  possible,  its  moral,  religious,  and  social 
element;  that  thus  slavery,  when  it  is  made  an  object 
of  national  legislation,  may  be  discussed  and  disposed 
of  on  merely  economical  and  political  grounds. 

But  to  do  any  thing  effectively  in  this  way,  it  is 
necessary  to  take  decided  ground.  The  political  differ- 
ences on  this  subject  may  be  accommodated  by  mutual 
concession  and  compromise,  consistently  with  self-respect. 
But  it  is  not  so  with  the  moral  and  social  question. 
No  bridge  of  compromise  can  be  thrown  over  the  chasm 
that  separates  truth,  justice,  and  honor,  from  falsehood, 
injustice,  and  shame.  The  relation  of  master  and  slave, 
and  the  claim  of  property  involved  in  it,  are  either 
iust  and  honorable,  or  unjust  and  base;  and  hence  I 
see  no  other  way  to  adjust  the  differences  that  exist  in 
reference  to  this  phase  of  the  subject  than  to  induce 
men  to  examine  and  decide,  on  rational  grounds,  the 
right  or  wrong  of  the  question,  before  they  attempt 
to  heal  the  exacerbations  that  grow  out  of  it. 

The  decision  to  which  I  am  brought  on  this  point, 
by  an  investigation  as  careful  as  I  am  capable  of  mak- 
ing, is  adverse  to  the  general  sentiment  in  the  Northern 
States.  I  hope,  however,  this  will  be  no  bar  to  an  im- 
partial consideration  of  the  reasons  on  which  I  shall 
endeavor  to  sustain  it.  With  candid  and  ingenuous 
minds  I  am  sure  it  will  not  be. 

And  if  ever  candor  and  ingenuousness  were  needful  for 
any  persons  on  any  subject,  they  are  needful  for  us  at 


PREFACE. 


V 


the  North  on  this  subject  at  the  present  time.  Slavery 
at  the  South  is  an  immovable  fact,  accepted  at  first  from 
necessity,  and  cherished  now  (as  its  patrons  tell  us,  and 
I  readily  believe  them),  from  conviction.  With  the 
views  which  at  present  prevail  on  this  subject  at  the 
North,  it  is  neither  desirable  nor  possible  that  our  Union 
should  much  longer  continue ;  not  desirable,  for  antago- 
nistic opinions  on  a  subject  of  morality,  religion,  and 
daily  life,  must  breed  constant  and  rancorous  irritation  ; 
not  possible,  for  no  government,  however  well-inten- 
tioned or  however  strong,  can  give  permanent  effect  to 
laws  designed  for  the  protection  of  slavery,  among  a 
free  and  intelligent  people  who  believe  slavery  to  be 
morally  unjust  and  socially  degrading.  The  love  of 
country,  therefore,  the  love  of  peace,  the  love  of  liberty 
for  ourselves,  our  posterity,  and  for  all  nations,  no  less 
than  the  love  of  truth,  should  persuade  us  to  lay  aside 
the  bias  of  party,  our  prepossessions  in  favor  of  great 
names,  and  all  our  prejudices,  that  we  may  calmly  and 
candidly  review  a  subject,  which,  in  the  present  crisis 
of  affairs,  involves  more  momentous  interests  than  any 
other  of  a  worldly  nature  which  can  occupy  our  at- 
tention. 

It  has  been  the  singular  happiness  of  the  American 
people  to  have  the  greatest  facilities  and  the  best  op- 
portunities for  acquainting  themselves  with  the  grounds 
and  real  merits  of  every  great  national  question  which 
has  heretofore  been  submitted  to  their  judgment.  Men 
of  unrivaled  eloquence  and  of  consummate  ability  and 
learning  in  their  respective  departments,  have  thoroughly 
ventilated  each  subject  of  national  concern,  before  the 
people  have  been  called  upon  for  their  ultimate  de- 
cision. This  has  been  our  great  security  for  the  prin- 
ciple of  self-government,  and  the  chief  cause  of  its 
success  among  us.     But  in  the  opinions  which  they 


vi 


PREFACE. 


have  formed,  or  may  form,  on  the  point  now  presented 
to  them,  they  have  not  and  can  not  have  advantages 
of  the  same  kind.  Congress  may  discuss  slavery  in  its 
economical  and  political  bearings,  and  the  Supreme 
Court  may  determine  the  rights  of  property  involved 
in  it,  on  grounds  of  legal  justice ;  but  they  can  go  no 
further  without  transcending  their  proper  functions ;  and 
hence  the  moral  and  religious  question,  which  is  really 
in  issue  before  the  peoj)le,  is  one  which  the  people  are 
obliged  to  determine  without  the  facilities  which  they 
have  had  for  coming  to  a  light  judgment  on  other  sub- 
jects of  national  interest.  I  mention  this  as  a  reason 
why  we  at  the  North  should  be  more  ready  to  suspect 
the  soundness  of  our  past  opinions,  and  why  our  breth- 
ren at  the  South  should  have  patience,  and  not  mistake 
the  somewhat  demonstrative  opinions  at  the  North  for 
our  deliberate  and  immutable  judgment.  True,  the 
anti-slavery  storm  has  raged  for  thirty  years ;  but  what 
is  thirty  years  in  the  life  of  a  nation  ? 

With  this  brief  premonition  I  commend  the  follow- 
ing work  to  the  public,  for  whose  sake,  and  not  for 
any  private  ends,  it  has  been  written.  By  their  judg- 
ment I  shall  cheerfully  abide.  If  I  am  so  happy  as  to 
carry  conviction  to  my  reader's  mind,  I  shall  be  thank- 
ful. If  I  fail  in  this  end,  I  shall  stijl  have  the  satis- 
faction to  reflect,  not  only  that  I  have  been  actuated 
by  a  good  intention,  but  that  I  have  promulgated  no 
sentiments  which  can  array  brother  against  brother, 
and  make  a  mart's  foes  those  of  his  otmi  household  / 
nor  indeed  uttered  a  word  Avhich  can  give  just  occa- 
sion of  offense  either  to  piety  or  to  charity. 

S.  S. 

New  York,  Jan.,  1861. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

PAGE 

Introduction.— The  Constitution. — In  what  sense  it  forbids  the  Estab- 
lishment of  Religion.—  Itself  founded  on  the  Law  of  Nature. — The 
People  at  the  time  of  its  adoption  united  in  the  same  Eeligion. — New 
Developments.— Harmony  of  the  Constitution  with  Nature  and  Rev- 
elation 11 


CHAPTER  II. 

Definition  of  Law. — Divine  Laws  beneficent,  but  diversified  in  their 
operation. — Definition  of  Justice,  and  its  relation  to  Law. — Rights, 
their  Nature  and  Definition. — Various  sorts  of  Liberty. — Slavery. — 
Ambiguity  of  the  Word. — Definition  of  the  word  Slave,     .      .  .26 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  Law  of  Nature. — An  equivocal  Expression. — Explained  to  be  a 
Law  founded  in  Nature. — Acknowledged  by  all  Mankind. — Declared 
by  Revelation. — Rights  of  Nature  restrained  by  its  Law. — Extracts 
from  standard  authors,  46 


CHAPTER  IV. 

General  Divisions  of  Society.— Two  Main  Classes  Those  who  are  in 

ax  Immediate,  and  those  who  are  in  a  Mediate  Relation  to  the  State. 
— The  Relations  explained  and  illustrated. — Origin  of  Government. 
—Rights  of  Women  and  Children.— How  protected,      ....  66 


viii 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 

PAGE 

The  same  Subject  continued. — The  Authority  of  the  State. — How  Lim- 
ited.—Its  RELATION  TO  MINORS.— To  MARRIED  PERSONS.— ITS  POWER  OVER 

Slavery  76 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Servitude  originally  consistent  with  a  state  op  Innocence. — Its  sub- 
sequent Debasement. — Remarkable  Passage  of  St.  Augustine,  .  84 


CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Origin  of  Slavery.— At  first  in  the  Wants  of  Society.— Extended 
by  other  Causes. — How  affected  by  War. — Grotius's  distinction  of 
Servitude  into  Perfect  and  Imperfect. — Rights  of  Fathers,  under 
the  Levitical  and  other  laws,  to  dispose  of  themselves  and  their 
children,   93 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Antiquity  and  Extent  of  Slavery. — Opinions  of  the  Ancients. — The 
Duty  of  Masters  inculcated  by  Cicero. — Objections  to  the  Justice  of 
Slavery  derived  from  its  Definition  in  the  Justinian  Code. — The 
Definition  explained,  and  the  Objection  shown  to  rest  on  a  Verbal 
Ambiguity,  103 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Slavery  regarded  as  a  Providential  Institution. — Children  follow 
the  Condition  of  their  Parents. — Inequalities  of  Fortune. — Man's 
natural  Helplessness. — Remarkable  Passage  from  Pliny,         .      .  126 


CHAPTER  X. 

Slavery  as  a  Social  Institution. — Ground  of  it. — Quotations  from  Gro- 
tius  and  puffendorf. — slavery  at  first  introduced  by  violence. — 
Transition. — Objections  to  the  Theory  of  Contract. — A  Reminis- 
cence,  139 


CONTENTS. 


ix 


CHAPTER  XI. 

PAGE 

Anglican  Theory  of  Slavery. — Slavery  as  founded  on  Conquest,  and 
under  tiie  Law  of  Nations. — Quotations  from  Grotius,  Locke,  Hobbes. 
— Deductions  from  Hobbes. — Position  of  Mr.  Webster. — Local  Law. — 
Opinion  of  the  English  Clergy,  161 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Limitations  of  Authority. — The  Divine  Right  to  Dominion  founded,  not 
on  Creation,  but  on  the  Wisdom  and  Goodness  of  the  Creator. — All 
Human  Authority  limited  by  the  Law  of  Nature. — Authority  of  Hus- 
bands and  Fathers. — Errors  respecting  the  Love  of  our  Neighbor. — 
The  Duty  founded  in  Nature. — Consistent  with  Servitude. — Compar- 
ative influence  of  Municipal  Law  and  Public  Opinion  in  restrain- 
ing the  Abuses  of  Authority,   182 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Objections,  theoretical  and  practical.— Property  in  Man.— Of  Neces- 
sity limited  and  conditional. — The  Words  of  the  Constitution  — 
Quotation  from  Judge  O'Neall. — Breaking  up  of  Families. — Marriage. 
—In  what  sense  Forbidden  and  in  what  Permitted,       ....  197 


CHAPTER  XIY. 

The  Perpetuity  of  Slavery. — Not  peculiar  to  Southern  Slavery. — Nor 
chargeable  upon  Slavery  as  such. — Twofold  Slavery  among  the 
Hebrews. — Relations  of  the  Descendants  of  Africans  to  the  People 
of  the  United  States. — Chief  Justice  Taney's  Opinion. — The  North 
and  West  compared  with  the  South  in  their  Treatment  of  the 
African  Race. — Prophecy,  215 


CHAPTER  XY. 

The  Rendition  of  Fugitive  Slaves. — Provision  of  the  Constitution. — 
In  what  sense  the  United  States  are  responsible  for  the  Laws  of 
the  several  states. — distinction  between  universal  and  legal  jus- 
TICE.— The  local  Law  in  respect  to  Servitude  declarative  of  the 
Law  of  Nature. — Fugitive  Slave  Law. — Reclamation  of  Fugitives 
a8  a  general  rule  not  only  legally  but  morally  just. — exceptional 
Cases,  .   226 


X 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

PAGE 

African  Slave-Trade.—  Allegory  op  Icarus  and  its  Application. — Con- 
sistency of  Government  in  recognizing  Slavery  and  reprobating  the 
Slave-Trade. — Seizure  and  Enslavement  of  Africans. — Why  declared 
Piracy  by  Law. — The  Laws  defended  against  Objections  drawn  from 
the  Inferiority  of  the  African  Race. — From  aggravating  the  Hor- 
rors of  the  Slave-Trade. — And  from  its  alleged  Discrimination 
against  Slave  Labor. — The  Prohibition  of  the  Slave-Trade  essen- 
tial to  the  South,  256 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Argument  from  Scripture. — State  of  the  Question. — Indirect  Influence 
of  Christianity  on  Slavery. — Polygamy  and  War. — How  far  paral- 
lel to  Slavery. — Diffusion  of  Knowledge  in  what  sense  adverse  to 
it. — Causes  of  the  Decay  of  Slavery  in  the  Roman  Empire. — Case  of 
St.  Cyprian  and  the  Numidian  Bishops,  280 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Conclusion. — Present  State  of  the  Country. — Freedom  of  Opinion. — 
Effects  of  Anti-Slavery  Agitation. — Change  of  Opinion  in  the  South 
the  Result  of  a  Change  in  social  condition. — The  Example  of  our 
Fathers. — In  what  way  to  be  followed. — Provision  for  free  Colored 
People. — Modern  Civilization. — Its  Point  of  Antagonism  to  Chris- 
tianity.— Tendency  of  the  Yiews  advocated  in  the  present  Work,    .  304 


CHAPTER  I. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  first  article  of  the  amended  Constitution  of  the 
United  States  declares  that  "  Congress  shall  make  no 
law  respecting  the  establishment  of  religion  or  prohibit- 
ing the  exercise  thereof."  This  declaration  is  justly 
dear  to  the  hearts  of  the  American  people.  It  secures  to 
every  citizen  the  enjoyment  of  liberty  of  conscience,  or 
the  sacred  right  to  worship  God  according  to  the  dictates 
of  his  own  judgment,  "  with  none"  on  earth  "  to  make 
him  afraid."  It  puts  the  various  denominations  of  relig- 
ion on  an  equal  footing,  protecting  all  but  showing 
preference  to  none;  and  thus  saves  the  people  from  a 
prolific  source  of  jealousy  and  discord.  The  dictate  of 
practical  wisdom,  it  is  at  once  the  charter  of  religious  lib- 
erty and  a  preventive  of  religious  dissension. 

It  would  be  a  great  mistake,  however,  to  imagine  that 
this  wise  provision  of  the  Constitution  was  intended  to 
effect  an  absolute  severance  between  government  and  re- 
ligion. The  law  of  Nature,  or  the  law  founded  in  the 
relation  of  creatures  to  one  another  and  to  their  Maker, 
is  the  foundation  of  all  just  human  laws;  and  the  belief 


12 


INTRODUCTION. 


of  its  divine  authority  and  sanction  is  the  most  efficacious 
motive  to  the  observance  of  these  laws,  and  the  most 
enduring  bond  of  human  society.  This  divine  law.  the 
obligation  of  which  has  been  confessed  in  all  ages  and  all 
countries,  in  opposition  to  which  all  human  laws  are 
nugatory,  and  the  belief  of  which  underlies  every  variety 
of  religion,  is  undoubtedly  assumed  by  the  Constitution 
as  the  basis  of  the  government  which  it  creates,  and  the 
limit  of  its  powers.  To  this  extent  the  Constitution 
itself  is  in  alliance  with  religion,  establishing  its  most 
fundamental  principles,  and  depending  on  its  power  over 
the  minds  of  the  people  for  support.  Hence,  the  very 
clause  which  forbids  Congress  to  establish  religion,  re- 
strains it  also  from'  prohibiting  such  establishment. 
"  Congress  shall  make  no  law  respecting  the  establish- 
ment of  religion,"  either  for  or  against  it.  It  shall  not 
decree  its  establishment;  for  a  law  of  Congress  to  this 
effect,  would,  of  necessity,  involve  the  adoption  of  some 
religious  tenets  in  preference  to  others,  or  an  alliance 
with  some  denomination  to  the  exclusion  of  others. 
Neither  shall  it  forbid  its  establishment ;  for  this  would 
be  to  abjure  the  fundamental  principles  of  all  religion 
and  of  all  just  government,  and  consequently  to  destroy 
its  own  function  and  to  die  by  its  own  hand.  Congress 
shall  make  no  law  on  the  subject  one  way  or  the  other, 
but  shall  leave  the  government  to  that  natural  alliance 
with  religion  which  God  himself  has  made  necessary  to 
its  health  and  perpetuity. 


INTRODUCTION. 


13 


If  further  proof  be  needed  to  show  that  this  was  the 
design  of  the  framers  of  the  Federal  Constitution,  we 
may  appeal,  among  other  evidences  to  the  same  effect, 
to  the  Farewell  Address  of  Washington,  which,  from  the 
unanimous  approval  it  has  received,  is  entitled  to  be  re- 
garded as  an  authorized  exposition  of  their  sentiments. 
For  having  distinguished  a  unity  of  government  from  a 
mere  league  or  confederation  which  would  be  liable  at 
any  moment  to  be  dissolved  by  accident  or  passion  or 
other  inconsiderable  cause ;  and  having  insisted  on  a 
unity  of  government  as  necessary  to  the  welfare  and 
prosperity  of  the  States,  the  address  proceeds  to  impress 
on  the  people  the  belief  that  religion  and  morality  are 
the  main  pillars  of  government,  and  to  incite  them  to 
the  maintenance  of  a  common  government  from  the 
fact  of  their  agreement  in  a  common  religion.  "  It  is 
of  infinite  moment,"  are  the  words  of  the  Address, 
"  that  you  should  properly  estimate  the  immense  value 
of  your  National  Union  to  your  collective  and  indi- 
vidual happiness;7'  and  it  then  adds,  as  an  inducement 
to  the  preservation  of  the  Union,  Ci  With  slight  shades 
of  difference  you  have  the  same  religion,  manners, 
habits,  and  political  principles."  "  Religion  and  moral- 
ity," it  further  declares,  "are  indispensable  supports 
of  all  the  dispositions  and  habits  which  lead  to  political 
prosperity."  It  denies  the  tribute  of  patriotism  to  the 
man  who  labors  to  subvert  "these  great  pillars  of  hu- 
man happiness,  these  firmest  props  of  the  duties  of  men 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  citizens."  It  warns  the  people  against  the  popular 
fallacy  1  i  that  morality  can  be  maintained  without  re- 
ligion;" and  declares  "  that  reason  and  experience  both 
forbid  us  to  expect  that  national  morality  can  prevail,  to 
the  exclusion  of  religious  principle." 

Religion  and  morality  both  teach  us  to  abstain  from 
injury,  to  keep  our  engagements,  and  to  fulfill  the  rel- 
ative duties  of  life.  So  far  they  are  agreed  and  work 
together  in  harmony.  Considered  separately  and  apart, 
however,  they  are  essentially  different.  Mere  morality, 
or  morality  not  founded  on  religion,  permits  us  to  regard 
the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  virtue  and  vice, 
as  arbitrary  and  conventional ;  as  having  no  higher 
standard  than  human  prescription,  no  higher  aim  than 
the  temporal  welfare  and  convenience  of  society.  Re- 
ligion, on  the  other  hand,  teaches  that  the  distinction 
between  right  and  wrong,  virtue  and  vice  is  founded  in 
the  will  of  God  ;  that  the  obligation  of  men  to  do 
what  is  right  and  virtuous,  and  to  shun  what  is  wrong 
and  vicious,  exists  antecedently  to,  and  independently  of, 
all  human  pacts  and  covenants,  and  is  in  fact  necessary 
and  eternal.  Thus,  what  morality  recognizes  as  rules 
of  convenience,  religion*  enjoins  as  the  laws  of  God, 

*  "  Religion  and  morality  differ  not  only  in  the  extent  of  the  duty 
they  prescribe,  but  in  the  part  in  which  they  are  the  same  in  the  ex- 
ternal work.  They  differ  in  the  motive  •  they  are  just  as  far  asun- 
der as  heaven  is  from  the  earth.  Morality  finds  all  her  motives  here 
below ;  religion  fetches  all  her  motives  from  above.  The  highest 
principle  in  morals  is  a  just  regard  to  the  rights  of  each  other  in  civil 


INTRODUCTION. 


15 


fixed  and  immutable,  and  binds  on  the  consciences  of 
men  by  the  fear  of  God  and  of  judgment  to  come. 
Very  justly,  therefore,  are  we  cautioned  (in  the  Fare- 
well Address)  against  the  delusive  fancy  that  morality 
can  be  maintained  without  religion. 

I  make  no  doubt  that  God  has  bestowed  on  every 
creature  its  proper  nature,  and  placed  it  in  certain 
relations  from  which  a  rule  of  action  flows,  and  that 
this  rule  is  the  will  and  law  of  the  Creator.  But  the 
facts  of  history  do  not  suffer  me  to  believe  that  human 
reason  is  competent  to  declare  this  rule  with  that  clear- 
ness and  authority  which  are  necessary  to  command  the 
assent  and  to  bind  the  consciences  of  the  generality  of 
men.  This  blessing  we  owe  to  Divine  Revelation,  which 
has  not  left  us  to  discover  our  Maker's  will  either  by 
intuition  (which  is  the  proper  guide  of  angels  and  not 
of  men),  nor  by  the  slow  and  uncertain  deductions  of 
reason,  but  has  delivered  it  to  us  in  plain  and  author- 
itative precepts.  Hence  when  I  speak  of  religion,  I 
must  be  understood  to  mean  revealed  religion ;  and  I 
suppose  that  the  word  religion  is  used  in  the  same 
sense  in  the  Farewell  Address. 

In  this  sense  it  will  hardly  be  denied  that  religion 

society ;  the  first  principle  in  religion  is  the  love  of  God — or,  in  other 
words,  a  regard  to  the  relation  which  we  bear  to  Him,  as  it  is  made 
known  to  us  by  revelation ;  and  no  action  is  religious,  otherwise  than 
as  it  respects  God,  and  proceeds  from  a  sense  of  our  duty  to  Him, 
or  at  least  is  regulated  by  a  sense  of  that  duty." — Bishop  Horsley's 
Charge  to  his  Clergy,  1790. 


16 


INTRODUCTION. 


is  the  foundation  of  human  society ;  the  ground  on 
which  morality  rests  for  its  support  and  permanence, 
the  source  from  which  it  derives  its  purity  and  efficiency. 
As  readily  will  it  be  allowed  that  the  American  people, 
at  the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  Federal  Constitution, 
had  one  and  the  same  religion.  The  theory  wThich  re- 
solves virtue  and  vice  into  social  conventionalities,  a 
theory  essentially  atheistic  and  subversive  of  human 
integrity,  was  abhorrent  to  the  minds  of  the  people, 
and  has  left  no  trace  of  its  existence  in  the  Constitution 
and  fundamental  laws  of  the  Union.  The  law  of  Na- 
ture, which  is  only  another  name  for  the  religion  of 
Nature,  has  been  assumed  as  the  rule  of  conscience  and 
the  basis  of  legislation ;  not  the  law  of  Nature  as 
dimly  apprehended  by  Pagans  and  Mohammedans,  *  or 
as  perverted  by  wild  and  infidel  theorists,  but  the  law 
of  Nature  as  declared  by  Divine  Revelation  and  embod- 
ied in  the  institutions  of  the  Christian  religion.  Hence 
the  sanction  of  an  oath  in  order  to  the  discharge  of  all 
the  functions  of  government,  executive,  legislative,  and 
judicial ;  and  that  oath  administered  in  the  Name  of 
the  One  God  and  on  the  Holy  Evangelists.  Hence  the 
recognition  of  Christian  marriage  as  the  foundation  of 
the  family  relation,  and  consequently  of  the  Christian 

*  I  make  no  allusion  to  the  Jewish  religion,  because  I  regard  it  as 
essentially  the  same  as  the  Christian ;  Judaism  being  Christianity  in 
the  letter,  and  Christianity  being  mystical  Judaism ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  Jewish  religion  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 


INTRODUCTION. 


17 


family  as  an  integral  element  of  society.  Hence  also 
the  absence  of  all  constitutional  provisions  and  funda- 
mental laws  which,  in  the  remotest  degree,  contravene 
the  Christian  religion  *or  any  of  its  undoubted  require- 
ments.^ 

Few  things,  indeed,  are  more  remarkable  than  the 
unanimity  which  Christianity  has  produced,  wherever  it 
has  prevailed,  in  regard  to  the  fundamentals  of  religion. 
Differences  of  opinion,  it  is  true,  have  always  subsisted 
among  men,  and  probably  always  will  subsist.  They 
arise  in  part  from  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind, 
which  is  such  that  every  truth  that  is  lodged  in  it 
generates  new  inquiries,  and  leads  to  speculation  and 
conjecture  in  regard  to  regions  of  knowledge  yet  un- 
explored and  undiscovered.  Christians  differ  among 
themselves,  no  less  than  the  ancient  Heathen  differed. 
But  how  unlike,  the  subject-matter  of  their  differences  ! 
The  Pagan  philosophers  differed  from  one  another  as  to 
the  foundations  of  all  religion,  the  Being  of  God,  the 

*  The  State  of  Delaware  has  expressly  acknowledged  the  Holy 
Trinity  and  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  The  2 2d  Art. 
of  its  Constitution  required  every  person  who  shall  be  chosen  a  mem- 
ber of  either  house,  or  appointed  to  any  office  or  place  of  trust,  be- 
fore taking  his  seat,  or  entering  on  the  execution  of  his  office,  in  addi- 
tion to  the  usual  oath  of  office,  to  make  and  subscribe  the  following 
declaration,  to  wit : 

"  I,  A.  B.,  do  profess  faith  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  Jesus  Christ, 
his  only  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  one  God  blessed  for  evermore ; 
and  I  do  acknowledge  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Test- 
aments to  be  given  by  Divine  inspiration." 


18 


INTRODUCTION. 


origin  of  the  Universe,  the  government  of  the  world  by 
Divine  Providence,  and  the  reality  of  the  distinction 
between  good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice.  Opinions 
which  were  then  the  badges  of  conflicting  sects,  and 
divided  the  minds  of  the  people,  are  now  for  the  most 
part  broached  only  by  the  few  who  delight  in  paradoxes, 
or  who,  having  dug  up  some  old  error,  hope  to  gain  a 
name  by  proclaiming  it  to  the  world  as  a  new  truth.  In 
effect  Christianity  has  shifted  our  differences  from  the 
foundation  to  the  superstructure ;  or  to  speak  more 
accurately  it  has  brought  us  to  an  agreement  respecting 
the  system  of  Nature,  and  left  us  to  make  for  ourselves 
new  differences  in  regard  to  that  system  of  Redemption 
which  it  has  pleased  God  to  superinduce  upon  Nature. 
In  respect  to  this  latter  system  which  revealed  religion 
represents  as  moving  forward  to  its  consummation  con- 
currently with  the  system  of  Nature,  the  differences  of 
Christians  are  unhappily  great  and  irreconcilable;  but 
in  regard  to  natural  religion,  i.  e.,  in  regard  to  religion 
considered  as  abstracted  from  the  scheme  of  Redemption, 
and  as  limited  to  the  acts  and  agents  of  this  world, 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  I  suppose,  that  the  various  de- 
nominations of  Christians,  comprising  at  the  time  of  the 
adoption  of  our  Federal  Constitution  the  great  body  of 
the  American  people,  were  substantially  agreed.*'1" 

*  Bishop  Gibson,  in  his  second  Pastoral  Letter  to  the  Diocese  of 
London,  a.  d.  1*760,  satisfactorily  shows  that  the  people  of  Great 
Britain  at  that  time,  notwithstanding  their  multiplicity  of  sects,  were 


INTRODUCTION. 


19 


The  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the  adoption  of  the 
Federal  Constitution,  has  witnessed  some  extraordinary 
and  conflicting  developments  of  opinion.  The  mind  of 
the  Northern  and  Eastern  States — surpassed  by  that  of 
no  other  age  or  country  in  acuteness,  activity,  and 
depth,  excited  by  keener  stimulants  and  vaster  pros- 
pects, and  yet  thrown  upon  its  own  energies  writh  no 
hereditary  institutions  to  steady  it,  with  no  learned 
order  to  guide  it,  except  in  dependence  on  popular  sup- 
port (which  means  subserviency  in  the  end  to  the 
popular  will),  has  germinated,  as  it  were,  wTith  wTild 
luxuriance,  and  put  forth,  among  many  good  fruits,  not 

united  in  a  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  embracing  the  most  necessary 
points  of  religion.  The  same  statement  was  probably  applicable  to 
their  American  descendants  at  the  time  of  their  separation  from  the 
mother  country.  The  summary  is  :  "  That  the  world  and  all  things 
in  it  were  created  by  God,  and  are  under  the  direction  and  govern- 
ment of  His  all-powerful  hand  and  all-seeing  eye  ;  that  there  is  an  essen- 
tial difference  between  good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice  ;  that  there  will 
be  a  state  of  future  rewards  and  punishments,  according  to  our  be- 
havior in  this  life  ;  that  Christ  was  a  teacher  sent  from  God,  and 
that  His  apostles  were  divinely  inspired  ;  that  all  Christians  are  bound 
to  declare  and  profess  themselves  to  be  His  disciples  ;  that  not  only 
the  exercise  of  the  several  virtues,  but  also  a  belief  in  Christ  is 
necessary  in  order  to  their  obtaining  the  pardon  of  sin,  the  favor  of 
God,  and  eternal  life  ;  that  the  worship  of  God  is  to  be  performed 
chiefly  by  the  heart  in  prayers,  praises,  and  thanksgivings  ;  and  as  to 
all  other  points,  that  they  are  bound  to  live  by  the  rules  which 
Christ  and  His  apostles  have  left  them  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
Here  then,"  he  adds,  u  is  a  fixed  and  certain  rule  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice, concerning  all  the  most  necessary  points  of  religion,  established 
by  a  divine  sanction,  embraced  as  such  by  all  denominations  of  Chris- 
tians, and  in  itself  abundantly  sufficient  to  preserve  the  knowledge 
and  practice  of  religion  in  the  world." 


20 


INTRODUCTION. 


a  few  crude  theories  of  morals  and  religion.    In  tho 

prosecution  of  Moral  Reform,  Temperance,  Anti- Slavery, 
Woman's  Rights,  and  other  fancied  schemes  of  philan- 
thropy, it  has  contrived  to  divest  some  gross  sins  of 
their  deformity,  and  to  convert,  by  means  of  penal  enact- 
ments, some  innocent  actions  into  crimes.  In  a  word, 
it  has  proposed  for  our  consideration,  and  made  some 
progress  in  forcing  on  our  acceptance,  a  new  church,  a 
new  creed,  and  a  new  decalogue.  In  the  Southern 
States,  where  the  distinctions  of  society  are  permanent 
and  sharply  defined,  where  the  fountains  of  learning  and 
science  are  open  to  the  few,  and  the  many  are  confined 
to  bodily  toil  and  labor,  the  tone  of  thought  has  been 
naturally  more  conservative.  Slavery,  whatever  be  its 
real  or  imaginary  evils,  like  all  fixed  institutions,  un- 
changed in  the  midst  of  changes,  has  given  stability  to 
society ;  it  has  been,  and  still  is  a  standing  protest 
against  the  mental  extravagancies  of  the  New  England 
States ;  and  it  will  probably  continue  to  beat  back  the 
waves  of  Northern  fanaticism,  unless  the  deeper  and 
hoarser  torrent  of  Northern  cupidity,  following  the  pre- 
cedents of  history,  roll  down  on  the  South  to  complete 
the  devastation  which  Northern  fanaticism  has  begun. 

Slavery  is  at  present  the  great  point  of  antagonism, 
not  so  much,  I  think,  between  the  North  and  the  South, 
as  between  order,  conservatism,  and  Christianity  on  the 
one  hand,  and  misrule,*  anarchy,  and  infidelity  on  the 
other.    Had  the  institution  been  assailed  merely  on 


INTRODUCTION. 


21 


economical  and  political  grounds,  there  would  be  nothing 
to  justify  this  remark.  Men  may  discuss  the  compara- 
tive advantages  of  free  and  servile  labor,  and  their 
respective  influences  on  morals  and  public  virtue,  just 
as  they  discuss  questions  of  tariff  and  revenue,  and  push 
their  discussions,  as  men  are  wont,  with  heat  and  pas- 
sion, without  endangering  the  structure  of  society,  or 
the  stability  of  government.  If  the  opposition  to  slavery 
had  been  rested'  on  these  grounds  only,  it  could  have 
done  no  harm,  and  might  have  been  productive  of  good. 
Had  nothing  more  been  done  than  to  stigmatize  slavery 
as  "a  relic  of  barbarism,"  there  had  been  no  cause  of 
alarm;  for  as  nations,  like  men,  sometimes  die  of.  reple- 
tion, and  an  excess  of  liberty  betokens  decay,  so  time 
alone  can  determine  whether  the  South  be  really  retro- 
grading in  civilization,  or  whether  its  Northern  oppo- 
nents, in  vaunting  their  superiority,  be  not  rather  en- 
acting the  vanity  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  or  the  impu- 
dence of  the  modern  celestials.  But  slavery  is  not 
assailed  merely  on  these  grounds.  It  is  assailed  also 
on  grounds  of  morality  and  religion.  It  is  held  up,  for 
the  first  time  in  the  world's  history,  to  the  scorn  and 
execration  of  mankind :  not  merely  for  its  abuses,  but  as 
being  in  itself  a  violation  of  the  law  of  Nature ;  the  law 
which  is  the  fountain  of  justice,  and  in  opposition  to 
which  no  government  ought  to  subsist.  It  is  true,  that 
this  opinion  is  held  with  various  degrees  of  consistency, 
and  with  cunning  adaptations  to  the  demands  of  public 


22 


INTRODUCTION. 


expediency,  and  the  whispers  of  private  interest.  Some 
would  have  the  "higher  law"  (as  it  is  called),  or  what 
they  fancy  to  be  its  dictate?,  carried  out  at  all  hazards, 
to  the  extent  even  of  insurrection  and  treason.  Others 
aim  to  conform  to  it  by  some  scheme  of  gradual  emanci- 
pation, and  by  certain  yet  undefined  changes  of  govern- 
ment. Others,  again,  distinguish  between  slaveholding 
simply  considered,  and  holding  slaves  with  the  purpose 
of  emancipating  them  when  Providence  shall  have  opened 
the  way;  denouncing  the  former  practice  as  a  sin,  and 
regarding  the  latter,  if  I  understand  them  right,  as  a  sin 
divested  of  its  guilt  by  the  good  intention  of  the  sinner. 
Some  are  violent,  others  crafty,  and  others  both  violent 
and  crafty ;  but  they  are  all  united  in  a  detestation  of 
slavery  as  oppressive,  unjust,  and  altogether  repugnant 
to  the  law  of  Nature ;  and,  consequently,  in  either  con- 
demning, or  justifying  only  on  the  ground  of  a  strin- 
gent necessity  or  temporary  expediency,  all  human  com- 
pacts and  enactments  which  are  designed  to  uphold  it. 

And  it  is  very  observable  that  while  the  opponents  of 
slavery  assail  it  as  a  violation  of  natural  right,  they  are 
not  met  by  their  antagonists  on  their  own  ground.  The 
defenders  of  slavery  entrench  themselves  behind  the  law 
of  the  land  and  the  Scriptures ;  but  they  do  not,  so  far 
as  their  arguments  have  fallen  under  my  notice,  defend 
slavery  on  the  ground  of  natural  right.  For  the  argu- 
ment founded  on  the  inferiority  of  the  African  race  does 
not  come  up  to  the  point.    It  rests  the  relation  now  sub- 


INTRODUCTION. 


23 


sisting  between  the  races  at  the  South  on  the  ground  of 
an  assumed  expediency,  without  affirming  its  immutable 
justice ;  and  dominion  founded  on  expediency  without,  or 
against  justice,  is  no  better  than  oppression  and  tyranny. 
If  the  existing  relation  is  first  proved  and  confessed  to 
be  just  and  right,  then  indeed  the  fitness  of  the  white 
race  for  dominion,  and  of  the  black  for  servitude,  is  a 
sound  argument  for  continuing  the  relation,  or  for  not 
interfering  with  it  where  it  exists.  But  the  mere  fitness 
can  not  create  the  relation ;  can  not  give  the  white  a  just 
title  to  dominion,  nor  make  servitude  the  duty  of  the 
black.  For  the  doctrine  attributed  to  the  Stagyrite  that 
the  Athenians  might  lawfully  invade  and  enslave  any 
people  who,  in  their  opinion,  were  fit  to  be  made  slaves, 
is,  and  I  hope  always  will  be,  abhorrent  to  the  religion 
of  the  American  people;  and  if  slavery  has  no  better 
foundation  than  this  to  rest  on,  it  deserves  to  fall ;  and 
it  is  but  natural  that  the  energies  of  a  Christian  people 
should  be  directed,  if  the  way  is  open,  to  effect  its  extir- 
pation. 

Moreover,  to  rest  the  defense  of  slavery  exclusively  on 
the  law  of  the  land  and  on  Scripture,  begets  the  impres- 
sion that  they  are  not  on  this  subject  in  harmony  with 
the  law  of  Nature ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  the  peo- 
ple are  led,  not  only  to  speak  contemptuously  of  the 
Constitution  for  the  protection  which  if  extends  to 
slavery,  but  to  disparage  the  Holy  Scriptures  also,  and 
to  resort  to  forced  interpretations  to  get  rid  of  their  tes- 


24 


INTRODUCTION. 


timony  in  its  favor.  The  people,  indeed,  on  the  whole, 
are  as  yet  loyal  to  the  Union,  and  attached  to  the 
Christian  religion :  but  they  believe,  for  the  most  part, 
that  slavery  is  contrary  to  natural  right  (that  is,  that  it 
is  a  moral  wrong  or  sin,  though  they  may  disclaim  the 
word) ;  and  starting  with  this  premise,  one  of  two  things 
will  probably  follow ;  either  they  will  pursue  success- 
fully one  scheme  after  another,  looking  to  ultimate 
abolition ;  or,  failing  of  success,  they  will  become  more 
and  more  disaffected  and  averse  to  all  union,  political 
and  religious,  of  which  slavery  is  an  element.  For  the 
public,  in  the  long  run,  is  a  severe  logician;  and  will 
either  abandon  its  premises,  or  carry  them  out  to  a  rigid 
conclusion. 

It  seems,  therefore,  in  a  manner  necessary  to  bring 
the  question  of  slavery  to  the  test  of  the  law  of  Nature ; 
if  for  no  other  purpose,  at  least  to  remove,  if  possible, 
even  the  semblance  of  disagreement  or  collision  among 
laws  that  are  meant  to  conspire,  with  a  divine  harmony, 
for  the  good  of  human  society.  For  no  greater  calamity 
can  befall  a  patriotic  and  Christian  people,  than  a  persua- 
sion, even  though  it  be  a  mistaken  persuasion,  that  either 
the  law  of  their  country  or  the  revealed  law  contradicts, 
in  any  point,  the  law  of  Nature,  the  eternal  and  im- 
mutable rule  of  the  human  conscience,  which  no  man  can 
be  expected  to  relinquish,  and  which  the  ministries  of 
God  in  church  and  state  are  really  designed  to  develop 
and  confirm.    For  the  law  of  the  land  in  its  legitimate 


INTRODUCTION. 


25 


design,  and  the  law  of  Christianity  from  an  intrinsic 
necessity,  pre-suppose  the  law  of  Nature,  are  declarative 
of  it,  and  reenforce  it  with  new  motives  to  obedience. 
They  form  together,  in  a  normal  state  of  Christian 
society,  a  triple  cord,  binding  us  together  as  men,  as 
citizens,  and  as  Christians  in  the  united  discharge  of  all 
relative  duties.  To  untwist  this  cord,  and  to  remove 
one  of  its  strands,  is  to  lay  a  tension  on  the  others  which 
they  were  not  intended  to  bear.  Is  it  necessary  to  do 
this  in  reference  to  slavery?  Is  not  the  institution 
agreeable  to  the  law  of  Nature,  as  well  as  to  the  law  of 
the  land  and  to  the  Scriptures  ?  This  is  the  'question 
which  I  propose  to  examine. 

-2 


CHAPTER  II. 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  RIGHTS,  LIBERTY,  SLAVERY  :  MEANING 
OF  THE  WORDS. 

As  words  are  the  medium  of  human  thought,  so  it  is 
impossible  for  men  to  think  clearly  on  any  subject  with- 
out first  distinguishing  their  meaning,  and  using  them 
as  far  as  possible  in  a  uniform  sense.  Great  confusion 
has  been  caused  in  the  minds  of  many,  on  the  subject 
we  are  about  to  consider,  by  a  neglect  of  this  precau- 
tion ;  and  I  shall,  therefore,  hope  for  the  reader's  atten- 
tion while  I  endeavor  to  remove  this  obstacle  by  a 
definition  of  some  of  the  chief  words  involved  in  the 
discussion.    And  first  for  the  word  law. 

By  law  (from  the  Saxon  Regan,  to  lie  down,  or  more 
directly  from  its  passive  participle  lagu*  what  is  laid 

*  Pronounced  lauyu.  Not  only  in  the  Saxon,  but  in  the  old  Eng- 
lish, the  g  had  a  liquid  sound  like  our  y  or  w.  In  an  old  copy  which 
I  have  of  Erasmus  on  the  Creed,  a.  d.  1533,  given  is  spelled  yeven, 
and  equal,  egal ;  and  the  same  power  of  the  letter  is  still  seen  in  the 
words,  anywise,  otherwise,  etc.,  which  were  written  even  so  lately  as 
the  last  century,  any  guise,  other  guise  :  the  wise  in  these  compounds, 
not  being,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  a  corrupt  form  of  ways,  but  the 
same  as  guise  (which  means  mode  or  method),  and  preservative  of  the 
original  pronunciation. 


LAW,  JUSTICE.  ETC. 


27 


or  fixed)  we  understand  a  fixed  rule  directive  and 
operative  of  good.  In  its  highest  form  it  is  a  rule 
which  the  Divine  wisdom  lays  on  itself  for  its  outward 
manifestation ;  and  in  this  sense  the  laws  of  God  are 
those  rules  which  God  has  fixed  in  His  own  mind  for 
the  government  of  His  creatures.  In  a  somewhat  lower 
sense,  it  is  a  rule  which  God  has  laid  on  His  creatures, 
directive  and  operative  of  the  end  for  which  they  were 
created.  The  end  for  which  all  things  are  created  is 
good ;  He  who  created  all  things  infallibly  knows  the 
end  and  the  best  means  of  obtaining  it ;  and  therefore 
His  laws  are  necessarily  directive  and  operative  of  good. 
Human  laws,  indeed,  so  far  as  they  are  merely  human, 
and  not  a  transcript  of  the  divine,  have  necessarily  the 
alloy  of  human  imperfection ;  yet  still  they  aim  at  a 
good  end,  and  what  we  mean  by  a  bad  law  is  one  that 
fails  to  accomplish  the  good  for  which  it  was  intended. 
So  that  divine  laws  absolutely  and  in  fact,  and  human 
laws,  in  their  design  and  in  a  certain  approximate  sense, 
are  not  merely  rules  of  action,  but  rules  of  action  direc- 
tive and  operative  of  good. 

It  is  well,  however,  to  observe  that  the  laws  of  God 
operate  in  different  ways  according  to  the  different  na- 
tures of  those  creatures  on  which  they  are  laid.  The 
laws  of  matter  operate  on  matter  according  to  the  nature 
of  matter  which  has  neither  sense  nor  power  of  self- 
motion.  The  laws  of  the  brute  creation  operate  on 
brutes  according  to  the  nature  of  brutes,  which  have 


28 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


sense  and  the  power  of  self-motion,  but  have  neither 
will  nor  reason.  The  laws  of  human  nature  operate  on 
man  according  to  his  reasonable  nature,  and  in  a  man- 
ner suited  to  that  will  which  is  a  part  of  his  reasonable 
nature  :  they  oblige,  but  they  do  not  compel ;  and  hence 
it  happens  that,  while  the  laws  of  God  effect  necessarily 
the  ends  for  which  they  are  intended  on  other  creatures, 
and  on  man  also,  as  respects  his  bodily  and  sensitive 
nature,  they  do  not  work  these  ends  on  our  reasonable 
nature  without  our  own  concurrence.  God  himself  can 
not  compel  an  unwilling  mind  to  goodness. 

To  avoid  confusion,  it  is  necessary  also  to  distinguish 
between  Laic  and  Justice,  and  to  define  their  relations. 
The  word  justice  is  sometimes  used  to  denote  an  at- 
tribute of  the  Deity ;  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  it  is 
used  to  denote  that  absolute  and  inconceivable  perfection 
in  the  Divine  mind  to  which  the  virtue  of  human  jus- 
tice bears  a  certain  analogy  or  proportion.  In  this 
sense  of  the  word  justice,  the  law  of  Nature  is  an  effect 
of  justice,  and  is  established  by  justice  :  because  it  is  an 
effect  of  God,  and  is  established  by  God,  whose  justice 
is  infinite.  In  no  other  way,  then,  can  we  determine 
whether  a  thing  is  agreeable  or  repugnant  to  the  justice 
of  God,  than  by  comparing  it  with  the  law  of  God. 
This  consideration,  if  attended  to,  would  cut  off  much 
i<lle  declamation ;  for  men  are  apt  to  conceive  of  the 
justice  and  holiness  of  God  after  a  picture  of  their  own 
imagining,  and  then  to  denounce  things  as  contrary  to 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


29 


those  Divine  attributes,  when  in  truth  they  are  only 
contrary  to  the  standard  which  they  have  set  up  in  their 
own  minds. 

But  this  Divine  law  which  is  the  effect  of  Divine  jus- 
tice is  itself  directive  and  operative  of  justice  in  the 
minds  of  men.  For  justice  considered  as  a  human 
virtue  is  the  constant  and  perpetual  desire  of  giving  to 
every  man  his  due  ;  a  certain  habitual  rectitude  of  will, 
which  disposes  us  to  render  to  others  whatsoever  we  owe 
them.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the  word  is  used  by  a  me- 
tonymy of  the  effect  for  the  cause,  to  denote  the  duty 
done,  as  well  as  the  temper  which  moves  us  to  do  it. 
Thus  we  say  that  the  justice  of  the  magistrate  leads 
him  to  hear  both  sides,  and  that  the  justice  of  men  leads 
them  to  pay  their  debts ;  and  we  say  also  that  the 
magistrates  dispense  justice,  and  that  men  in  their  deal- 
ings render  justice  to  one  another.  In  both  senses, 
however,  justice  is  primarily  the  effect  of  law :  for  in 
the  forjaer  senses  it  presupposes  law  as  its  rule  and 
guide,  and  in  the  latter  sense  it  is  that  which  the  law 
enjoins  :  Jus  est  quod  lex  prmcipit.  For  although  we 
may  conceive  of  human  justice  as  existing  independently 
of,  and  anterior  to,  human  prescriptions  and  enactments, 
and  as  even  imitating  the  Divine  justice  by  framing 
subordinate  rules  for  its  manifestation,  yet  we  can  not 
conceive  of  it  otherwise  than  as  dependent  on  some  law 
superior  to  itself:  for  if  we  consider  it  as  a  temper  or 
habit  of  mind,  we  find  that  it  presupposes  law,  and  is 


30 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


guided  by  it  to  be  what  it  is  ;  or  if  we  consider  it  as  an 
act  we  see  that  it  is  that  which  some  law,  previously  ex- 
isting, directs  to  be  done.  And  therefore  we  say  that 
justice,  considered  as  a  human  virtue,  is  primarily  and 
essentially  the  product  of  a  law  superior  to  itself ;  of 
that  law  which  God  has  laid  on  all  mankind ;  and 
which,  because  it  is  laid  on  the  human  nature,  is  called 
the  law  of  Nature.  If  we  speak,  then,  with  reference 
to  the  first  principles  of  human  action,  we  are  bound  to 
acknowledge  that  law  takes  the  precedence  of  justice, 
and  to  test  our  notions  of  justice  by  comparing  them 
with  that  which  is  the  standard  of  justice,  law. 

We  may  consider  further  that  justice  is  a  relative 
virtue :  it  has  respect  not  to  one's  own  self  and  posses- 
sions, but  to  the  persons  and  goods  of  others.  Who, 
then,  can  conceive  of  justice,  either  as  a  habit  or  an  act, 
without  previous  definition  of  law  ?  As  long  as  men  are 
fallible  and  liable  to  have  their  judgment  warped  by 
interest,  prejudice,  or  passion,  so  long  will  tljey  have 
differences  and  disputes.  And  when  arguments  have 
failed,  and  friendly  arbitrations  can  not  be  had,  how  are 
their  differences  to  be  adjusted  and  their  disputes  termi- 
nated ?  In  no  other  way,  peaceably,  than  by  an  appeal 
to  law ;  to  the  law  of  the  State  on  questions  of  munici- 
pal justice  :  to  the  law  of  Nature  on  questions  of  uni- 
versal justice.  If  they  refuse  to  abide  by  the  law,  or 
can  not  obtain  its  decisions,  they  commonly  either  accom- 
modate their  differences  by  mutual  concession,  or  appeal 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


31 


to  the  sword  as  their  final  arbiter.  Inter  arma  silent 
leges ;  in  war  it  is  not  always  justice,  but  often  fortune, 
or  rather  Providence,  which  has  further  and  greater  ends 
to  answer  than  those  that  respect  the  merits  of  the  con- 
test, that  determines  the  issue  :  but  while  the  laws  are 
operative,  they  arc  the  wells  and  fountains  to  which  men 
resort  for  the  distribution  of  justice. 

I  do  not  mean  to  affirm  that  this  relation  is  never  re- 
versed. Human  justice,  as  already  intimated,  after  the 
example  of  its  divine  prototype,  may  enact  laws ;  and 
these  laws  are  of  course  the  effect  of  justice,  and  not  its 
cause.  In  fact  most  of  the  laws  under  which  we  live 
are  of  this  nature  :  hence  many  persons,  drawing,  as 
men  ore  wont,  a  universal  conclusion  from  a  partial 
truth,  are  led  to  suppose  that  law,  simply  considered,  is 
subordinate  to  justice,  and  has  no  force  against  justice  ; 
and  then  having  raised  justice  aboVe  law  they  are 
naturally  and  necessarily  led  to  resolve  justice  into  an 
instinct  or  feeling,  or  to  make  it  the  product  of  their 
own  crude  notions  and  fancies :  tempted  thereto,  perhaps, 
by  the  old  and  secret  prompting,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods 
Whereas,  in  truth,  and  this  is  what  I  affirm,  human  jus- 
tice could  not  originate  laws,  could  not  have  an  actual 
or  even  a  conceptional  existence,  unless  it  were  itself  at 
first  originated  and  guided  by  laws  superior  to  any  and 
every  manifestation  of  its  own.  So  that,  if  we  trace 
matters  to  their  source,  we  find  that  justice  is  the  off- 
spring of  law.  as  is  law  the  offspring  of  God. 


32 


LAW.  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


Hence  the  founders  of  States  have  sought  to  fortify 
their  constitutions  by  the  sanction  of  divinity ;  and  in- 
deed (Qeov  vofwi)  that. fundamental  laws  are  of  God  has 
been  the  common  sentiment  of  mankind. 

Another  notion  which  it  may  be  well  to  consider  is 
that  of  Rights — their  origin  and  nature. 

The  functions  of  law  are  to  command  and  to  forbid,  to 
permit  and  to  punish.  These  are  the  functions  of  the 
law  of  Nature  as  well  as  of  other  laws.  Some  things 
it  commands :  as.  to  live  honestly,  and  to  give  to  every 
one  his  due.  Other  things  it  forbids  :  as.  to  do  injury  to 
any  creature.  Now,  when  the  law  commands  one  person 
to  render  a  duty  to  another,  it  entitles  the  latter  to  de- 
mand that  duty  of  the  former ;  that  is,  it  gives  him  a 
right  to  exact  its  performance  :  for  example,  the  law 
that  commands  children  to  honor  their  parents,  gives 
parents  the  right  to  exact  honor  from  their  children. 
Again,  when  the  law  forbids  us  to  do  some  things,  it  per- 
mits us  to  do  other  things  which  are  not  forbidden ;  that 
is,  it  gives  us  the  right  to  do  them.  For  example,  the  law 
which  forbids  me  to  walk  beyond  certain  limits,  permits 
me  to  walk  within  those  limits  ;  in  other  words,  it  gives 
me  the  right  to  do  so.  Hence  we  see  the  origin  and 
nature  of  rights ;  which  are  no  more  than  a  power, 
faculty,  or  liberty  to  have  or  to  do.  A  natural  right  is 
simply  a  liberty  that  a  man  has  to  exact  something  of 
another  which  the  law  of  Nature  enjoins  that  other  to 
render  to  him  ;  or  it  is  a  liberty  which  a  man  has  to  do 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


33 


something  which  the  law  of  Nature  does  not  forbid  him 
to  do.  In  like  manner  a  civil  right  is  a  liberty  to  exact 
of  others  what  the  civil  law  requires  them  to  render  to 
us  ;  or  it  is  a  liberty  to  do  that  which  the  civil  law  does 
not  forbid  us  to  do.  Rights,  therefore,  do  not  oblige. 
The  law  may  forbid  or  not  permit  me  in  certain  cases 
to  waive  my  rights,  and  it  may  oblige  and  compel  me  in 
other  cases  to  assert  them.  But  rights  themselves  are 
not  laws  and  have  not  the  force  of  laws ;  they  neither 
oblige  nor  compel  us  to  any  course  of  action,  but  leave 
us  at  liberty  ;  and  if  it  be  sometimes  a  duty  and  a  mark 
of  spirit  to  assert  and  defend  them,  it  is  often,  also  (I 
might  say  much  oftener),  a  virtue  and  an  evidence  of 
magnanimity  to  waive  them,  and  to  forbear  to  insist  on 
them. 

That  "  all  men  are  created  equal "  is,  as  our  Declar- 
ation of  Independence  affirms,  a  self-evident  truth; 
and  therefore  not  to  be  understood  in  any  other  than  a 
self-evident  sense.  All  men  have  reasonable  souls, 
capable  of  willing  and  thinking  and  of  moral  accounta- 
bility ;  and  their  bodies  are  made  out  of  the  same  dust, 
and  are  cast  in  the  same  mold.  Compared  with  crea- 
tures below  them,  they  have  the  same  natural  advantages; 
and  compared  wTith  creatures  above  them  in  the  scale  of 
being,  they  have  the  same  natural  imperfections.  Their 
natural  wants  and  desires  are  the  same ;  affecting  present 
good  not  (like  the  brutes)  for  its  own  sake,  but  as  an 
instrument  to  some  other  good  beside  and  beyond  it,  and 

2* 


84 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


thus  indicating  a  capacity  for  greater  happiness  than 
this  world  can  furnish.  All.  too,  stand  in  a  common 
relation  to  God  as  their  Maker,  and  the  Giver  and  Pre- 
server of  their  lile ;  all  are  created  in  His  image ;  all  have 
the  marvelous  faculty  of  articulate  speech ;  and  all 
have  one  and  the  same  law  for  their  rule  of  action  ;  the 
law,  namely,  of  that  reasonable  nature  which  God  has 
given  them.  Like  the  variegated  grass,  no  two  blades  of 
which  are  exactly  alike,  while  all  have  a  general  resem- 
blance, so  men,  while  distinguished  from  one  another 
by  infinite  varieties  of  body  and  mind,  are  yet  all  of  one 
and  the  same  kind,  and  consequently  equal  in  all  the 
essential  properties  of  their  kind.  The  differences  that 
exist  among  them  are  the  results  of  accident  or  fortune, 
of  their  own  acts  or  of  the  government  of  Divine  Prov- 
idence ;  but  not  of  their  creation.  They  are  created 
equal,  and  in  all  the  essentials  of  their  nature  they  must 
forever  remain  equal. 

In  a  word,  men  compared  with  creatures  of  other 
kinds  are  equal  in  the  essential  properties  of  their  kind ; 
but  when  compared  with  one  another,  and  considered  as 
male  and  female,  adults  and  children,  rich  and  poor, 
sound  and  maimed,  ruler  and  subject,  master  and  ser- 
vant, etc.,  etc.,  they  are  infinitely  unequal:  every  man 
being  distinguished  from  every  other  by  some  personal 
characteristic  of  his  own.  Both  truths  are  patent,  both 
instructive.  Our  equality  results  from  the  constitution 
of  our  nature;  our  differences  result  from  accident  or 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


35 


fortune,  from  our  own  virtues  or  vices,  or  from  th*3 
allotments  of  Providence :  the  one  suggests  mutual  be- 
nevolence and  respect,  and,  inspiring  a  fixed  sense  of 
human  dignity,  serves  to  allay  the  discontents  and 
envies,  and  to  guard  against  the  undue  elations  and 
depressions  of  mind  that  are  apt  to  be  generated  by  the 
other. 

From  this  equality  of  nature  results  an  equality  of 
rights.  The  Maker  of  mankind  has  given  life  to  them 
all ;  He  has  granted  the  earth  to  all  of  them  in  common, 
and  to  each  one  of  them  in  particular  a  property  in  his 
own  person  and  labor ;  and  He  wills  the  happiness  of 
them  all.  Hence  all  men  have  by  nature  an  equal  right 
to  life,  liberty,  property,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness, 
subject  only  to  the  limitations  of  the  law  of  Nature. 
The  natural  rights  of  man,  therefore — those  that  arise 
from  the  law  of  Nature  before  the  superinduction  of  any 
other  law — are  equal.  For  the  very  reason,  however, 
that  men  are  equal  by  nature,  have  the  same  wants  and 
desires,  affect  the  same  things,  and  have  equal  natural 
rights,  they  are  liable  to  jostle  and  interfere  with  one 
another,  and  to  come  into  perpetual  collisions,  rendering 
their  natural  rights  useless  to  many,  and  infinitely  pre- 
carious to  all.  In  order,  therefore,  to  prevent  feuds  and 
dissensions,  to  provide  for  their  mutual  interests,  and  to 
enable  them  to  exercise  their  rights  in  harmony,  they 
define  their  relations,  and  their  respective  spheres  of 
possession  and  action ;  and,  to  give  permanence  to  these 


36 


LAW j  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


friendly  and  peaceable  arrangements,  they  form  com- 
pacts and  institute  governments.  These  compacts  and 
governments,  not  contradicting  the  law  of  Nature  (for 
in  this  case  they  are  null  and  void),  but  being  agreeable 
to  it,  are,  when  formed,  bound  upon  the  parties  who 
form  them  by  the  law  of  Nature,  which  requires  men  to 
be  faithful  to  their  engagements :  and  bound  also  not 
only  on  the  contracting  parties,  but,  in  many  cases,  on 
their  families  also,  and  their  children  that  come  after 
them.  Now  it  is  evident  that  these  new  laws  and  com- 
pacts restrain  the  former  rights  of  men,  and  create  new 
ones.  Men  surrender  some  of  their  rights  for  the  sake 
of  obtaining  others,  or  they  transfer  their  private  rights 
to  a  public  person,  for  the  sake  of  promoting  their 
mutual  security  and  welfare.  These  concessions  and 
transfers  the  law  of  Nature  '(while  they  conform  to  it) 
does  not  permit  men  to  revoke,  and  hence  Nature  and 
Revelation  require  submission  to  the  magistrate,  while 
the  magistrate  enforces  the  observance  of  these  laws  and 
contracts.  Natural  right,  therefore,  is  of  no  avail  to 
justify  the  infraction  of  laws  and  contracts  to  which  we 
have  once  consented.  A  man's  natural  right  to  dispose 
of  his  own  person  in  marriage  is  no  justification  of 
bigamy  after  the  law  has  tied  him  to  one  woman ;  nor 
will  his  natural  right  to  come  and  go  whithersoever  he 
pleases  and  help  himself  to  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  clear 
him  from  the  guilt  or  penalty  of  trespass  if  he  enters  his 
neighbor's  field  and  reaps  his  corn  against  his  will,  and 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


37 


in  violation  of  the  law  which  protects  him  in  his  prop- 
erty. That  cruelty  and  oppression  may  justify  men,  in 
extreme  cases,  in  falling  back  on  their  natural  rights, 
few  will  deny :  but  for  fancied  grievances  and  imaginary 
wrongs  to  disturb  the  just  and  peaceful  relations  and 
settled  institutions  of  society  is,  by  the  consent  of  all,  a 
crime  that  deserves  the  severest  reprobation. 

What  has  been  said  opens  the  way  for  a  just  appre-. 
hension  of  liberty,  which  I  take  to  be  a  right  to  free- 
dom as  restrained  and  regulated  by  law.  The  natural 
liberty  of  mankind  is  a  freedom  limited  only  by  the  law 
of  Nature ;  the  civil  or  political  liberty  of  a  people  is  a 
freedom  which  is  further  limited  by  those  human  laws 
and  forms  of  government  to  which  they  are  rightfully 
and  actually  subject.  Natural  liberty  is  an  immediate 
gift  of  God  to  men,  being  bestowed  on  them  in  virtue 
of  that  human  nature  in  which  they  are  created.  Civil 
or  political  liberty  is, a  mediate  gift  of  God  to  men, 
being  bestowed  on  them  through  the  medium  or  inter- 
vention of  those  political  institutions  which  He  enables 
them  to  form  by  His  wisdom,  and  to  preserve  by  His 
providence. 

There  are  other  senses  of  the  word  liberty,  to  which  I 
shall  presently  advert,  but  on  which  I  forbear  to  dwell, 
because  I  consider  them  irrelevant  to  the  matter  in  hand. 
But  there  is  an  abuse  of  the  word  which  deserves  to  be 
noted  and  exposed.  For  by  liberty  men  often  mean  a 
freedom  to  do  as  they  list,  without  regard  to  what  is  good 


38 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


and  just ;  to  consult  their  own  present  pleasure,  with- 
out regard  to  justice,  the  good  of  mankind,  and  their 
real  and  eternal  good.  If  I  should  say  that  there 
was  no  such  liberty,  and  that  they  who  fancied  they  had 
it,  were  really  slaves  to  their  lusts  and  passions,  and  to 
the  author  and  instigator  of  evil,  I  should  affirm,  indeed, 
that  which  is  true,  but  which  might  not  carry  conviction 
to  all.  Suffice  it,  therefore,  to  say,  what  none,  I  hope, 
will  deny,  that  there  is  no  such  liberty  given  by  Glod  to 
any  man,  in  any  conceivable  relation,  or  under  any  pos- 
sible circumstances.  For  suppose  a  man  to  be  free  from 
all  subjection  to  civil  society  and  human  laws,  still  he  is 
not  at  liberty  to  think  and  to  act,  as  his  fancy,  or  hu- 
mor, or  passion,  may  incline  him.  Even  if  all  other 
laws  are  removed,  he  is  always  and  everywhere  subject 
to  the  law  of  Nature,  and  he  is  entitled  to  no  other  lib- 
erty, than  a  freedom  to  do  that,  and  only  that,  which  the 
law  of  Nature  permits.  Fancy  and  humor,  instinct  and 
passion,  are  not  laws  ;  they  are  only  the  workings  and 
promptings  of  that  lower  and  sensitive  nature,  which  we 
have  in  common  with  the  brutes  ;  and  they  are  to  be 
restrained  and  regulated  by  the  law  of  that  reasonable 
nature,  which  constitutes  our  resemblance  to  our  Maker. 
If  men  choose  to  call  this  state  of  lawlessness  liberty, 
let  them  at  least  not  degrade  themselves  and  insult 
their  Maker  by  calling  it  natural  liberty  ;  for  natural 
liberty,  or  the  liberty  conferred  on  us  by  Nature,  i.  e., 
by  the  God  of  Nature,  is  a  freedom  to  do  what  the  law 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


39 


of  Nature  enjoins,  and  only  that  which  the  law  of  Na- 
ture permits. 

From  liberty  we  naturally  pass  to  the  consideration 
of  slavery,  which  is  a  privation  of  liberty  in  some  sort 
and  to  some  degree.  But  of  what  sort  ?  and  in  what 
degree  ? 

Men  are  apt  to  think  that  slavery  is  the  opposite  of 
liberty,  and  a  privation  of  it ;  much  the  same  as  cold  is 
the  opposite  of  heat,  and  a  privation  of  heat.  Ask 
them  what  they  mean  by  a  slave,  and  the  answer  will 
probably  be,  that  he  is  one  who  is  deprived  of  his  lib- 
erty ;  and,  perhaps,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  they 
will  add,  that  he  is  deprived  of  it  for  no  fault  of  his 
own. 

But  certainly  there  are  many  sorts  of  liberty  with 
which  slavery  has  no  manner  of  connection,  and  which 
are  common  alike  to  the  bond  and  the  free. 

Liberty  sometimes  denotes  the  power  of  choice  and 
self-determination ;  the  opposite  of  this  liberty  is  not 
slavery,  but  necessity. 

Sometimes  liberty  denotes  the  power  to  exercise  rea- 
son and  judgment  in  the  direction  of  our  conduct ;  the 
privation  or  destitution  of  this  liberty  is  not  slavery, 
but  insanity  or  idiocy. 

Liberty,  again,  sometimes  denotes  the  power  to  think 
and  act  on  our  responsibility  to  our  Maker.  This  is 
that  sacred  liberty  of  conscience,  the  attempt  to  coerce 
which,  by  intimidation  and  persecution,  is  accounted  base 


40 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


by  all  generous  minds.  But  this  liberty  is  inalienable  ; 
no  man,  whether  bond  or  free,  can  be  deprived  of  it 
against  his  will ;  neither  imprisonment  nor  death  can 
extinguish  it ;  for  the  man  who  is  resolved  on  his  in- 
tegrity can  not,  as  the  poet  tells  us,  be  turned  from  his 
resolute  purpose  either  by  the  barbarity  of  tyrants  or 
the  madness  of  the  people.^ 

Liberty  sometimes  denotes  the  habit  of  virtue  and 
rectitude.  Thus  we  say,  that  athe  service  of  God  is 
perfect  freedom,"  or  liberty.  The  opposite  of  this  lib- 
erty is  habitual  pravity,  and  is  said  to  be  slavery  in  a 
figurative  sense,  because  its  subject  is  under  the  domin- 
ion of  his  lusts  and  passions. 

Liberty  sometimes  means  the  power  to  do  this  or  that, 
and  to  move  in  one  direction  or  another,  accordingly  as 
outward  objects  excite  the  appetites,  or  attract  the  senses 
of  the  body.  This  liberty  belongs  to  brutes,  and  to  man 
in  virtue  of  that  animal  nature  which  he  possesses  in 
common  with  the  brute  creation.  The  mere  privation 
of  this  liberty  is  not  slavery ;  for  meti  are  deprived  of  it 
when  they  are  imprisoned  or  manacled,  but  they  are  not 
therefore  slaves.  The  order  of  human  society  deprives 
all  its  members  of  this  liberty  in  some  degree,  without 
by  any  means  reducing  them  to  servitude. 

*  Justum  et  tenacem  propositi  virum 
Non  civium  ardor  prava  jubentium, 
Non  vultus  instantis  tyranni 
Mente  quatit  solida. 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


41 


To  liberty,  in  none  of  these  senses,  is  slavery  opposed. 
For  slaves  and  masters  are  equally  free,  within  their 
respective  spheres,  to  choose  and  determine  their  own 
actions ;  to  exercise  the  share  of  reason  and  judgment 
which  God  has  given  them ;  to  follow  the  dictates  of 
conscience;  and  to  go  hither  and  thither  as  they  are 
moved  by  their  senses,  and  external  objects.  All  these 
senses  of  the  word  may,  as  already  remarked,  be  dis- 
carded as  irrelevant  to  the  subject ;  nor  can  I  conceive 
of  any  sort  of  liberty  to  which  it  can  be  reasonably  pre- 
tended that  slavery  is  opposed,  unless  it  be  bodily  liberty, 
or  civil  liberty. 

And  here  we  come  to  the  point  at  which  the  road 
divides,  and  the  difference,  indicated  in  our  title-page, 
begins  to  appear.  For  it  deserves  to  be  carefully  noted 
that  the  word  slavery  itself  is  taken  in  two  senses,  dia- 
metrically opposite:  the  one  of  which  assigns  to  the  slave 
a  certain  status  in  civil  society,  and,  consequently,  re- 
serves to  him  his  natural  rights,  and  assigns  to  him  only  a 
limited  subjection  under  the  protection  of  <  he  law ;  while 
the  other  puts  him  absolutely,  and  without  reserve  under 
the  arbitrary  dominion  of  his  master.  No  wonder  that  men 
differ  so  radically  on  the  subject  of  slavery,- some  denoun- 
cing it  as  abhorrent  to  nature,  and  a  curse  to  humanity, 
others  extolling  it  as  a  divine  institution  and  a  blessing, 
when  they  use  the  same  word  to  represent  things  as  wide 
asunder  as  the  poles  !    Thus  I  find  Mr.  Locke*  denying 

*  Works,  Vol.  IT.  p.  165,  Fol.  Ed. 


42 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


that  men,  either  among  the  Jews,  or  any  other  nation, 
ever  sold  themselves  into  slavery,  and  contending  that  it 
is  against  the  law  of  Nature  for  a  man  to  be  a  slave  with 
his  own  consent.  But  what  does  Mr.  Locke  mean  by 
slavery  ?  He  understands  by  a  slave  one  who  is  subject 
"  to  the  absolute  and  arbitrary  power  of  another  to  take 
away  his  life  when  he  pleases and  he  makes  slavery  to 
be  "the  state  of  war  continued  between  a  lawful  con- 
queror and  a  captive."  And  in  this  sense  all  that 
Mr.  Locke  says  about  slavery  is  very  true ;  but  in  this 
sense  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  slave  in  the  United 
States.  If  I  turn  to  Johnson's  Dictionary,  I  find  that 
a  slave  is  "  one  mancipated  to  a  master ;  not  a  freeman ; 
a  dependent.'7  Is  slavery ;  in  this  sense  of  the  word, 
contrary  to  the  law  of  Nature,  and  were  none  sold  to  it 
among  the  J ews,  or  other  nations ;  sold  to  be  dependents 
and  bondmen?  We  know  the  contrary,  nor  does  Mr. 
Locke  deny  it ;  only  he  calls  this  state  of  servile  depend- 
ence not  slavery^  but  "  drudgery."  Thus  we  see  that 
the  same  word  is  defined  by  standard  authorities  to  mean 
things  as  different  as  light  and  darkness ;  the  one  making 
slavery  to  be  a  state  of  hostile  oppression  and  subjection 
to  absolute  power,  the  other  making  it  to  be  a  state  of 
peace  and  friendship,  and  of  limited  subjection  in  a  well 
ordered  society.  How  many  strains  of  poetry,  and 
bursts  of  oratory,  and  teachings  of  philosophy  that  have 
stirred  our  souls  in  childhood,  and  awakened  our  admira- 
tion in  manhood,  are  suggested  by  the  former  sense ! 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


43 


And  on  the  other  hand,  how  many  moving  instances  of 
attachment,  fidelity,  and  bravery  come  to  our  remem- 
brance, when  we  use  the  word  in  the  latter  sense !  What 
man  that  lives,  can  regard  slavery  with  any  other  senti- 
ment than  one  of  scorn  and  execration,  if  it  mean  what 
Mr.  Locke  and  his  followers  understand  it  to  mean? 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  who  can  consider  the  ties  that 
bind  the  slave  (in  the  latter  sense  of  the  word)  to  his 
master,  and  the  interest  that  he  feels  in  all  that  concerns 
his  master's  family  and  estate,  and  not  have  kindly  and 
generous  sympathies  excited  in  his  bosom  ? 

How  far  this  equivocal  meaning  of  the  word  slavery 
is  the  cause  of  the  extreme  and  contradictory  opinions 
that  prevail  on  the  subject,  I  leave  to  others  to  decide. 
That  some  grave  conclusions,  and  of  a  very  practical 
kind,  are  drawn  from  slavery  in  one  of  its  aspects,  and 
inadvertently  applied  to  it  in  the  other,  I  shall  endeavor 
to  show  in  another  place.  But  for  the  present  I  am 
content  to  advertise  the  reader,  that  I  consider  the 
definition  of  slavery,  as  given  by  writers  on  the  Civil 
Law,  and  adopted  by  popular  writers  on  both  sides  of 
the  Atlantic,  to  be  inapplicable  to  the  state  of  society  in 
this  country.  For  it  is  a  fact,  which,  I  suppose,  will 
not  be  denied,  that  no  one  of  the  United  States  upholds 
that  form  of  slavery  which  makes  the  slave  the  absolute 
property  of  the  master.  And  if  I  am  asked  to  state 
precisely  what  I  mean  by  American  slavery,  I  answer, 
that  a  slave  is  a  person  who  is  related  to  society 


mm 


44 


LAW,  JUSTICE,  ETC. 


through  another  person,  called  a  master,  to  whom  he 
owes  due  service,  or  labor,  for  life,  and  from  whom 
he  is  entitled  to  receive  support  and  protection. 

This  definition  comprises,  I  believe,  either  expressly 
or  by  implication,  all  the  essential  characteristics  of  a 
slave,  in  that  form  of  slavery  which  exists  in  our 
country. 

1.  It  affirms  that  a  slave  is  a  person  ;  and  when  it  is 
added,  that  he  is  related  to  society  through  another 
person,  it  is  implied  that  both  are  persons  of  the  sawie 
nature,  and  possessed  of  the  same  natural  rights,  and 
owing  reciprocally,  the  one  to  the  other,  all  those  human 
regards  which  are  consistent  with  their  relative  posi- 
tions. 

2.  It  affirms  that  a  slave  is  a  person  who  holds  not 
an  immediate,  but  only  a  mediate  *  relation  to  the  com- 
munity in  which  he  lives. 

3.  It  affirms  that  a  slave  is  a  person  who  owes  ser- 
vice or  labor  to  another,  called  his  master ;  in  which  is 
implied,  that  his  labor  is  not  his  own,  to  dispose  of  as 
he  pleases,  but  belongs  to  his  master,  to  be  disposed  of 
as  his  master  directs. 

4.  It  affirms  that  the  slave  owes  his  labor  to  his  mas- 
ter, not  for  a  term  of  time,  but  for  life ;  which  implies, 
that  the  master  has  a  right  to,  or  property  in.  the  slave's 
labor  for  life. 


*  For  an  explanation  of  these  terms,  see  below,  Chapter  Fourth, 


MEANING  OF  THE  WORDS. 


45 


5.  It  affirms  that  the  slave  owes  due  labor  to  his 
master :  by  which  I  mean,  that  he  owes  it  only  in  due 
measure,  and  in  proportion  to  bis  abilities ;  and,  conse- 
quently, that  the  master  has  the  right  to  exact  it  only  in 
the  same  measure  ;  not  to  overwork  his  slave,  but  to  re- 
quire of  him  only  such  work  as  is  reasonable. 

6.  When  it  is  affirmed  that  the  master  has  a  right  to 
the  due  labor  of  a  slave  for  life,  it  is  implied  that  he 
has  the  right,  also,  to  transfer  that  right  to  others, 
under  the  same  limitations,  receiving  an  equivalent  in 
return. 

7.  It  is  affirmed  that  the  slave  has  a  right  to  claim 
from  his  master  support — food,  clothing,  shelter,  in 
sickness  and  in  health ;  and  protection  also  from  insult 
and  violence. 

These  several  particulars  will  be  more  fully  explained 
in  subsequent  chapters.  The  form  of  slavery  which 
they  indicate,  is  limited,  and  not  absolute ;  and  I  call 
it  American  slavery,  because  it  is  in  fact  the  form,  and 
the  only  form,  in  which  slavery  legally  exists  in  any  of 
the  United  States.  It  is  this  limited  form  of  slavery 
which  I  purpose  to  defend  ;  not  by  an  appeal  to  local  or 
positive  law,  whether  State  or  Federal,  but  by  an  appeal 
to  the  Law  of  Nature,  or  the  principles  of  universal 
justice. 


CHAPTER  III. 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE,  AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 

Having  defined  slavery,  and  undertaken  to  compare 
it  with  the  law  of  Nature,  in  order  to  ascertain  its  con- 
formity or  repugnance  thereto,  a  due  regard  to  method 
requires  me  to  explain,  more  distinctly  than  I  have 
hitherto  done,  what  I  mean  by  the  law  of  Nature. 

First,  however,  in  order  to  allay  the  fears  of  those 
who  think  that  all  recognition  of  Natural  Religion  is 
derogatory  to  Revealed,  it  may  be  proper  to  remark, 
that  the  expression  law  of  Nature  is  capable  of  a  two- 
fold sense.  It  may  denote  a  law  founded  in  nature,  in 
the  relations  and  fitness  of  things,  and  directive  of  the 
common  good  ;  or  it  may  denote  such  discoveries  of  that 
law  as  have  been  made  by  human  reason,  in  the  unas- 
sisted use  of  its  present  faculties.  The  distinction  is 
obvious ;  for  the  law  may  be  founded  in  nature,  and  yet 
we,  through  the  weakness  of  our  faculties,  or  the  neg- 
lect of  our  opportunities,  may  have  failed,  in  a  degree 
or  wholly,  to  discover  it  :  as  we  see  in  geometry,  which 
contains  numerous  propositions  capable  of  a  rigid  de- 
monstration, while  yet  the  generality  of  men  know  little 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE,  AND  ITS  RIGHTS.  47 

more  of  it  than  its  axioms.  In  the  former  sense,  the 
law  of  Nature  comprises  all  those  duties  which  flow 
from  the  relations  in  which  we  stand  to  God  and  our 
fellow-creatures. ;  while  in  the  latter  sense  it  denotes  no 
more  than  those  principles  and  rules  of  morality  and 
religion,  which  we,  in  the  unassisted  use  of  our  faculties, 
are  able  to  discover. 

To  what  extent  human  reason  is  able,  in  its  present 
state,  without  the  aid  of  Divine  Revelation,  to  discover 
the  law  of  Nature,  is  a  question  on  which  there  is  a 
wide  diversity  of  opinion.  Had  men  retained,  and  not 
abused,  that  gift  of  reason  which  God  originally  be- 
stowed on  them,  they  would,  probably,  be  able  to  dis- 
cover, without  doubt  or  perplexity,  all  the  duties  they 
owe  to  God  and  their  neighbor.  But  the  history  of  men 
makes  it  pretty  evident,  that  they  have  abused  their 
reason,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  this  abuse,  they  are 
unable  to  discover  the  will  of  their  Maker  with  that 
ease  and  certainty,  which  were  originally  in  their  power. 
They  can  but  spell  out,  as  it  were,  with  pains  and  labor, 
those  immutable  truths  which  reason,  in  its  pure  and 
unclouded  state,  could  read  plainly  and  without  an 
effort.  They  confess,  indeed,  universally  their  subjec- 
tion to  a  law  of  higher  authority  than  human  edicts,  but 
they  are  perpetually  liable  to  mistake,  and  misapply  its 
requirements.  Antigone  spoke  the  voice  of  Nature 
when,  scorning  the  prohibition  of  Creon,  she  refused  to 
violate  that  divine  law  unwritten,  infallible,  ivhich  is 


48 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


always  living,  and  of  which  no  man  can  say  when  it 
began  to  dawn : 

'OvSe,  O&t'VFlV  TOGOVTOV  G)6fJL7)V  TLl  OU 

KTjpvyjuad-'  cjgt'  dypairra  Kactyahrj  #£c3v 
vo^i^a  dvvaad-ai  $vi]Tbv  ovd'  vnepdpafj,elv. 
ov  yap  tl  vvv  ye  Kax&Hi  &  s  1  nore 

£y  t  avr  a,  novdelg  oldev  e  £  or  ov*  cf)dv?]  : 

albeit,  guided  rather  by  her  feelings  than  by  her  reason, 
she  was  mistaken  in  thinking  that  this  eternal  law  made 
the  rites  of  sepulture  necessary  to  the  repose  of  the 
soul.  All  mankind  acknowledge  the  first  and  elemen- 
tary principles  of  this  divine  law,  which,  indeed,  are  so 
easily  apprehended  and  universally  promulged,  that  they 
are  said  to  be  written  in  the  hearts  of  men.  Some 
few  of  the  ancient  Heathen,  assisted,  doubtless,  to  some 
extent,  by  traditionary  revelation,  have  given  us  very 
admirable  discoveries  of  the  same  eternal  law,  in  the 
shape  of  elaborate  deductions  from  its  principles  ;  while 
to  the  Holy  Scriptures  we  are  indebted  for  its  most 
luminous,  most  concise,  and  only  authoritative  expo- 
sition. So  that  I  may  safely  unite  in  an  appeal  to  the 
lav/  of  Nature,  understanding  thereby  a  law  founded  in 
Nature,  stable,  eternal,  and  sufficiently  known,  especially 
by  Christians,  to  answer  the  ends  of  a  law,  without  con- 
cerning myself  in  the  inquiry  whether  men  owe  their 
knowledge  of  it  exclusively  to  Divine  Revelation,  or, 
in  part,  to  the  independent  discoveries  of  their  own 
reason. 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


49 


With  the  same  propriety,  indeed,  that  we  deny  the 
objective  reality  of  the  law  of  Nature,  we  may  deny  the 
objective  reality  of  all  other  things,  and  so  involve  our- 
selves in  universal  skepticism.  True  and  false,  sweet 
and  bitter,  order  and  disorder,  proportion  and  dispropor- 
tion, beauty  and  deformity,  light  and  darkness,  are  dif- 
ferences founded  in  nature,  and  not  merely  ideas  exist- 
ing in  our  minds.  That  the  whole  is  greater  than  a 
part,  that  2  is  to  4  as  4  to  8,  that  a  parallelogram  is  double 
a  triangle  on  the  same  base  and  between  the  same  parallels, 
are  immutable  truths,  founded  in  the  nature  of  things, 
independently  of  our  perception  of  them.  Light  and 
darkness  do  not  depend  for  existence  on  a  man's  eye,  nor 
beauty  and  deformity  on  his  taste,  nor  sweet  and  bitter 
on  his  palate ;  but  they  are  real  differences,  founded  in 
nature,  and  upheld  by  its  immutable  laws.  It  is  the 
same  in  morals  and  religion.  The  nature  of  things,  and 
the  relations  which  they  hold  to  one  another,  are  such, 
that  some  habits  and  actions  are  agreeable  to  our  reason- 
able nature  and  conducive  to  the  common  good,  while 
others  are  repugnant  to  our  reasonable  nature,  and 
detrimental  to  the  common  good.  It  is  evidently  the 
design  of  Nature  and  the  will  of  its  Author,  that  we 
should  choose  and  practise  the  one  class  of  habits  and 
actions,  and  avoid  the  other ;  and  this  will  of  the  Author 
of  Nature,  so  far  as  it  is  discoverable  by  us,  is  to  us  a 
law  ;  a  law  laid  in  Nature,  and  always  binding  on  men, 
unless  the  Author  of  Nature  see  fit,  for  great  and  wise 

3 


50 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


0 


ends,  to  dispense  with  it,  and  to  prescribe  actions  (as, 
for  example,  Abraham's  sacrifice  of  his  son),  which,  if 
the  law  were  not  dispensed  with  by  its  supreme  Author, 
would  be  an  infraction  of  it. 

Those  actions  which  are  agreeable  to  the  lawr  of 
Nature,  which  are  due  to  others  by  the  relations  in 
which  we  stand  to  them,  and  are  conducive  to  the  com- 
mon good  (and  the  common  good,  be  it  observed,  in- 
cludes the  honor  of  God,  as  well  as  the  happiness  of 
men),  are  said  to  be  right,  virtuous,  and  dutiful ;  right, 
as  being  done  according  to  that  straight  rule  which  is 
the  shortest  way  to  happiness ;  virtuous,  as  being  emi- 
nently worthy  of  (vir.)  man,  who  is  made  in  the  image 
of  his  Maker ;  and  dutiful,  as  being  due  to  our  Creator 
and  our  fellow-creatures,  in  virtue  of  the  relations  we 
hold  to  them.  Actions  opposite  to  these  are  wrong  or 
crooked,  vicious,  and  undutiful.  And  we  might  as  well 
say  that  proportion  and  disproportion  are  created  by  the 
rules  of  mathematics,  the  beautiful  and  deformed  by 
canons  of  criticism,  light  and  darkness  by  the  prin- 
ciples of  natural  philosophy,  or  true  and  false  by  the 
ipse  dixit  of  the  metaphysician,  as  to  say  that  right  and 
wrong,  virtue  and  vice,  are  the  mere  creation  of  human 
law.  Evidently  the  distinction  in  the  case  last  men- 
tioned, as  well  as  in  the  others,  is  prior  to  the  decrees 
and  enactments  of  human  legislators ;  prior  even  to  the 
written  revelations  of  the  Almighty;  founded  in,  and 
equally  immutable  with,  the  very  nature  of  things :  and 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


51 


the  immutable  rule  which  distinguishes  what  is  essen- 
tially right  from  what  is  essentially  wrong,  is  called  the 
law  of  Nature ;  not  as  if  Nature  had  no  other  laws,  for, 
undoubtedly,  the  investigations  of  natural  science,  and 
taste,  and  all  the  other  branches  of  human  philosophy, 
presuppose  certain  laws  of  Nature  to  which  they  respect- 
ively refer ;  but,  by  way  of  eminence,  and  because  of  all 
the  laws  founded  in  Nature  that  which  distinguishes 
right  from  wrong,  and  defines  those  actions  which  are 
consonant  to  universal  reason,  and  promotive  of  universal 
happiness,  is  adapted,  on  this  earth,  only  to  the  human 
nature,  and  is  incomparably  the  most  worthy  of  human 
consideration  and  study. 

To  discover  and  interpret  this  divine  law,  and  apply 
it  to  the  regulation  of  human  conduct,  is  the  province  of 
reason.  In  matters  of  taste,  the  final  appeal  is  to  our 
feelings.  We  can  give  no  other  explanation  of  beauty 
and  deformity  in  nature,  than  to  say  that  the  one  excites 
within  us  pleasant,  and  the  other  unpleasant  emotions. 
We  consult  the  feelings  of  men  as  they  are  affected 
agreeably  or  otherwise,  by  outward  objects,  and  from 
the  facts  thus  collected  we  form  canons  of  criticism,  and 
establish,  approximately  at  least,  a  standard  of  taste. 
But  right  and  wrong  are  matters  of  reason,  and  not  mat- 
ters of  taste ;  and  though  we  speak  of  the  beautiful  and 
deformed,  the  lovely  and  the  unlovely,  in  morals  and 
religion,  yet  what  we  mean  is,  if  we  would  talk  sense, 


52 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


not  what  is  in  the  first  instance  agreeable  or  disagreeable 
to  our  feelings,  but  what  is  agreeable  or  disagreeable  to 
the  relations  in  which  we  stand  to  God  and  our  fellow- 
creatures  (which  is  a  matter  for  reason  to  decide),  and 
to  our  feelings  accordingly  as  they  are  or  are  not  trained 
to  a  jusfa  perception  and  appreciation  of  these  relations. 
In  inquiries  of  this  sort,  therefore,  feeling  is  to  be  dis- 
carded as  a  final  arbiter.  For  feeling  can  not  explain 
law,  nor  tell  us  what  it  prescribes,  or  what  it  forbids ; 
and  no  more  can  it  comprehend  the  relations  of  man  to 
the  universe,  and  define  the  actions  which  are  congruous 
or  incongruous  to  these  relations.  Feeling  can  not  in- 
form us  what  actions  are  most  productive  of  good,  or 
what  of  evil,  to  mankind  at  large,  or  to  any  individual 
among  them.  The  investigation  of  human  duty,  under 
any  of  these  formulas,  namely,  what  is  right  or  wrong, 
becoming  or  unbecoming,  good  or  evil,  is  exclusively  the 
province  of  reason.  In  inquiries  of  this  nature,  feeling, 
even  were  men  pure  and  perfect,  would  be  of  no  avail ; 
and  taking  men  as  they  are,  corrupt  and  imperfect,  it  is 
easy  to  see  that  it  may  become  a  fallacious  and  ruinous 
guide.  In  ascertaining  the  law  of  Nature,  therefore,  on 
any  given  subject,  let  us  aim  in  the  first  place  to  be 
guided  by  reason;  and  to  consider  actions  as  right  or 
wrong,  just  or  unjust,  good  or  evil,  not  by  the  feelings 
which  they  excite,  but  by  the  feelings  they  ought  to  ex- 
cite, and  by  their  agreement  or  disagreement  with  those 


AND   ITS  RIGHTS. 


53 


principles  and  rules  of  moral  conduct  which  approve 
themselves  to  the  reason  of  mankind.  * 

If  it  be  said  that  every  man  must  look  for  this  divine 
law  to  the  promptings  of  his  own  conscience,  I  answer 
that  conscience  is  indeed  the  vicegerent  of  God  in  the  soul ; 
but  then  I  must  contend  that  conscience  is  neither  feeling 
nor  instinct,  but  that  it  is  simply  the  reason  or  understand- 
ing itself  applying  its  light  to  the  government  of  its  own 
moral  actions.  But  this  light  or  knowledge  by  which 
the  conscience  proceeds  is  capable  of  being  reduced  to 
distinct  propositions;  and  accordingly  as  these  propo- 
sitions are  true  or  false,  accordingly  as  they  do  or  do  not 
declare  the  immutable  law  which  Nature  prescribes,  the 
conscience  which  adheres  to  them  and  follows  them,  di- 
rects us  either  right  or  wrong,  and  leads  us  either  to 
good  or  to  evil. 

As  those  propositions  which  determine,  or  ought  to 
determine,  the  conscience,  relate  to  the  moral  conduct  of 
men,  and  are  designed  to  show  us  the  consequences  of 
our  moral  actions,  they  are  called  practical,  to  distin- 
guish them  from  others  of  a  theoretical  or  speculative 
kind.    And  for  the  same  reason  that  those  precepts, 

*  The  origin  and  causes  of  the  habit,  now  so  common,  of  appealing 
to  the  feelings  for  the  arbitration  of  grave  questions  in  morals  and 
religion,  would  form  a  curious  subject  of  inquiry.  The  habit  is  very 
flattering  to  indolence  and  self-conceit ;  and  has,  perhaps,  been  fos- 
tered by  the  word  heart  in  our  English  Bibles ;  which  in  our  language 
denotes  the  feelings  or  affections,  but  which  in  the  Hebrew,  and  also 
in  the  New  Testament  Greek,  comprises  the  understanding  and  judg- 
ment as  well  as  the  affections 


54 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


which  are  designed  for  the  regulation  of  the  conscience, 
are  called  practical  dictates,  the  conscience  itself  is 
commonly  called  by  our  older  writers  the  practical  rea- 
son, or  the  practical  understanding.  The  terms  are, 
indeed,  scholastic,  and  have  now  become  obsolete  ;  but  it 
is  much  to  be  feared  that  the  disuse  of  them  has  helped 
to  blind  the  public  mind  to  the  true  nature  and  office  of 
conscience,  and  to  propagate  the  delusion  which  makes 
conscience  another  name  for  self -will. 

The  dictates  of  conscience,  therefore,  in  the  proper 
sense  of  the  words,  are  the  deductions  which  reason 
makes,  or  is  capable  of  making,  or  the  discoveries  which, 
when  made,  she  acknowledges  to  be  true,  of  the  ever- 
lasting law  of  Nature.  Those  dictates  assume  different 
forms  corresponding  to  the  methods  in  which  reason 
proceeds.  For  sometimes  we  proceed  in  the  analytic 
method  :  and  assuming  that  nature  intends  the  common 
good,  that  is  to  say,  the  honor  and  glory  of  the  Creator 
and  the  welfare  of  the  creature,  and  seeing  that  of  all 
possible  actions  some  one  tends  more  than  others  to  pro- 
mote this  end,  we  infer  that  this  action  is  best  to  be 
done.  Or,  proceeding  m  the  synthetic  way,  we  prove 
that  some  actions  are  suited  to  our  reasonable  and  social 
nature,  and  to  the  relations  in  which  we  are  placed  to 
God  and  our  fellow-creatures,  and  that  others  are  un- 
suited ;  and  thence  argue  that  the  former  are  fit  and 
ought  to  be  done,  and  that  the  latter  are  unfit  and  ought 
not  to  be  done.    Moreover,  regarding  the  good  and  evil 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


55 


consequences  of  our  actions  as  the  sanctions  annexed  by 
Nature  to  the  rule  which  she  prescribes,  and  as  impart- 
ing to  it  the  force  of  a  lata,  reason,  in  the  name  of  God, 
lays  on  herself  the  obligation  to  do  those  things  which 
are  agreeable  to  the  rule,  and  to  avoid  the  contrary,  and 
thus  delivers  her  dictates  in  the  form  of  commands. 
But,  whichsoever  of  these  forms  be  adopted,  the  result 
is  the  same ;  for  whether  my  reason  judges  a  thing  to 
be  best,  or  tells  me  that  I  ought  to  do  it,  or  commands 
me  to  do  it,  I  am  equally  obliged  to  do  it.* 

Proceeding  in  one  or  other  of  these  methods,  reason 
discovers  to  us,  and  devolves  upon  us,  our  obligation  to 
practise  those  primary  duties  which  we  owe  to  God,  to 
ourselves  and  our  fellow-creatures ;  such  as  piety  to  God 
and  benevolence  to  men,  sobriety  and  chastity,  pru- 
dence and  constancy,  moderation  and  equity,  fidelity  and 
gratitude,  innocence  and  rectitude,  candor  and  honesty, 
and  in  general  all  those  virtues  which  are  suited  to  our 
reasonable  and  sociable  nature,  and  to  the  relations  and 
circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  and  which  pro- 
mote the  honor  of  God  and  the  good  of  men,  and  form 
us  to  the  habits  of  self-control.  From  the  obligation  of 
these  virtues  are  deduced  those  precepts  which  enjoin  us 
to  love  and  reverence  our  Maker,  to  be  grateful  to  pa- 
rents and  benefactors,  to  do  no  harm  to  the  innocent,  to 
be  faithful  in  our  observance  of  compacts,  and  others  of 

*  See  Cumberland's  Laws  of  Nature,  c.  4. 


56 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


a  similar  nature.  These  virtues,  indeed,  have  been 
taught,  and  these  precepts  delivered  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures with  wonderful  plainness  and  with  divine  authority. 
But  they  are  not  original  with  the  Scriptures.  The  Ten 
Commandments,  which  are  a  digest  of  them  made  by  the 
finger  of  God,  were  no  new  law  at  the  time  they  were 
delivered,  but  declarative'"  of  that  eternal  law  which 
dawned  forth  in  the  creation  ;  a  law  founded  not  in  the 
opinions  of  men,  but  in  the  reason  and  nature  of  things; 
engraven,  as  it  were,  on  the  heart  of  every  man :  con- 
fessed by  all  nations,  and  contradicted  by  none  ;  and  ex- 
pressed with  great  clearness  and  force  by  some  Heathen 
moralists  as  well  as  by  Christian  divines.  This  is  that 
Law  of  Nature  which  is  of  higher  origin  than  human 
authority,  and  unalterable  by  senate  or  people.  For,  as 
Cicero  admirably  argues,  if  the  laws  of  the  people,  and 
the  decrees  of  princes,  are  constitutive,  and  not  merely 
declarative,  of  right  and  justice,  then  robbery,  adultery, 
and  forgery  would  be  right  and  virtuous,  if  once  they 
were  enacted  by  the  decrees  and  ordinances  of  the  mul- 
titude; and  if,  as  with  bitter  irony  he  adds,  there  be 
such  rare  virtue  in  the  suffrages  of  fools  as  to  change 
the  nature  of  things,  why  do  they  not  ordain  by  their 
votes  that  poison  be  accounted  healthy  food  ?  and  if  then 

*  The  only  exception  is  in  relation  to  a  part  of  the  fourth  com- 
mandment, which  is  declarative  of  the  law  of  Nature,  in  so  far  as  it 
requires  us  to  set  apart  a  portion  of  our  time  to  the  service  of  religion, 
but  positive  and  arbitrary  in  so  far  as  it  specifies  that  portion,  and 
makes  it  to  he  every  seventh  day. 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


57 


laws  can  make  right  out  of  wrong,  why  can  not  they 
make  those  things  preserve  life,  which  naturally  de- 
stroy it  ?  % 

From  the  law  of  Nature  spring  the  rights  of  Nature ; 
which,  as  already  intimated,  are  of  two  kinds.  The  first 
kind  comprises  those  rights  which  consist  in  a  liberty  to 
exact  of  others  what  the  law  of  Nature  requires  them 
to  render  to  us ;  and  the  second  comprises  those  rights 
which  authorize  us  to  have,  or  to  do,  all  that  the  law  of 
Nature  does  not  forbid.  > 

Of  the  former  kind  there  are  evidently  two  sorts 
which,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  we  may  call  direct 
and  indirect.  The  former  is  created  by  the  direct  con- 
stitution of  Nature,  and  without  the  intervention  of  any 
act  on  the  part  of  the  person,  from  whom  obedience  is 
exacted,  to  authorize  this  exaction  ;  as,  for  example,  the 

*  Quod  si  populorum  jussis,  si  principum  decretis,  si  sententiis 
judicum,  jura  constituerentur ;  jus  esset  latrocinari ;  jus,  adulterare  ; 
jus  testamenta  falsa  supponere,  si  haec  suffragiis,  aut  scitis  multitu- 
dinis  probarentur.  Quae  si  tanta  potestas  est  stultorum  sententiis 
atque  jussis,  ut  eorum  suffragiis  rerum  natura  vertatur ;  cur  non  san- 
ciunt,  ut  quae  mala  perniciosaque  sunt,  habeantur  pro  bonis  ac  salu- 
taribus  ?  aut  cur,  cum  jus  ex  injuria  lex  facere  possit,  bonum  eadem 
facere  non  possit  ex  malo  ?  And  he  adds,  that  a  good  law  is  distin- 
guished from  a  bad  by  no  other  rule  than  that  of  nature  ;  and  that 
the  distinction  not  only  of  right  and  wrong,  but  of  all  virtues  and 
vices,  is  in  like  manner  founded  in  nature.  Atqui  nos  legem  bonam 
a  mala  nulla  alia  nisi  naturae  norma  dividere  possumus.  Nee  solum 
jus  et  injuria  a  natura  dijudicantur,  sed  omnino  omnia  honesta  ac 
turpia,  nam  et  communis  intelligentia  nobis  notas  res  efficit,  easque  in 
animis  nostris  inchoavit,  ut  honesta  in  virtute  ponantur,  in  vitiis  tur- 
pia.— Be  Legibus,  lib.  1,  sect.  16. 

3* 


58 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


right  of  parents  over  their  children.  Rights  of  the 
latter  sort  presuppose  the  intervention  of  such  an  act, 
and  may  therefore  be  said  to  be  indirectly  created.  For 
example  :  the  law  of  Nature  (and  not  only  the  law  of 
the  land)  gives  the  supreme  magistrate,  in  every  settled 
commonwealth,  a  right  to  exact  obedience  of  the  subject ; 
but  then  it  supposes  the  previous  consent  of  the  subject, 
either  expressed  or  implied,  to  the  magistrate's  author- 
ity. In  this  case,  the  right  of  the  magistrate  may  be 
called  a  natural  right,  inasmuch  as  it  is  created  by 
natural  law ;  but  the  right  is  evidently  of  a  different 
sort  from  one  which  would  give  the  magistrate  liberty  to 
exact  obedience  without  the  subject's  consent. 

Of  the  former  sort  of  rights,  or  those  which  grow  out 
of  the  direct  constitution  of  nature,  I  am  not  aware 
that  there  is  any  variety.  Nature  gives  the  parent  a 
right  to  exact  obedience  from  his  child ;  but  besides  this, 
I  know  of  no  instance  in  which  Nature  gives  one  man 
a  direct  right  to  exercise  dominion  over  another.  Even  the 
right  of  the  husband  over  the  wife  is  not  directly  be- 
stowed on  him  by  Nature,  but  is  obtained  in  the  first 
instance  by  the  consent  of  the  woman  or  of  her  parents. 
And  so,  in  all  cases,  that  of  parents  alone  excepted,  the 
right  of  dominion,  when  bestowed  by  the  law  of  Nature, 
is  bestowed  only  in  virtue  of  some  act,  expressed  or  im- 
plied, on  the  part  of  the  subject  to  justify  it;  whence  it 
is,  I  suppose,  that  we  have  in  the  Decalogue,  which  is 
declarative  of  the  law  of  Nature,  an  express  command  to 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


59 


honor  father  and  mother,  but  no  express  command  to 
defer  to  any  other  human  authority ;  the  obligation  to  obey 
the  magistrate,  and  others  invested  with  lawful  authority 
over  us,  being  enjoined  only  by  implication,  and  in 
consequence  of  that  analogy  which  other  lawful  author- 
ity bears  to  the  parental. 

Natural  rights  of  the  other  kind,  or  such  as  consist  in 
a  liberty  to  have,  or  to  do,  what  the  law  of  Nature  does 
not  forbid,  are  numerous.  The  chief  of  them  are,  a 
right  to  self-preservation ;  a  right  to  life  and  limb  and 
the  products  of  our  labor ;  a  right  to  personal  liberty, 
and  a  right  to  the  pursuit  of  happiness. 

It  should  be  well  observed,  however,  that  the  rights 
of  Nature  are  necessarily  limited  by  the  law  of  Nature. 
For  right,  being  a  liberty  to  have  or  to  do  what  the  law 
permits,  perishes  and  becomes  extinct  directly  it  leads  us 
to  do  what  the  law  forbids.  The  rights  of  Nature, 
therefore,  are  a  nullity,  the  moment  they  are  exercised 
in  violation  of  the  lata  of  Nature;  inasmuch  as  their 
very  essence  consists  in  a  liberty  to  do  that,  and  only 
that,  which  is  consistent  with  the  law  of  Nature. 

Of  the  limitation  of  rights  of  the  former  kind,  or 
those  which  entitle  us  to  exact  what  is  due  to  us  from 
others,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  in  a  future  chap- 
ter ;  and  shall  conclude  the  present  chapter  with  a  brief 
review  of  rights  of  the  latter  kind.  And,  first,  of  the 
right  of  self-preservation. 

Hobbes,  who  has  been  more  successful  in  poisoning 


60 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


the  mind  of  Great  Britain  (and,  consequently,  of  this 
country)  with  infidel  error  than  have  all  her  clergy  in 
imbuing  it  with  Christian  doctrine  (for  a  fool  or  a  mad- 
man may  destroy  in  a  day  more  than  a  hundred  skillful 
architects  can  build  up  in  a  year) ;  Hobbes,  I  say,  opens 
the  fourteenth  chapter  of  his  Leviathan,  by  telling  us 
that  "  The  right  of  nature,  which  writers  commonly  call 
Jus  Naturale,  is  the  liberty  each  man  hath  to  use  his 
own  power  for  the  preservation  of  his  own  nature ;  that 
is  to  say,  of  his  own  life ;  and,  consequently,  of  doing 
any  thing  which,  in  his  own  judgment  and  reason,  he 
shall  conceive  to  be  the  aptest  means  thereunto."  Hence, 
I  suppose,  the  maxim,  which  is  now-a-days  in  every 
body's  mouth,  that  "  Self-preservation  (meaning  thereby 
the  preservation  of  one's  bodily  life)  is  the  first  law  of 
nature."  One  is  ashamed  to  think  that  such  a  maxim 
can  have  currency  in  a  Christian  country,  when  the 
very  heathen  have  taught  us,  both  by  doctrine  and  illus- 
trious examples,  that  it  is  better  to  die  virtuously  than 
to  live  dishonorably.  I  shall  not  stop  to  refute  the  falla- 
cies of  Hobbes,  but  shall  merely  affirm,  what  I  am  sure 
none  but  an  atheist  will  deny,  that  no  man  has  an  abso- 
lute right  to  preserve  his  own  life,  but  that  every  man 
holds  the  right  under  these  two  limitations  ;  first,  that  if 
religion  or  the  public  welfare  demand  it,  he  is  ready  to 
part  with  it :  and,  second,  that  in  preserving  his  own  life, 
he  will  do  wrong  to  no  innocent  person.  For,  as  Bishop 
Lucy  eloquently  says  (Obser.  on  Lev.,  p.  167  ;  London, 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


61 


A.  D.  1663):  uTo  live  only,  is  to  be  a  beast,  a  plant 
only ;  but  to  live  virtuously  and  reasonably,  to  glorify 
that  God  who  gave  him  those  abilities  by  which  his  life 
is  happy,  that  is  the  end  of  man,  and  of  man's  life; 
which  he  is  to  leave  then,  when  he  can  not  enjoy  it  upon 
these  conditions ;  and  to  a  Christian  man,  as  to  the  best 
of  philosophers  who  had  thoughts  and  assurance  of  eter- 
nity, this  life  hath  been  reputed  of  little  value,  and  to 
die,  no  misery ;  because  it  is  but  the  passage  to  a  better 
and  more  spiritual  life,  although  perhaps  there  may  be 
some  difficulties  in  opening  the  gate." 

The  same,  mutatis  mutandis,  may  be  said  of  the 
other  rights  of  Nature.  They  are  none  of  them  absolute, 
but  are  all  limited  by  that  law  of  Nature  which  creates 
them.  They,  therefore,  vanish  and  expire  the  instant 
they  are  exerted  in  violation  of  the  obligation  which  is 
imposed  on  every  man  to  promote  the  common  good ;  in 
other  words,  to  live  for  God,  and  for  his  fellow-creatures, 
and  for  life  eternal.  It  is  the  foulest  of  moral  leprosy  to 
assert  these  rights  in  defiance  of  the  law  which  creates 
them.  Men  have  the  right  to  life  and  limb,  and  the 
products  of  their  own  labor,*  the  right  to  preserve  their 
liberty,  the  right  to  pursue  their  happiness,  not  as  they 
please,  but  only  under  the  restraints  of  that  Eternal  Law 
which  commands  them  to  keep  compacts  inviolate,  to  do 
no  harm  to  the  innocent,  and,  in  a  word,  to  fulfill  the 
dictates  of  universal  justice.  To  vindicate  natural  rights, 
therefore  (supposing  them  to  be  infringed),  or  to  encour- 


62 


THE  LAW  OF  NATURE, 


age  others  to  vindicate  them,  by  means  of  theft,  rob- 
bery, and  murder,  is,  indeed,  in  all  righteous  judgment, 
uto  sow  the  wind,  and  reap  the  whirlwind;"  for  rights, 
so  vindicated,  vanish,  and  only  the  guilt  remains  of 
having  violated  the  Eternal  Law  which  created  them. 

P.  S.  The  following  descriptions  or  definitions  of  the 
law  of  Nature  are  principally  taken  from  authors  who 
have  treated  professedly  on  the  subject.  These  authors, 
though  two  of  them  were  civilians,  were  all  eminent  in 
Christian  theology ;  and  hence  they  must  have  thought 
that  not  only  the  Decalogue,  but  also  the  precepts  of  our 
Blessed  Lord  and  His  Apostles,  except  so  far  as  they  re- 
late to  external  religion,  are  declarative  of  a  prior  law 
inlaid  in  Nature  by  its  divine  Author. 

"  The  lawT  of  Nature,"  says  Dr.  Jortin,  "  is  the  pri- 
mary and  original  law  of  God,  the  eternal  and  un- 
changeable law  of  morality,  which  necessarily  arises 
from  the  nature  of  rational  creatures,  and  from  their  re- 
lation to  God  and  to  each  other.  And  so  the  wisdom 
of  this  law  is  the  very  same  as  the  wisdom  of  God's 
creation  itself.  For  God  hath  so  made  us,  that,  if  we 
would  behave  ourselves  towards  one  another,  according 
to  our  power  and  abilities,  according  to  the  best  of  our 
judgment,  to  the  dictates  of  sober  reason,  and  the  sug- 
gestions of  conscience,  universal  harmony  and  all  its 
blessed  effects  would  ensue."  * 

*  Scrmous,  vol.  v.,  p.  421. 


AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 


63 


"  Since  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  and  condi- 
tion of  man,"  says  Puffendorf,  4 'that  he  should  live 
entirely  loose  from  all  law,  and  perform  his  actions  by  a 
wild  and  wandering  impulse,  without  regard  to  any 
standard  or  measure  ;  it  follows  that  we  make  inquiry 
into  that  most  general  and  universal  rule  of  human 
action,  to  which  every  man  is  obliged  to  conform,  as  he 
is  a  reasonable  creature.  To  this  rule  custom  hath 
given  the  name  of  Natural  Law,  and  we  may  call  it 
likewise  the  law  universal  and  perpetual;  the  former 
in  regard  that  it  binds  the  whole  body  of  human  race, 
the  latter,  because  it  is  not  subject  to  change,  which  is 
the  disadvantage  of  positive  laws."  * 

Grotius  comes  nearer  to  a  definition  :  "  Natural  law," 
he  says,  "  is  the  rule  and  dictate  of  right  reason,  show- 
ing the  moral  deformity,  or  moral  necessity,  there  is  in 
any  act,  according  to  its  suitableness  or  unsuitableness 
to  our  reasonable  and  social  nature  ;  and,  consequently, 
that  such  act  is  either  forbidden  or  commanded  by  God, 
the  Author  of  Nature."  f 

Bishop  Cumberland's  definition  is  more  profound  and 
rigid  :  it  includes  in  it  not  only  precept,  but  promulga- 
tion and  sanction,  and  thus  comes  fully  up  to  the  requi- 
sitions of  a  law*  "  The  law  of  Nature,"  he  says,  u  is 
a  proposition,  proposed  to  the  observation  of,  or  im- 
pressed upon,  the  mind,  with  sufficient  clearness,  by  the 

*  Law  of  Nature  and  Nations,  book  ii.,  c.  3,  sect.  1. 
\  Gro.  De  Jur.  Bel.  et  Pacis,  lib.  i.,  cap,  1,  s.  10. 


64         THE  LAW  OF  NATURE.   AND  ITS  RIGHTS. 

nature  of  things,  from  the  will  of  the  First  Cause, 
which  points  out  that  possible  action  of  a  rational  agent, 
which  will  chiefly  promote  the  common  good,  and  by 
which  only  the  entire  happiness  of  particular  persons 
can  be  obtained." 

To  which  I  may  add,  as  expressive  of  the  matter  of 
the  law,  the  following  quotation  from  Bishop  Butler's 
dissertation  "  Of  the  Nature  of  Virtue  " : 

"As  much  as  it  has  been  disputed  wherein  virtue 

consists,  or  whatever  ground  of  doubt  there  may  be 

about  particulars,  yet  in  general  there  is  in  reality  an 

universally  acknowledged  standard  of  it.    It  is  that 

which  all  ages  and  all  countries  have  made  profession  of 

in  public  ;  it  is  that  which  every  man  you  meet  puts  on 

the  show  of ;  it  is  that  which  the  primary  and  funda- 
» 

mental  laws  of  all  civil  constitutions,  over  the  face  of 
the  earth,  make  it  their  business  and  endeavor  to  enforce 
the  practice  of  upon  mankind;  viz.,  justice,  veracity 
and  regard  to  the  common  good." 


CHAPTER  IV. 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


In  all  human  society,  and  under  every  form  of  gov- 
ernment, we  find  two  general  divisions  of  persons ;  the 
one  holding  an  immediate,  the  other  a  mediate  relation 
to  the  community  in  which  they  live.  It  is  competent 
to  persons  of  the  former  description  to  dispose  of  them- 
selves  and  their  affairs  as  they  please,  with  no  other  lim- 
itation than  that  which  is  laid  on  them  by  the  laws  of 
the  community  to  which  they  belong.  They  may  follow 
what  trade  soever  or  profession  they  choose ;  they  may 
hold  property  and  form  engagements  in  their  own  name 
and  right ;  they  may  squander  their  estate,  and  reduce 
themselves  to  poverty  and  vagrancy ;  or  they  may  de- 
prive themselves  for  a  time  of  their  bodily  liberty,  and 
for  the  sake  of  avoiding  the  evils  of  penury  and  va- 
grancy, and  of  getting  an  honest  livelihood,  they  may 
subject  themselves  to  the  dominion  of  another,  by  bind- 
ing themselves  out  to  service,  or  enlisting  in  the  army 
or  navy,  if  they  happen  to  live  in  countries  in  which 
armies  and  navies  are  maintained.  This  division  of 
persons  comprehends,  in  most  countries,  the  great  bulk 


66 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


of  the  inhabitants,  artisans,  lawyers,  soldiers,  physicians, 
merchants,  tradesmen,  laborers,  etc.,  etc.,  who  have  at- 
tained to  what  is  called  their  majority ;  or  who,  in  other 
words,  have  reached  a  certain  age  (which  in  our  country 
and  Great  Britain  is  twenty-one,  in  France  twenty-five, 
in  Holland  thirty),  which  is  prescribed  by  the  State  in 
order  to  their  admission  to  the  rights  of  citizens. 

But,  besides  these  persons,  there  have  always  been, 
under  every  form  of  government,  from  the  most  strin- 
gent despotism  to  the  purest  democracy,  a  large  number 
of  persons  who  stand  only  in  a  mediate  relation  to  so- 
ciety, or  to  its  governing  power ;  or  who,  in  other  words, 
are  related  to  it  through  the.  medium  of  others.  In  ev- 
ery civilized  country  all  persons,  who  have  not  attained 
their  majority,  are  of  this  description  ;  to  a  certain  ex- 
tent, also,  all  married  women,  without  regard  to  age,  are 
of  this  description  ;  and  in  many  ages  and  countries,  the 
relations  of  master  and  servant  have  been  such,  that  ser- 
vants have  been  all  their  life  long  persons  of  the  same 
description.  Minors,  for  instance,  however  well  qualified 
to  transact  business  for  themselves,  are  related  to  society 
only  through  their  fathers  or  guardians ;  wives  through 
their  husbands ;  and  servants  (except  those  who  are 
citizens)  through  their  masters.  The  relation  of  this 
whole  description  of  persons  to  the  society  in  which,  or 
to  the  government  under  which,  they  live,  is  such  that 
they  are  incapable  of  direct  communication  with  it,  and 
enjoy  its  benefits,  and  receive  its  protection  only  through 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


67 


the  medium  of  others.  This  distinction  of  persons  into 
those  who  act  in  their  own  right,  and  those  who  act  only 
in  the  right  of  another,  is  fundamental ;  and  having  ob- 
tained under  all  governments,  must  be  confessed  to  be 
founded  in  Nature,  and  a  necessary  element  of  social 
order. 

The  foundation  of  this  distinction  I  take  to  be  this, 
viz.,  that  States,  or  communities  of  men,  were  originally 
formed  by  fathers  of  families;  and  that  the  theory  on 
which  they  were  founded,  and  are  still  administered  and 
conducted,  supposes  their  power  to  be  lodged  in  the  men 
of  which  they  are  composed,  not  simply  as  they  are  persons, 
but  as  they  are,  or  are  capable  of  becoming,  fathers  of 
families.  The  family  was  in  order  of  time  before  the  State, 
and  the  State  is  a  combination  of  fathers  and  masters  for 
the  better  protection  of  themselves  and  their  families. 
Reason  points  to  this  as  the  probable  origin  of  political 
communities,  and  history  attests  the  fact  of  such  origin. 
Men's  reverence  for  the  law  of  Nature  is  not,  as  a  gen- 
eral rule,  strong  enough  to  enable  families  to  live  to- 
gether in  safety  and  peaceable  communion  under  that 
law  alone,  and  without  the  intervention  of  civil  government 
to  coerce  the  unruly  to  its  observance.  Lust,  avarice, 
and  ambition,  with  their  abominable  progeny  of  violence, 
fraud  and  rapine,  bring  dismay  and  desolation  on  fam- 
ilies :  and  the  state  or  political  community  is  simply  a 
contrivance,  by  winch  the  heads  and  natural  protectors 
of  families  shall  be  able  to  concentrate  their  will  and 


68  GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


strength  in  laws  and  forms  of  judicature  to  ward  off 
from  them  disgrace  and  ruin.  Hence  the  reasonableness 
and  necessity  of  the  provision,  not  otherwise  to  be  ex- 
plained or  justified,  which  excludes  the  larger  numerical 
portion  of  every  political  community  from  a  direct  par- 
ticipation in  its  control.  The  right  of  suffrage  is  then 
truly  universal  when  it  is  extended  to  all  the  adult 
males  of  the  State,  without  regard  to  distinctions  of 
property ;  it  can  not  go  beyond  this  limit,  and  be  ex- 
tended to  women,  without  violating  the  main  principle 
on  which  the  very  being  of  the  State  rests  for  support, 
which  is  the  subordination  of  wives  to  their  husbands, 
of  children  to  their  fathers,  and  of  slaves  (in  every 
community  which  has  them)  to  their  masters.  Women 
are  cared  for  and  protected  in  their  natural  rights  by 
the  State,  and  so  are  children,  and  so  are  slaves  in  those 
countries  in  which  they  chance  to  form  one  of  the  classes 
of  society ;  but  women,  children,  and  slaves  are  not  the 
State,  are  not  the  protectors  of  society.  Their  position 
is  one  of  subordination  and  dependence  ;  and  men — free- 
men— whether  they  be  "  the  lords  of  creation7'  or  not, 
are  in  fact  the  lords  and  rulers  of  the  political  commun- 
ity to  which  they  belong. 

And  not  only  in  fact,  but  of  right ;  for  a  little  re- 
flection will  convince  us  that  Nature  and  right  reason 
point  to  men  as  the  proper  depositories  of  political 
power,  and  restrain  two,  at  least,  of  the  classes  above 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


69 


indicated  to  that  mediate  relation  to  the  State  which,  in 
fact,  they  hold. 

In  the  case  of  children,  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  the 
rule  are  apparent.  Nature  itself,  while  they  are  too 
weak  to  take  care  of  themselves,  has  evidently  entrusted 
them  to  the  care  of  their  parents  ;  and  to  this  end  has 
implanted  in  the  bosom  of  parents  a  strong  affection  for 
their  offspring.  But,  in  order  to  exercise  this  care  over 
their  children,  to  feed,  clothe,  and  educate  them,  it  is 
essentially  necessary  that  their  parents  have  the  gov- 
ernment of  them.  Nature,  therefore,  requires  the  sub- 
ordination of  children  to  their  parents,  and  to  the  father 
rather  than  the  mother  (if  the  children  are  born  in  wed- 
lock), as  being  the  head  of  the  wife,  and  consequently 
of  the  family.  The  State  presumes  this  subordination  : 
regards  children  as  under  the  care  of  their  parents,  deals 
with  them  through  their  parents,  and,  in  the  case  of  the 
death  of  the  parents,  continues  to  govern  them  in  the 
same  indirect  way  through  the  medium  of  tutors  or 
guardians. 

The  beneficence  of  this  provision,  and  the  true  posi- 
tion of  the  State  in  relation  to  it,  appear  in  another 
respect.  Children,  through  weakness  and  inexperience, 
are  not  qualified  to  make  engagements  for  their  own 
benefit :  their  simplicity  and  ignorance  would  render 
them  an  easy  prey  to  fraudulent  and  designing  persons  ; 
and  if  they  had  the  power  to  bind  themselves  by  their 
own  acts  they  would  be  soon  involved  in  confusion  and 


70 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


ruin.  The  law  of  Nature  accounts  them  incapable  of 
forming  engagements  to  their  own  damage.  They  gain 
the  necessary  understanding  and  experience,  which 
qualify  them  to  form  engagements  and  contracts,  at  dif- 
ferent times  of  life,  some  at  an  earlier  age,  some  at  a 
later.  It  is  impossible  to  make  a  particular  rule  for 
every  one ;  and  hence  the  State  steps  in  and  determines 
a  particular  moment  when  they  shall  all  be  accounted 
capable  of  acting  in  their  own  name  and  right.  Thus 
the  State  is  the  minister  of  Nature,  and  gives  force  and 
eflfect  to  her  intention.  It  acknowledges  the  paternal 
relation  to  be  prior  to  its  own  relation  ;  and  its  admission 
of  the  son  to  immediate  relation  with  itself  is  simply  the 
collective  consent  and  concurrence  of  fathers  to  the  point 
of  time  when  their  paternal  authority  shall  be  surren- 
dered, and  their  sons  admitted  to  a  direct  participation 
in  the  government,  which  they  originally  founded,  and 
which  they  continue  to  direct. 

Nor  is  this  subjection  of  men  to  the  authority  of  the 
State,  during  their  minority,  without  any  voice  in  its 
affairs,  founded  exclusively  on  the  paternal  right  of  gov- 
ernment, but  also  on  their  own  consent.  ; '  For  it  may 
fairly  be  presumed  that  if  an  infant,  at  the  time  of  its 
birth,  had  the  use  of  reason,  and  saw  that  its  life  could 
not  be  preserved  without  the  care  of  the  parents,  to 
which  must  be  joined  a  power  over  itself,  it  would 
readily  consent  to  the  same,  and  desire  for  itself  a  com- 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


71 


fortable  education  from  them."  '"'  Men,  therefore,  (lur- 
ing their  minority,  are  not  deprived  of  their  natural 
rights,  but  are,  with  their  presumed  consent,  protected 
by  their  fathers  in  the  enjoyment  of  those  rights. 

The  fact  that  the  State  owes  its  origin  to  a  union  of 
families,  explains  and  justifies  also  the  relation  in  which 
women  stand  to  it.  For  they  were  subordinate  to  their 
husbands  before  the  State  or  political  community  existed; 
they  became  at  first  related  to  the  state  through  their 
husbands  ;  and  the  same  reasons  which  led  to  the  origin 
of  this  mediate  relation  serve  to  perpetuate  it.  They 
were  not  the  framers  of  the  body  politic,  and  are  not  its 
administrators ;  because  they  were  not,  and  are  not, 
heads  of  families,  but  occupy  in  the  family  a  subordinate 
position. 

But  what,  it  may  be  asked,  is  the  ground  and  origin 
of  the  family  relation  ?  By  what  right  does  the  hus- 
band exercise  authority  over  his  wife  ?  On  what  ground 
is  the  father's  authority  over  the  children  made  superior 
to  that  of  the  mother  ?  The  life  of  the  offspring  is 
equally  due  to  both  parents ;  and  Nature,  by  infusing 
into  the  bosom  of  the  mother  a  stronger  parental  attach- 
ment, and  annexing  to  her  relation  greater  pains  and 
sorrows,  seems,  on  a  superficial  view,  to  give  her  a 
higher  claim  to  their  obedience.  Why,  then,  is  not  the 
woman  invested  with  the  chief  power  over  her  children, 

*  Puffendorff's  Whole  Duty  of  Man,  book  ii.,  c.  iii. 


72 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


and  made,  instead  of  the  man.  the  medium  of  deriving 
to  them  the  protection  and  benefits  conferred  on  them  by 
the  State  ? 

The  proximate  solution  of  these  questions  is  found, 
no  doubt,  in  the  institution  of  marriage.  For  if  chil- 
dren are  born  out  of  wedlock,  either  actually,  as  some- 
times happens  in  civil  society,  or  hypothetically,  as  when 
we  fancy  men  living  in  a  state  of  nature  :  then  the  case 
would  be  otherwise  :  for  children  would  then  know  no 
higher  authority  than  that  of  the  mother,  and  would 
owe  subjection  to  her  in  preference  to  others. 

But  there  is  an  answer  to  the  question  back  of  this  : 
for  marriage  is  not  an  expedient  on  which  men  have 
stumbled  at  random,  nor  a  custom  fastened  on  them  by 
a  senseless  tradition  ;  but  it  is  the  way  indicated  by  Na- 
ture, and  prescribed  by  Revelation,  for  the  propagation 
of  the  human  species.  And  marriage  to  every  person 
who  well  considers  it  will  appear  to  be  not  precisely  a 
contract  between  equal  parties,  but  a  contract  which 
takes  its  origin  from  the  man,  and  in  which  mutual 
stipulations  are  exchanged,  of  comfort  and  protection 
on  the  one  side,  and  of  obedience  and  service  on  the 
other. 

It  is  impossible  for  a  sane  man  to  believe  that  the 
mutual  attraction  of  the  sexes  is  mainly  designed  in  the 
human  kind,  as  among  brutes,  for  the  continuance  of  the 
species.  No  more  revolting  spectacle  of  brutality  and 
misery  can  be  imagined,  than  would  be  presented  by  the 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY.  73 

human  kind,  if  it  were  propagated  by  casual  and  promis- 
cuous intercourse.  To  suppose  that  God  intended  any 
such  degradation  of  a  higher  species  of  His  creatures  to 
the  level  of  a  lower,  is  a  virtual  denial  of  His- goodness 
and  providence.  Nature  evidently  teaches  that  the  in- 
tercourse of  the  sexes  among  mankind  is  designed  for 
higher  ends  than  the  propagation  of  the  species,  and 
that  it  ought  to  be  regulated  with  a  view  to  the  care  and 
education  of  children,  and  the  orderly  government  of 
society.  By  infusing  in  the  man  a  desire  of  offspring, 
and  of  filial  affection  and  support,  she  points  him  to 
marriage  as  an  indispensable  means  of  fixing  and  ascer- 
taining the  paternal  relation,  which  could  not  otherwise 
be  known,  and  without  the  certainty  of  which,  no  man 
could  know  and  love  his  children,  and  make  their  welfare 
the  object  of  his  study  and  labor.  In  this  way  Nature 
indicates  the  man  as  the  proper  party  to  propose  and 
originate  marriage.  By  endowing  him  also  with  the 
greater  strength  of  body  and  mind  (for  though  par- 
ticular women  may,  and,  doubtless,  do  excel  particular 
men  in  both  these  respects,  yet  a  comparison  of  the 
sexes  on  the  whole  leaves  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the 
superiority  belongs  to  the  man),  she  unequivocally 
points  him  out  as  the  head  of  the  woman ;  and  in  so 
doing,  she  plainly  designates  the  father  as  superior  to 
the  mother,  in  the  rule  and  government  of  the  family. 
Thus,  if  marriage  requires  the  subordination  of  the  wife 
to  the  husband,  and  gives  the  father  a  higher  claim  than 

4 


74 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


the  mother  on  the  obedience  of  the  children,  it  is  no  less 
evident  that  marriage  itself,  which  involves  these  dis- 
tinctions, is  founded  in  nature ;  and  that  the  preeminence 
of  the  man  in  the  family  was  potentially  wrought  in 
human  nature,  before  it  was  actually  developed  in  the 
custom  of  nations,  and  prescribed  by  the  Revealed  Law. 
Man  was  created  for  society ;  society  can  not  exist  with- 
out government,  nor  government,  unless  there  be  one  to 
rule,  and  others  to  obey ;  and  He  who  created  man,  cre- 
ated in  him,  and  with  him,  the  rudiments  of  that  govern- 
ment which  is  necessary  for  the  simplest  form  of  society. 
In  the  extension  and  enlargement  of  society,  men  are 
thrown  more  upon  their  own  resources  for  the  expedients 
of  government ;  and  in  respect  to  these,  God  no  other- 
wise ordains  than  as  His  overruling  Providence  directs. 
Families  and  tribes  combine  themselves  into  the  nation 
under  a  single  head,  or  they  vest  the  supreme  power  in 
the  hands  of  the  few  or  the  many ;  and  hence  the  mon- 
archy, hereditary  or  elective,  the  oligarchy,  the  de- 
mocracy, etc.,  all  which  are  the  effects  of  human  con- 
trivance. But  government,  in  its  original  or  elementary 
form  (which  is  patriarchal),  is  the  more  immediate 
operation  of  the  Divine  wisdom,  and  is  stamped  on 
Nature  by  the  Divine  decree.  The  man,  from  the 
necessity  of  Nature,  and  in  obedience  to  her  voice,  be- 
comes the  founder  of  the  family,  and  he  chooses  the 
woman  to  cooperate  with  him  in  the  procreation  and 
education  of  his  children.    He  seeks,  and  receives  her 


GENERAL  DIVISIONS  OF  SOCIETY. 


75 


at  her  father's  hands ;  and  when  he  obtains  her,  he  be- 
comes to  her  what  her  father  was  before ;  her  protector 
and  guardian,  her  representative  in  society,  and  the  per- 
son through  whom  she  is  related  to  the  political  body. 
To  reverse  this  order,  is  to  upheave  the  foundation  of 
human  society;  and  to  approximate  this  reversal,  and, 
under  the  specious  pretext  of  bettering  woman's  con- 
dition, to  work  one  change  after  another  in  her  estab- 
lished relations  with  society,  and  to  confer  upon  her  one 
right  after  another  inconsistent  with  these  relations,  is, 
by  little  and  little,  to  disintegrate  society,  and  to  open 
the  way  for  the  ultimate  reign  of  confusion  and  brutality. 
"Women's  rights  are,  with  their  own  consent,  secured  to 
them  through  their  husbands  and  fathers. 


CHAPTER  V. 


RELATIONS    TO    THE  STATE. 


The  power  of  the  State,  like  all  human  power,  is 
limited  in  its  legitimate  exercise  by  the  law  of  Na- 
ture; and,  if  it  contravene  this  law  by  acts  that  are 
unjust  or  oppressive,  or  rash  and  capricious,  it  imperils 
its  own  existence.  Of  flagrant  violations  of  the  law  of 
Nature,  there  is  little  danger ;  an  attempt  to  decree  im- 
piety to  God,  the  contempt  of  parents,  the  perpetration 
of  fraud,  or  any  confessed  immorality,  would  be  rejected 
at  once  as  suicidal  and  monstrous.  It  is  only  in  the  last 
stage  of  decay  or  the  fullness  of  corruption  that  a  polit- 
ical body  can  rush  upon  such  manifest  ruin.  It  is  the 
hidden  danger  that  is  most  to  be  dreaded.  Rocks  that 
tower  in  the  air  the  ship  of  State  easily  avoids ;  but  woe 
betide  her  when  rocks  that  lie  just  beneath  the  surface 
of  the  waters  are  not  laid  down  in  the  pilot's  chart ! 
And  if  the  principles  on  which  we  have  insisted,  as  de- 
veloped in  the  formation  and  government  of  families,  are 
really  dictated  by  Nature  ;  if  they  were  in  force  antece- 
dently to  the  constitution  of  the  State,  and  underlie  its 
existence,  then  every  measure  of  legislation  which  tends 


KKTiA'LTONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


77 


to  obliterate  these  principles,  is  as  really,  though  less 
obviously,  hostile  to  the  true  genius  and  welfare  of  the 
State  as  a  statute  would  be  which  imposed  virtue  for 
vice,  or  vice  for  virtue.  The  State,  no  doubt,  has  the 
power  to  reduce  the  nonage  of  men  below  the  limit  which 
law  and  custom  have  prescribed,  and  to  confer  on  women 
the  civil  rights  and  franchises  which  have  been  hitherto 
appropriated  to  men ;  but  unless  the  powTer  of  the  State 
in  these  particulars  be  exercised  with  discretion  and  with 
due  regard  to  those  principles  which  are  the  foundation 
of  its  own  existence,  there  is  manifest  danger  that  it 
may  counteract  the  design  and  law  of  Nature,  and  thus 
retrograde  towards  anarchy  by  means,  perhaps,  of  those 
very  measures  which,  as  it  fondly  dreams,  are  to  ad- 
vance it  in  civilization  and  refinement. 

A  law  of  the  State  authorizing  children  to  act  in  their 
own  right  at  twelve  or  fourteen  years  of  age,  would  be 
manifestly  repugnant  to  Nature.  It  would  be  unjust, 
by  depriving  the  parent  of  the  right  which  Nature  gives 
him  to  the  child's  subjection  and  service,  and,  by  depriv- 
ing the  children  of  the  correlative  right  to  the  parent's 
protection  and  care.  It  would  be  inexpedient,  because  it 
would  confer  the  right  of  self-government  on  a  large 
class  of  persons  who  are  unfit  for  its  exercise,  and  whose 
reckless  improvidence  would  probably  involve  them  in 
ruin.  A  law  of  the  State  declaring  marriage  to  be  merely 
a  partnership  or  joint  contract  between  two  equal  par- 
ties, would  be  also  repugnant  to  Nature.    It  would  sever 


78 


RELATIONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


in  twain  what  Nature  intends  to  be  one ;  for  man  and 
woman,  separately  considered,  are  parts  of  one  whole,  ^ 
and  it  is  only  in  their  union  that  the  human  nature  is 
entire.  It  would  be  unjust,  by  depriving  the  man  of  the 
subjection  and  service  naturally  due  to  him  from  the 
woman,  and  by  depriving  the  woman  of  the  comfort  and 
protection  which  Nature  gives  her  the  right  to  claim  from 
the  man.  It  would  be  inexpedient,  because  it  would  sub- 
vert the  foundation  of  that  order  which  is  essential  to  the 
peace  and  happiness  of  human  society,  and  which  Nature 
has  laid  in  the  physical  and  mental  superiority  of  the 
man ;  and  because  by  throwing  uncertainty  over  the  pa- 
ternal relation,  it  wTould  render  men  incapable  of  mutual 
confidence  and  alliance,  of  great  and  enduring  works,  of 
steady  aim  and  purpose,  and  deprive  them  of  their 
strongest  motives  to  sober  thought  and  persevering 
labor. 

These  principles,  though  questioned  by  some,  are,  on 
the  whole,  pretty  firmly  rooted  in  the  human  mind.  It 
is  almost  universally  admitted  that  the  State  is  right  in 
holding  women  and  children  to  the  full  extent  to  which 
they  are  so  held,  in  a  mediate  relation  to  itself;  that 
the  laws  of  the  State  which  uphold  this  relation  are  de- 

*  "They  twain,"  said  God,  at  the  beginning,  ''shall  be  one  flesh." 
(Gen.  ii.  24,  comp.  Mat.  xix.  5.)  The  notion  of  Plato,  that  the  human- 
ity was  originally  one  mass,  and  became  male  and  female  by  separa- 
tion, was  probably  not  so  much  a  sally  of  fancy,  as  a  perversion  of 
tradition. 


RELATIONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


79 


clarative  of  the  law  of  Nature  as  exhibited  in  the  consti- 
tution of  mankind ;  and  that  laws  of  an  opposite  design 
and  tendency,  by  doing  violenca  to  Nature,  would  be  pro- 
ductive of  confusion  and  misery  in  human  society. 

But  there  is  another  class  of  persons  among  us,  hold- 
ing a  mediate  relation  to  the  State,  and  that  is  persons 
who  are  bound  to  service  for  life,  and  who  are  related  to 
the  State  only  through  those  persons  to  whom  they  are 
bound.  I  say  that  there  are  such  persons  among  us  ; 
for,  believing  that  the  States  of  the  American  confedera- 
racy  are  united  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name,  and  that  the 
Constitution  which  unites  them  is  something  more  than  a 
compact,  I  hope  to  be  pardoned  for  regarding  the  people 
of  the  Southern  States  as  in  some  real  sense  one  with 
ourselves,  and  for  looking  upon  their  prosperity  as  our 
prosperity,  and  their  institutions  as  our  institutions.  In 
this  view,  an  inquiry  into  the  moral  quality  and  effect  of 
a  law,  the  aim  of  which  would  be  to  separate  master  and 
slave,  and  to  bring  slaves  into  immediate  relation  with 
the  State,  is  so  far  from  being  a  barren  speculation  that 
it  is  one  in  the  solution  of  which  all  citizens  of  the 
United  States  may  be  expected  to  feel  a  deep  and  re- 
sponsible interest. 

But  here  we  are  in  clanger  of  being  embarrassed  by  a 
verbal  ambiguity.  Men  affix  the  same  idea  to  the  word 
child ;  but  they  affix,  as  already  stated,  various  and  dis- 
cordant ideas  to  the  word  slave.  And,  by  the  way,  it  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  a  word  which  is  used  with  so 


80 


RELATIONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


much  latitude,  and  serves  to  cover  such  a  variety  of  con- 
ditions, is  utterly  unfit  to  be  used  in  an  instrument  that 
requires  extraordinary  precision  of  language ;  a  fact  that 
seems  to  have  escaped  the  attention  of  those  who  deny 
that  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  recognizes 
slavery  in  any  form,  because  it  does  not  contain  the 
word.  Bound  to  service,  which  are  the  words  of  the 
Constitution,  expresses  one  form  of  slavery,  the  recog- 
nition of  which  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  rejection 
of  slavery  as  the  word  is  understood  by  Mr.  Locke, 
Adam  Smith,  and  other  eminent  authors.  But  of  this 
more  anon. 

If  slavery  be  a  forced  condition,  upheld  by  the  mere 
power  of  the  strong  over  the  weak  ;  if  it  be  an  arbitrary 
deprivation  of  natural  rights,  tyrannical  and  cruel,  un- 
just and  oppressive  :  then,  undoubtedly,  a  law  of  the 
State  that  should  abolish  it,  would  be  so  far  from  being 
repugnant  to  the  law  of  Nature,  that  it  would  be  im- 
peratively demanded  by  it.  For  who  doubts,  or  ever  did 
doubt,  that  the  law  of  Nature  forbids  injustice  ?  He 
who  contends  that  the  State  is  bound  to  guard  the 
natural  rights  of  man,  and  to  restrain,  by  the  wisest  and 
most  effective  measures  in  its  power,  tyranny  and  cruelty, 
oppression  and  injustice,  may  rely  upon  it  that  he  shall 
not  have  me  for  an  opponent.  If  slavery  be,  as  its 
adversaries  generally  suppose,  essentially  unjust,  it  cer- 
tainly needs  no  argument  to  show  that  justice  requires 
its  extinction,  and  it  would  only  remain  to  devise  those 


RELATIONS  TO  TEIE  STATE. 


81 


means  for  its  extinction  which  prudence  and  wisdom 
would  prescribe. 

But  what  I  hold  and  shall  endeavor  to  show  is,  that 
slavery,  considered  as  a  settled  institution  of  society,  is 
not  contrary  to  justice,  nor  an  infraction  of  the  natural 
rights  of  man.  On  the  contrary,  I  suppose  that  the 
relation  of  master  and  slave,  wherever  it  is  duly  estab- 
lished, is  consonant  to  the  law  of  Nature,  binds  both 
parties  to  reciprocal  duties,  and  clearly  conduces  to  their 
mutual  welfare,  and  conduces  also  (though  not  always 
in  the  greatest  degree),  to  the  prosperity  of  the  com- 
munity. 

Between  the  natural  relations  of  the  family,  however, 
and  those  which  are  merely  providential,  there  is  this 
broad  and  ineffaceable  difference,  viz.,  that  the  former  are 
not,  and  the  latter  are,  dependent  for  their  continuance 
on  the  will  of  the  parties.  While  parent  and  child  live, 
no  power  can  annul  the  relation  which  Nature  has  created 
between  them.  The  law  of  Nature,  if  Divine  revela- 
tion be  accepted  as  its  interpreter,  does  not  permit  either 
husband  or  wife,  separately  or  both  together,  under  any 
circumstances  or  for  whatever  cause,  to  dissolve  the  bond 
that  unites  them ;  the  parties  may  separate,  but  they 
can  not  free  themselves  from  the  bond  ;  only  the  State, 
in  virtue  of  the  limited  power  which  God  has  entrusted 
to  it  for  the  purpose,  can  release  one  of  the  parties  from 
its  obligations  to  the  other.  These  natural  relations, 
therefore,  may  be  said  to  be  ordinarily  indissoluble.  Not 

4* 


82 


RELATIONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


so,  however,  with  that  providential  relation  which  subsists 
between  master  and  slave,  for  the  bond  which  unites  them 
may  be  at  any  time  dissolved  by  their  mutual  consent. 

Hence  it  follows  that  the  State  has  a  much  larger 
power  over  master  and  servant  than  it  has  over  the  other 
and  more  sacred  relations  of  the  family.  It  may  annul 
the  relation,  with  the  express  consent  of  the  parties  ;  it 
may  presume  on  their  consent,  and  extinguish  the  rela- 
tion, when  its  extinction  is  manifestly  conducive  to  the 
welfare  of  the  parties  immediately  concerned,  and  de- 
manded by  high  grounds  of  public  expediency.  It 
appears  to  me,  however,  that  the  authority  of  the  State 
in  this  matter  is  by  no  means  absolute.  For  when  the 
relation  is  settled  and  the  parties  to  it  are,  on  the  whole 
and  in  a  reasonable  degree,  content  with  their  respective 
stations,  it  is  evident,  I  think,  that  a  law  of  the  State 
abolishing  it  would  do  violence  to  the  law  of  Nature, 
and  work  manifold  injustice  and  misery.  For  both  mas- 
ters and  slaves  have  rights  which  the  State  is  bound  to 
respect :  it  has  no  right  to  deprive  the  master  of  that 
debt  of  service  which  the  slave  owes,  without  making  him 
compensation  :  it  has  no  right  to  deprive  the  slave  of  his 
master's  care  and  protection,  without  putting  him  in  a 
position  in  which  he  may  earn  his  livelihood  in  health, 
and  have  a  reasonable  prospect  (equivalent  to  what  he 
had  before)  of  support  in  sickness,  decrepitude,  and  old 
age.  Thus  to  deprive  men  of  their  social  rights,  and  by 
a  mere  act  of  arbitrary  power  cancel  obligations  that  are 


RELATIONS  TO  THE  STATE. 


83 


founded  on  eternal  justice,  is  tyranny ;  and  to  do  the 
same  under  the  pretext  of  philanthropy  and  religion,  is 
tyranny  and  hypocrisy  combined.  And  if  anything  can 
add  to  the  iniquity  of  such  legislation,  it  is  the  fact  that 
the  rights  and  obligations  thus  trifled  with  are  in  order 
of  Nature  anterior  to,  and  more  sacred  than,  any  which 
the  State  can  create  ;  for  the  relation  of  master  and  ser- 
vant grows  up  in  order  of  Nature  next  to  that  of  parent 
and  child,  and  the  rights  and  obligations  involved  in  it 
were  of  force  before  men  formed  themselves  into  polit- 
ical organizations.  True,  the  State  is  supreme ;  it  can 
not  be  called  to  account  (though  the  men  who  govern  it 
may  be)  for  any  of  its  acts ;  but  as  every  violation  of 
justice  is  followed  by  a  righteous  retribution  of  Provi- 
dence, so  the  deprivation  of  slaves  of  the  care  and  pro- 
tection to  which  their  servitude  entitles  them,  has  been 
found  not  only  to  involve  them  in  ruin,  but  to  inundate 
society  with  the  evils  of  pauperism  and  vagrancy  and  an 
increase  of  crime. 

But  I  find  myself  unconsciously  anticipating  the 
course  of  my  argument,  and  assuming  that  the  relation 
of  master  and  slave  is  essentially  just,  and  does  no  vio- 
lence to  natural  rights.  Let  us  look,  then,  to  the  origin 
and  grounds  of  the  relation ;  when  we  shall  find,  if  I 
mistake  not,  that  the  position  of  the  slave,  though  hum- 
ble, is  not  dishonorable  ;  unless,  indeed,  lowliness  be 
accounted  synonymous  with  meanness,  and  all  servitude 
be  branded  as  vile  and  reproachful. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THEORY    OF  SLAVERY. 

"  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread  till 
thou  return  unto  the  ground,"  was  part  of  the  penalty 
which  man  incurred  for  his  failure  in  that  obedience  to 
the  law  of  GOD,  which  had  been  made  the  condition  of 
his  continuance  in  the  perfect  knowledge  and  love  of 
his  Maker.  It  was  not  labor  that  constituted  the  penalty 
of  his  transgression,  but  the  discomfitures  and  hardships 
that  were  thenceforward  to  be  the  accompaniments  of 
labor.  For,  before  the  fall,  u  the  Lord  God  took  the 
man,  and  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden,  to  dress  it 
and  to  keep  it a  plain  proof,  that  as  labor  is  one  of 
the  ends  for  which  man's  body  was  created,  so  was  it 
also  the  condition  on  which  he  was  to  enjoy  the  products 
of  the  earth.  Even  in  his  state  of  innocence  he  was  to 
till  the  ground ;  and  if  men  had  continued  innocent, 
there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that,  in  process  of  time, 
the  products  of  one  country  would  have  been  exchanged 
for  another,  and  that  the  auxiliary  arts  and  sciences 
would  have  flourished  in  connection  with  agriculture  and 
commerce.    Labor  which,  under  the  blight  of  the  fall, 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


85 


is  irksome  and  oppressive,  would  have  been,  in  a  state  of 
innocence,  a  delightful  occupation  ;  and  the  various  con- 
nections and  relations  to  which  its  manifold  divisions 
and  subdivisions  naturally  lead,  would  probably  have 
been  much  the  same  as  at  present,  only  without  that 
loathing  and  disgust,  which  grow  out  of  a  disordered 
body,  and  those  turbulent  outbreaks  of  oppression  and 
cruelty,  hatred  and  revenge,  which  are  the  bitter  fruits 
of  a  disordered  mind.  The  diversity  of  mens  genius 
and  talents,  their  various  aptitude  for  all  innocent  pur- 
suits and  departments  of  industry,  would  have  been  as 
great  as  at  present ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that 
integrity  would  have  impaired  their  faculties,  or  re- 
strained their  development.  In  fact,  we  have  only  to 
see  men  as  they  are,  and  then,  by  an  effort  of  imagina- 
tion, to  take  away  sin  (and  death,  which  is  that  method 
of  departure  from  this  world,  which  sin  has  introduced), 
in  order  to  see  what  they  wrould  have  been  had  they  pre- 
served their  innocence. 

But  what  (methinks,  I  hear  the  reader  exclaim),  do 
you  think  there  could  have  been  bondage  in  Paradise  ? 
Pray,  why  not  ?  There  are  bonds  of  love  and  reverence, 
as  well  as  bonds  of  fear  and  hatred  ;  and  as  it  is  the  sub- 
stitution of  the  love  of  self  for  the  love  of  God  and  man, 
which  makes  bondage*  hateful,  so  we  have  only  to  drive 
out  self-love,  and  to  bring  back  the  love  of  God  and 
man  in  its  place,  in  order  to  render  bondage  lovely  and 
beautiful.    In  truth,  dear  reader,  there  has  been  no  real 


86 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


bondage  on  this  earth,  unless  it  existed  in  Paradise 
that  wretched  state,  which  the  world  calls  bondage,  being 
no  more  than  a  miserable  and  abortive  experiment  to 
effect,  by  power,  a  union,  which  is  then  only  perfect 
when  created  by  love. 

I  see  no  reason,  then,  why  the  relation  of  master  and 
servant  should  not  have  existed  in  a  state  of  innocence 
as  well  as  that  of  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child. 
Certainly,  the  Christian  religion,  which  assumes  the  fall 
of  man  as  a  fact,  and  aims  to  restore  him  to  the  state 
from  which  he  has  fallen,  does  not  abrogate  the  relation 
of  master  and  servant,  but  seeks  to  purge  it  of  selfish- 
ness, and  to  reclaim  it,  as  far  as  human  infirmity  allows, 
to  a  state  of  ideal  perfection. 

The  state  of  servitude,  as  God  designed  it,  and  as  it 
wTould  have  existed  in  Nature,  had  not  Nature  been 
vitiated  by  sin,  and  as  it  may  still  exist  on  earth,  in 
proportion  as  men  are  redeemed  from  the  curse  by  the 
grace  of  Christ,  and  realize  the  pattern  which  He  pre- 
scribes, is  eloquently  described  in  one  of  the  noblest 
chapters  of  that  remarkable  work  of  St.  Augustine, 
"  The  City  of  God."  The  reader  will  find  the  passage 
suggestive  of  wholesome  thoughts ;  and  the  old  English 
version,  made  from  that  of  Ludovicus  Vives,  is  so  redo- 
lent of  antiquity,  that  I  shall  use  it  in  preference  to  any 
modern  and  more  polished  translation.  It  is  impossible 
to  read  it,  and  not  feel  that  we  are  holding  communion 
with  the  good  father  himself : 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


87 


l(  Now  God,  our  good  Master,  teaching  us  in  the  two 
chiefest  precepts  the  love  of  Him  and  the  love  of  our 
neighbor,  to  love  three  things,  God,  our  neighbor,  and 
ourselves,  and  seeing  he  that  loveth  God,  offendeth  not 
in  loving  himself;  it  followeth  that  he  ought  to  counsel 
his  neighbor  to  love  God ;  and  to  provide  for  him  in  the 
love  of  God  ;  since  he  is  commanded  to  love  him  as  his 
own  self.  So  must  he  do  for  his  wife,  children,  family, 
and  all  men  besides  :  and  wish  likewise  that  his  neighbor 
would  do  as  much  for  him  in  his  need  :  thus  shall  he  be 
settled  in  peace  and  orderly  concord  with  all  the  world. 
The  order  whereof  is,  first,  to  do  no  man  hurt,  and,  sec- 
ondly, to  help  all  that  he  can.  So  that  his  own  have  the 
first  place  in  his  care ;  and  those,  his  place  and  order  in 
human  society  affordeth  him  more  conveniency  to  benefit. 
Whereupon  St.  Paul  saith,  4  He  that  provideth  not  for 
his  own,  and,  namely,  for  them  that  be  of  his  household, 
denieth  the  faith  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel. '  For  this 
is  the  foundation  of  domestical  peace,  which  is  an  or- 
derly rule,  and  subjection  on  the  part  of  the  family, 
wherein  the  provisors  are  the  commanders,  as  the  hus- 
band over  his  wife,  parents  over  their  children,  and  mas- 
ters over  their  servants  :  and  they  that  are  provided  for, 
obey,  as  the  wives  do  their  husbands,  children  their  pa- 
rents, and  servants  their  masters.  But  in  the  family  of 
the  faithful  man,  the  heavenly  pilgrim,  there  the  com- 
manders are,  indeed,  the  servants  of  those  they  seem  to 
command  ;  ruling  not  in  ambition,  but  being  bound  by 


88 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


careful  duty ;  not  in  proud  sovereignty,  but  in  nourish- 
ing pity.7' 

Beautiful  ideal  of  human  society  when  cemented  by 
the  love  of  God.  t;  whose  service,"  in  whatever  relation 
of  life;  "  is  perfect  freedom.77  That  servitude  should  be 
upheld  by  force,  that  the  lords  and  tyrants  of  the  people 
should  affect  to  be  their  benefactors^  is  at  once  the  off- 
spring and  penalty  of  the  corruption  of  human  society. 
"  Ye  shall  not  be  so,77  said  the  divine  Restorer  ;  "  but 
he  that  is  greatest  among  you  let  him  be  as  the  younger ; 
and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth  serve ;  *  *  I  am 
among  you  as  he  that  doth  serve  !7J  To  reclaim  man 
to  his  original  state,  not  to  increase  the  disintegration  of 
society,  by  leavening  it  with  the  spirit  of  pride  and  re- 
bellion, but  to  bind  together  husband  and  wife,  parents 
and  children,  masters  and  servants,  rulers  and  subjects, 
in  the  love  of  God,  and  in  mutual  and  helpful  depend- 
ence on  one  another  for  God's  sake;  is  the  design  of 
"The  City  of  God,77  the  Church  of  the  Redeemed; 
whose  origin,  history,  and  polity  St.  Augustine  describes 
in  the  work  I  am  quoting.  The  above  extract  was  the 
conclusion  of  the  chapter  entitled,  u  Of  the  law  of 
heaven  and  earth,  which  swayeth  human  society  by 
counsel,  and  unto  which  counsel  human  society  obey- 
eth.77  The  next  extract  is  the  whole  of  the  succeeding 
chapter,  title  and  all : 

"Nature's  freedom  and  bondage,  caused  by  sin,  in 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


89 


which  man  is  a  slave  to  his  own  affects  (affections) 
though  he  be  not  bondman  to  any  one  besides. 

"  Thus  bath  Nature's  order  prescribed,  and  man  by 
God  was  thus  created.  c  Let  them  rule/  saith  He,  L  over 
the  fishes  of  the  sea 'and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  over 
everything  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth/  He  made  him 
reasonable,  and  lord  only  over  the  unreasonable  ;  not 
over  man,  but  over  beasts.  Whereupon  the  first  holy 
men  were  rather  shepherds  than  kings,  God  showing 
herein  what  both  the  order  of  creation  desired  and  what 
the  merit  of  sin  exacted.  For  justly  was  the  burden  of 
servitude  laid  upon  the  back  of  transgression.  And, 
therefore,  in  all  the  scriptures  we  never  read  servant 
until  such  time  as  that  just  man  Noah  laid  it  as  a  curse 
upon  his  offending  son.  So  that  it  w^as  guilt  and  not 
Nature  that  gave  original  unto  that  name.  The  Latin 
word  servns  had  the  first  derivation  from  hence ;  that 
those  that  were  taken  in  the  wars,  being  in  the  hands  of 
the  conquerors  to  massacre  or  to  preserve,  if  they  saved 
them,  then  they  were  called  servi,  of  servo,  to  serve. 
Nor  was  this  effected  beyond  the  desert  of  sin.  For  in 
the  justest  war,  the  sin  upon  one  side  causeth  it.  and  if 
the  victory  fall  to  the  wicked  (as  sometimes  it  may)  it  is 
God's  decree  to  humble  the  conquered,  either  reforming 
their  sins  herein  or  punishing  them.  Witness  that  holy 
man  of  God,  Daniel,  who,  being  in  captivity,  confessed 
unto  his  Creator  that  his  sins  and  the  sins  of  the  people 
were  the  real  causes  of  that  captivity. 


90 


THEORY  OE  SLAVERY. 


"  Sin ?  therefore,  is  the  mother  of  servitude  and  first 
cause  of  man's  subjection  to  man,  which,  notwithstand- 
ing, cometh  not  to  pass  but  by  the  direction  of  the 
Highest,  in  whom  is  no  injustice,  and  who  alone  knoweth 
best  how  to  proportionate  His  punishment  unto  man's 
offences ;  and  He  himself  saith,  1  Whosoever  commit- 
teth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin;'  and  therefore  many  relig- 
ious Christians  are  servants  unto  wicked  masters,  yet 
not  unto  freemen,^  for  that  which  a  man  is  addicted 
unto,  the  same  is  he  a  slave  unto.  And  it  is  a  happier 
servitude  to  serve  man  than  lust :  for  lust  (to  omit  all 
the  other  affects)  practiseth  extreme  tyranny  upon  the 
hearts  of  those  that  serve  it,  be  it  lust  after  sovereignty 
or  fleshly  lust.  But  in  the  peaceful  orders  of  States, 
wherein  one  man  is  under  another,  as  humility  doth 
benefit  the  servant,  so  doth  pride  endamage  the  superior. 
But  take  a  man  as  God  created  him  at  first,  and  so  he  is 
neither  slave  to  man  nor  to  sin.  But  penal  servitude 
had  the  institution  from  that  law  which  coimnandetli  the 
conservation  and  forbiddeth  the  disturbance  of  Nature's 
order  ;  for  if  that  law  had  not  been  transgressed,  penal 
servitude  had  never  been  enjoined. 

"  Therefore  the  apostle  warneth  servants  to  obey  their 
masters  and  to  serve  them  with  cheerfulness  and  good- 
will ;  to  the  end,  that  if  they  can  not  be  made  free  by 
their  masters,  they  (may)  make  their  servitude  a  free- 

*  "Their  masters  being  slaves  to  their  own  passions,  which  are 
worse  masters  than  men  can  be." — L.  Vives. 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY.  91 

dom  to  themselves  by  serving  them,  not  in  deceitful  fear 
but  in  faithful  love,  until  iniquity  be  overpassed  and  all 
man's  power  and  principality  disannulled,  and  God  only 
be  all  in  all."^ 

In  this  admirable  passage  the  theory  of  servitude  is 
luminously  developed.  The  relation  of  master  and  ser- 
vant grows  out  of  the  wants  of  man,  and  is  part  of  Na- 
ture's order;  it  is  productive  of  no  hardship,  and  is 
accompanied  with  no  disgrace,  but  is  alike  beneficial  and 
honorable.  But  the  abuse  of  man's  free  will,  which  has 
disturbed  the  order  of  Nature,  and  brought  degradation 
and  misery  in  various  degrees,  on  all  the  natural  and 
instituted  relations  of  human  society,  has  blighted  the 
relation  of  master  and  servant,  rendering  masters  impe- 
rious and  servants  turbulent,  and  has  thus  caused  the 
relation  to  be  upheld  by  force,  even  in  cases  in  which  it 
ought  to  be  upheld  by  charity.  Christianity,  which^ 
proceeds  from  the  Author  of  Nature,  can  not  violate  the 
order  of  Nature.  She  takes  Nature  as  her  foundation, 
and  builds  on  it  a  new  superstructure,  or  repairs  the 
ruins  of  the  old.  She  does  not  destroy  the  man,  but 
renews  him ;  she  does  not  annihilate  the  powers  and  fac- 
ulties of  the  human  mind,  but  gives  them  a  new  bent 
and  superinduces  on  them  the  new  habits  of  faith  and 
charity.  She  does  not  abolish  the  natural  relations  of 
mankind,  but  breathes  into  them  a  new  spirit — the 

*  St.  Augustine's  "  City  of  God,"  with  the  learned  comments  of  Jo. 
Lod.  Vives.    Englished  by  J.  A.    A.  D.  1610.    Bk.  xix.,  c.  15. 


92 


THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


love  of  God  and  man — and  aims,  by  the  energy  of  this 
Holy  Spirit,  to  restore  them,  as  far  as  human  infirm- 
ity allows,  to  what  Christians,  instructed  in  the  oracles 
of  God,  believe  to  be  their  original,  and  what  all  others 
may  perceive  to  be  their  ideal,  perfection.  And  it  is  by 
the  consistent  application  of  the  same  principle— the 
reformation  and  conservation  of  human  society,  and  not 
its  destruction  and  disintegration,  ■  that  Christianity  is 
led,  not  to  abrogate  the  relation  of  master  and  servant, 
but  to  restore  it  to  its  primitive  innocence  by  an  infusion 
of  charity  for  the  performance  of  its  reciprocal  duties, 
and  of  patience  for  the  endurance  of  those  evils  which 
are  at  first  the  fruits,  and  are  then  made  by  God's  just 
ordinance,  the  punishment  of  man's  disturbance  of  the 
order  of  Nature. 

All  this,  I  confess,  proceeds  on  the  assumption  that 
slavery,  or  servitude  for  life,  does  no  violence  to  Nature, 
but  is  good  and  agreeable  to  Nature.  For  it  is  only 
that  which  is  good  that  can  be  abused  by  man's  perver- 
sity, and  reformed  from  abuse  by  his  renovation ;  since 
evil  can  neither  be  abused  nor  reformed,  but  is  only  fit 
to  be  restrained  and  abolished.  This,  then,  is  the  next 
point  Ave  are  to  consider,  and  it  will  lead  us  to  investi- 
gate the  origin  and  essence  of  slavery,  and  the  grounds 
on  which  it  rests.  Whence  came  it  ?  what  is  it  ?  and 
what  are  the  reasons  for  its  continuance  ?  The  investi- 
gation of  these  matters  will  form  the  subject  of  the  fol- 
lowing chapter. 


CHAPTER    VI I . 


ORIGIN    AND    NATURE    OF  SLAVERY. 

The  father,  not  less  by  the  voice  of  Nature,  than  by 
the  appointment  of  God,  is  the  head  of  his  family.  He 
was  born,  not  for  himself  alone,  but  for  his  wife,  his 
children,  and  all  others  whom  he  loves  and  is  bound  to 
protect.  For  the  purpose  of  discharging  these  functions, 
he  calls  in  the  aid,  and  avails  himself  of  the  strength, 
the  speed,  or  any  other  perfection  of  those  animals  that 
Nature  has  strewed  around  him,  and  intended  for  his 
assistance.  In  process  of  time  arts  are  cultivated,  and 
property  is  more  unequably  distributed.  The  wants  of 
the  rich  are  multiplied,  and  the  poor  are  reduced  to  the 
necessity  of  bartering  their  labor  for  their  sustenance. 
Hence  the  relation  of  master  and  servant ;  the  one  en- 
gaging to  administer  food  and  raiment,  shelter  and  pro- 
tection, and  the  other  to  undertake  all  proper  labors  and 
reasonable  employments,  as  their  own  functions  and 
abilities,  and  their  master's  wants  and  services  should 
require.^ 

The  relation,  at  first  probably  temporary,  and  as  occa- 
*  See  Dr.  John  Taylor's  Elements  of  Qivil  Law,  p.  410. 


94  ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 

sion  required,  soon  became  permanent.  "In  the  early 
ages  of  the  world,"  says  Puffendorff,  "when  men  began 
to  quit  their  primitive  plainness  and  simplicity,  to  culti- 
vate the  method  of  living,  and  to  enlarge  their  fortunes 
and  possessions,  it  is  very  likely  the  wiser  and  richer 
sort  invited  those  of  less  parts  and  less  wealth  to  assist 
them  in  their  business,  for  hire.  Afterwards,  when  both 
parties  found  their  benefit  in  this  way  of  proceeding,  the 
meaner  tribe  were  by  degrees  persuaded  to  join  them- 
selves perpetual  members  to  the  families  of  the  greater  ; 
under  these  conditions,  that  the  latter  should  engage  to 
supply  food  and  all  conveniences  of  living,  and  the 
former  should  bind  themselves  to  undertake  all  proper 
labors  and  employments  as  their  masters  should  direct. 
So  that  the  first  rise  of  servitude  is  owing  to  the  volun- 
tary consent  of  the  poorer  and  more  helpless  persons, 
and  is  founded  on  that  common  form  of  contract  Do  ut 
facias;  I  promise  to  give  you  constant  sustenance, 
upon  condition  that  you  assist  me  with  your  constant 
work."* 

Besides  this  honest  and  natural  desire  of  obtaining  a 
livelihood,  the  passions  and  vices  of  men,  and  sometimes 
higher  and  more  generous  motives,  have  led  them  volun- 
tarily to  reduce  themselves  to  servitude.  The  Hebrews 
(and  I  suppose  Moses  understood  human  rights)  not  only 
made  slaves  of  foreign  nations  by  conquest,  but  permitted 
slavery  among  themselves,  and  over  their  own  people,  for 

*  Law  of  Nature  and  Nations,  Bk.  VI.,  ch.  iii.,  sec.  4. 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


95 


the  relief  of  extreme  poverty,  and  for  the  payment  of 
debts,  as  well  as  for  the  punishment  of  crime.  The 
statement  of  Tacitus  in  regard  to  the  Germans,  is 
well  known.  In  their  passion  for  gambling,  they  used, 
when  they  had  lost  all  else,  to  stake  their  liberty  on  the 
cast  of  a  die ;  and  he  that  lost  voluntarily  became  a  slave 
to  the  winner.  An  ancient  Greek  author,  quoted  by 
Grotius,  speaks  of  thousands  who  are  free,  and  who  yet 
oblige  themselves  by  contract  to  become  slaves.  So 
strongly,  indeed,  has  this  inclination  at  times  prevailed 
among  men,  that  in  several  countries  it  has  been  found 
necessary  to  restrain  it  by  law.  The  practice  was  for- 
bidden by  the  Egyptians,  and  consequently  must  have 
prevailed  among  them  before  it  was  forbidden.  It  was 
permitted  in  Athens,  until  the  time  of  Solon;  one  of 
whose  laws,  as  we  learn  from  Plutarch,  enacted  o^iaat 
juifj  davh&odai,  that  men  should  not  borrow  money  on 
their  bodies.  "  Among  the  Romans,  it  was  a  known 
trick  with  sharpers,  to  suffer  themselves  to  be  sold  for 
the  sake  of  going  shares  in  the  price :  and  for  their  pun- 
ishment, they  were  condemned  to  real  servitude."  The 
practice  was  forbidden  by  the  Petilian  law.^  In  view 
of  these  facts,  it  may  be  questioned  whether  slavery  be 
indeed  (as  is  commonly  supposed)  the  creature  of  local 
laio,  or  whether  men  have  not  the  right  universally  to 

*  See  Grotius,  Bk.  II.,  ch.  xxv.  sec.  27,  and  the  notes ;  and  Puff. 
Bk.  VI,  ch.  iii,  sec.  7. 


96 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


dispose  of  themselves  and  their  services  for  life,  except 
so  far  as  they  are  restrained  from  doing  so  by  the  law  of 
the  place  or  country  in  which  they  reside. 

However  this  be,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  servi- 
tude had  its  origin  exclusively  in  war.  In  the  judgment 
of  the  eminent  authors  whom  we  have  quoted,  it  was 
originally  founded  on  contract ;  and  the  relation  of  mas- 
ter and  servant  is  probably  more  ancient  than  any  other 
relation  (that  of  husband  and  wife  excepted)  which  is 
founded  on  contract.  It  dates  back  to  a  period  anterior 
to  the  records  of  profane  history,  and  may  be  shown  to 
have  existed  in  the  family,  before  families  were  grouped 
into  nations,  and  to  have  involved  rights  which  were  not 
forfeited,  but  were  recognized  and  respected  under  the 
more  extended  governments  to  which,  in  course  of  time, 
families  were  subjected. 

The  lawyers,  indeed,  would  have  us  believe  that  ser- 
vants owe  their  name,  as  well  as  their  origin,  to  the  for- 
tunes of  war:  "  Servoriim  appellatio  ex  eo  fluxit"  say 
the  digests,  u  quod  imperatores  nostri  captivos  veil- 
dere,  ac  per  hoc  servare,  nec  occidere  solent but  the 
lawyers  are  no  authority  in  a  question  of  etymology ; 
not  to  add  that  servants  were  held  as  property  before 
Roman  generals  made  captives,  or  Rome  herself  had  a 
being.  The  grammarians  speak  more  to  the  point  when 
they  derive  servus  from  the  obsolete  tgog  a  servant  the 
aspirate  being  expressed  by  the  letter  s  and  the  digamma 
of  the  JEolics  by  the  letter  v.  which  gives  us  servos  from 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


97 


£()oc  just  as  sylva  is  derived  from  v/wy,  not  to  mention 
many  other  instances  of  the  same  kind.  No  doubt  the 
condition  of  servitude  was  modified  by  war ;  of  that  pres- 
ently ;  but  first  having  traced  it  to  its  origin,  let  us 
observe  its  agreement  with  justice  and  equity. 

Grotius  distinguishes  servitude  into  perfect  and  im- 
perfect, meaning  by  the  latter  that  kind  of  servitude 
which  is  for  a  term  of  time,  or  on  certain  conditions,  the 
result  of  agreement  or  of  positive  law.  Of  the  former 
he  says  : 

"  Perfect  servitude  is  that  which  obliges  a  man  to 
work  all  his  life  long  for  diet  and  other  common  neces- 
saries, which,  if  it  be  concluded  on  natural  terms,  has 
nothing  too  hard  and  severe  in  it,  for  the  perpetual  obli- 
gation to  service  on  the  one  hand  is  compensated  by  the 
perpetual  certainty  of  being  provided  for  on  the  other. 
They  who  let  themselves  out  for  daily  labor  often  have 
not  this  assurance  of  being  provided  for,  whence  that 
which  Eubulus  has  mentioned  frequently  happens 

E&EAFt  d'apev  /lllgOov,  etc. 

{  He  was  willing  to  stay  with  them  for  his  victuals  with- 
out wages.'    The  same  comedian,  in  another  place, 

TIoAXol  (bvyovrcc,  etc. 

1  Many  who  have  run  away  from  their  masters,  when 

free  again  seek  the  same  crib  at  which  they  used  to  feed.' 

Thus  Posidonius,  the  Stoic,  was  wront  to  note  in  history 

5 


98 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


that  there  were  formerly  many  who,  conscious  of  their 
own  weakness,  gave  themselves,  of  their  own  accord,  to 
be  slaves  to  others  (onog  nap  etteivcjv,  etc.),  4  that  they 
might  receive  from  them  the  care  and  provision  which 
they  needtd,  and  do  them  in  return  all  the  service 
they  were  able.'  Others  add  an  instance  of  this  in  the 
Mariandyni,  who,  for  the  same  reason,  made  themselves 
slaves  to  the  Heracleotae.7'^ 

Hence  it  appears  that  slavery  may  be,  and  in  fact,  to 
a  great  extent,  has  been  founded  on  the  consent  of  the 
slaves ;  and  a  right  to  the  service  of  persons  founded  on 
their  own  consent,  is  evidently  agreeable  to  the  law  of 
Nature,  being  confirmed  by  that  fundamental  and  im- 
mutable principle  which  requires  men  to  be  faithful  to 
their  engagements.  They  who  maintain  that  government 
is  founded  on  the  consent  of  the  people,  maintain  also 
that  this  consent  is  presumed  when  the  contrary  is  not 
manifest,  and  that  it  is  held  to  be  tacit  and  implied  in 
many  cases  in  which  it  is  not  expressed ;  and  is  not  to  be 
set  aside  and  overruled  by  individuals  because  of  their 
particular  complaints  and  grievances.  In  countries, 
therefore,  where  slavery  exists,  if  the  slaves  are  content 
with  their  lot  and  do  not  evidence  the  contrary  by  any 
overt  act,  it  is  not  easy  to  see,  on  these  principles,  why 
their  consent  should  not  be  presumed  and  regarded  as 
the  foundation  of  the  masters'  right,  or  why  a  right 
founded  on  tacit  and  general  consent  and  exercised  for 

*  Lib.  ii.,  c,  v.,  sect.  27. 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


99 


the  good  of  the  whole,  should  fail  or  be  voided  because 
it  happens  to  operate  severely  in  particular  cases.  The 
fact  that  thousands  of  persons,  and  even  whole  tribes, 
have,  of  their  own  accord,  subjected  themselves  to  mas- 
ters for  the  certainty  of  protection  and  maintenance,  and 
surrendered  their  liberty  for  what  they  considered  an 
equivalent  in  return,  shows  very  plainly  that  all  servi- 
tude is  not  involuntary  and  contrary  to  natural  rights. 

There  are  other  ways  in  which  slavery  may  originate 
without  violation  of  justice.  For,  as  men  have  a  natural 
right  to  sell  themselves,  when  they  think  it  for  their 
benefit  to  do  so  (i.  e.,  to  make  over  to  another  their  own 
labors  for  life,  and  the  disposal  of  their  persons,  so  far  as 
necessary  to  secure  their  labors)  ;  and,  as  this  practice 
has  prevailed  to  a  great  extent,  where  it  has  not  been 
prohibited  by  municipal  law,  so  have  fathers  a  natural 
right,  in  cases  of  necessity,  to  sell  their  own  children. 
These  are  the  words  of  Grotius,  who  has  never  been  ac- 
cused of  being  unfriendly  to  liberty.  "  Although,"  he 
says,  "  the  paternal  authority  is  so  fixed  and  inherent  in 
the  father's  person  and  character,  that  it  can  never  be 
taken  from  him,  and  transferred  to  another ;  yet  may  a 
father  naturally,  and  where  the  civil  law  does  not  ob- 
struct it,  paivn  his  child,  and  sell  him  too,  if  there  be  a 
necessity  for  it,  and  no  other  way  of  maintaining  him."  * 

*  And,  in  a  note,  he  subjoins  from  Jornandes,  in  his  Gothic  history  : 
"  This  is  even  what  parents  do  here,  who,  consulting  the  preservation 
of  their  children,  had  much  rather  they  should  lose  their  freedom  than 


100  ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


"  And  this  right,"  he  continues,  "  other  nations  seem  to 
have  borrowed  from  that  Theban  law,  mentioned  by  iElian 
in  his  second  book,  as  the  Thebans  from  the  Phoenicians, 
and  they,  in  turn,  from  the  Hebrews  ;  and  Apollonius 
tells  us,  in  his  epistle  to  Domitian,  that  this  very  law 
obtained  also  among  the  Phrygians."  Thus  far  Grotius  ; 
and  the  reason  which  he  gives  for  his  opinion,  is  worthy 
of  note  :  "  Nature  itself  is  supposed  to  grant  a  right  to 
every  thing,  without  wrhich  that  which  she  commands 
can  not  be  accomplished." 

But,  although  slavery  was  originally  founded  in  con- 
tract, yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  number  of 
slaves  has  been  greatly  enlarged,  and  their  condition  ag- 
gravated, by  the  fortunes  of  war.  For,  on  the  principles 
on  which  wars  were  anciently,  and  are  still,  in  some 
countries,  conducted,  the  lives  of  the  conquered  are  at 
the  mercy  of  the  conqueror.  The  captive  was  believed, 
by  the  right  of  war,  to  have  forfeited  his  life,  and  it  was 
accounted  an  act  of  clemency  to  spare  his  life,  on  con- 
dition that  it  should  be  spent  in  the  service  of  the  captor. 
Hence  mancipia  (manu  capti,  taken  by  hand,  or  taken 
in  battle)  became  a  common  appellation  of  slaves,  and 
emancipation  came  to  mean  delivery  from  servitude. 
But  the  clemency,  it  should  be  observed,  was  extended 

their  lives ;  and,  therefore,  out  of  mere  kindness,  sell  them  for  a  main- 
tenance, rather  than  keep  them  to  starve  and  perish  at  home."  To 
which  he  adds,  "I  find  there  has  been  the  same  custom  among  the 
people  of  Mexico."    (See  1,  ii.,  c.  5,  sect.  5.) 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY.  101 


by  the  one  party,  and  accepted  by  the  other,  on  a  given 
condition  ;  perpetual  service  being  promised  by  the 
one,  in  return  for  his  life  being  spared  by  the  other.  So 
that  in  this  case,  also,  if  we  consider  it  carefully,  we  find 
that  slavery  was  in  reality  founded  on  contract,  and  that 
the  fortune  of  war  merely  furnished  the  occasion  of  the 
contract.  If  it  be  said,  that  the  contract  was  morally 
void,  because  it  was  made  on  an  erroneous  principle,  and 
under  compulsion,  I  answer,  that  I  am  not  concerned  to 
defend  it;  for  I  by  no  means  justify  slavery  on  the 
ground  of  conquest.  Only  I  would  have  it  observed, 
how  naturally  the  relation  of  the  captor  and  the  cap- 
tured may  be  changed  even  during  their  lives  (of  the 
relations  of  their  children  I  shall  speak  by-and-by),  and 
the  contract,  which  was  at  first  the  result  of  necessity, 
and  extorted  by  fear,  come,  after  a  while,  to  be  the  off- 
spring of  choice,  and  cemented  by  good- will  For, 
when  the  contract  was  formed,  both  parties  would  find 
their  mutual  advantage  in  keeping  it  in  good  faith. 
For  if  the  slave  adhered  to  his  natural  right  of  liberty, 
and,  in  consequence  of  it,  should  seek  opportunity  to 
escape  from  service,  and  take  the  life  of  his  master ;  in 
a  word,  if  he  persisted  in  regarding  his  master  as  his 
enemy,  and  acting  towards  him  by  the  laws  of  war,  why, 
then  the  master  would  assert  his  right  by  the  same  laws, 
to  imprison  the  slave,  to  force  him  to  hard  labor,  and 
even  to  take  his  life.  It  would,  therefore,  be  for  the 
interest  of  both  parties  to  divest  themselves  of  the 


102 


ORIGIN  AND  NATURE  OF  SLAVERY. 


animus  of  war,  to  lay  aside  their  hostility,  and  to  bind 
themselves,  in  good  faith  and  by  moral  ties,  to  observe 
the  compact  by  which  master  and  slave  are  bound  to- 
gether in  peaceable  and  friendly  society ;  the  same  com- 
pact, in  fact,  which  is  the  original  and  natural  foundation 
of  the  relation.  And,  however  some  may  deride,  I  can 
not  but  regard  it  as  an  illustration  of  the  beneficence  of 
God's  providence  (ever  educing  good  out  of  evil),  and 
of  His  wise  adaptation  of  mankind  to  their  condition  in 
this  world,  that  even  that  servitude,  which,  at  first,  springs 
from  war,  and  is  a  violence  to  Nature,  is  suffered  thus 
easily  and  naturally  to  pass  into  servitude  in  its  peaceful 
and  normal  state  ;  and  men  silently  turned  from  enemies 
and  destroyers  into  mutual  helpers  and  friends. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


THE    NATURAL   JUSTICE   OF   SLAVERY  INFERRED  FROM 
THE  CONSENT  OF  MANKIND  I    THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 

In  referring  to  the  customs  of  former  ages,  I  have  no 
intention  to  hold  them  up  as  models  for  the  imitation  of 
the  nineteenth  century.  We  of  this  age  possess,  no 
doubt,  many  and  great  advantages  over  those  that  have 
preceded  us ;  nor  do  I  at  all  suppose  that  the  antiquity 
of  slavery  is  any  proof  of  its  excellence,  or  that  the  pre- 
cedents of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome  ought  to  bias  a 
Christian  people  in  its  favor.  Indeed,  if  the  question 
were  as  to  the  eligibility  of  free  or  slave  institutions, 
under  circumstances  equally  favorable  to  both,  and  in- 
volving no  moral  obligation  in  behalf  of  either,  I  should 
feel  no  hesitation  in  avowing  my  preference  for  freedom, 
and  my  aversion  to  slavery.  But  I  beg  to  remind  the 
reader,  again  and  again,  that  this  is  not  the  question 
which  I  have  undertaken  to  discuss.  It  is  not  the  inex- 
ywdiency,  but  the  pretended  injustice  of  slavery,  the 
deeply  rooted,  and  wide-spread  conviction  among  us,  that 
slavery  is  upheld  merely  by  local  law  in  opposition  to 
the  law  of  Nature,  or  the  dictates  of  universal  justice ; 


104 


THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


it  is  this  which  has  so  exasperated  one  section  of  our 
country  against  the  other,  as  to  render  it  impossible  for 
the  two  sections,  while  the  baneful  influence  of  this  senti- 
ment continues,  to  be  united  harmoniously  under  one 
government.  It  is  to  this  conviction  that  I  address  my- 
self. It  is  the  moral  right  or  justice  of  slavery,  and  not 
its  advantages  or  disadvantages  as  compared  with  other 
forms  of  society,  which  I  aim  to  establish.  It  is  the  fact 
(for  such  I  believe  it  to  be)  that  the  positive  and  local 
laws  which  uphold  slavery  are  not  necessarily  repugnant 
to,  but  may  be  declarative  of,  the  law  of  Nature,  which 
I  have  undertaken  to  prove.  On  a  question  of  justice 
or  injustice,  on  a  question  that  involves  the  true  mean- 
ing and  intent  of  Natural  law,  the  consent  of  nations 
ought  to  be  decisive;  and  I  hope,  therefore,  that  the 
reader  will  permit  me,  before  I  come  to  the  distinct  con- 
sideration of  that  form  of  slavery  which  exists  in  our 
Southern  States,  to  enlarge  a  little  on  the  argument  of 
our  last  chapter,  which  was  designed  to  show  that  slavery 
may  be  founded  in  justice;  and  to  remove,  as  I  hope 
to  do,  an  objection  wdiich  has  been  of  great  force  to 
strengthen  the  opposite  conviction. 

The  Sacred  History  informs  us,  and  I  now  appeal  to 
it  only  for  its  testimony  to  facts,  that  slavery  existed 
under  the  patriarchs  for  centuries  before  the  conquest  of 
Canaan,  and  that  after  the  settlement  of  Canaan,  it  con- 
tinued to  exist  among  the  Hebrews  and  the  contiguous 
nations  in  times  anterior  to  the  records  of  profane  his- 


THE.  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


105 


tory.  From  profane  history,  also,  we  learn  that  slavery 
existed  among  the  Assyrians,  Mecles,  and  Persians,  be- 
fore the  origin  of  the  Grecian  republics.  The  monuments 
of  Greece  and  Rome  leave  no  doubt  that  slavery  existed 
in  these  republics  from  their  infancy,  and  that  it  grew 
and  flourished,  so  to  speak,  under  the  shadow  of  the  tree 
of  civil  liberty.  Nor  was  slavery  extirpated  from  the 
empire  when  Rome  became  Christian,  under  Constantine. 
On  the  contrary,  it  was  recognized  by  the  Christian 
Church,  and  the  mutual  rights  and  duties  involved  in  it 
were  guarded  by  canons,  which  forbade  slaves  to  be  or- 
dained, married,  or  baptized,  without  the  consent  of  their 
owners,  lest  these  acts  should  be  made  a  pretext  for  de- 
frauding the  master  of  his  right  of  property  in  the  slave. 
In  the  changes  of  society  that  brought  about  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  Roman  empire,  slavery  was  stripped  of  its 
more  repulsive  features,  and  gradually,  to  a  great  extent, 
decayed.  But  it  wTas  not  wholly  abolished.  Since  the 
Reformation,  it  has  existed  not  only  in  the  East,  where 
it  has  always  prevailed,  but  also  in  some  parts  of 
Europe ;  and  although  the  nations  of  western  Europe 
rejected  it  for  themselves,  they  yet  made  no  scruple  to 
establish  it  in  their  American  dependencies;  and  the 
abominable  and  infamous  expedients  to  wrhich  they  most 
unjustifiably  resorted  to  introduce  slave  labor  in  places 
where  it  was  demanded,  and  then  not  otherwise  to  be 
had,  ought  to  suggest  to  us  the  folly  and  danger  of 
attempting  to  subvert  and  expel  it  from  places  where  it 

5* 


106  THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


is  equally  needed,  and  has  come  to  be  naturally  and 
peaceably  established.  These  are  facts  which  lie  on  the 
surface  of  history,  and  which,  as  I  have  rather  under- 
stated them,  it  is  the  less  necessary  to  prove  by  a  cita- 
tion of  authorities. 

And  not  only  has  slavery  existed  among  these  nations 
as  a  fact,  but  it  has  been  intimately  interwoven  with  the 
whole  texture  of  their  society.  It  was  regulated  by  law 
among  the  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  Romans ;  Homer  rep- 
resents his  heroes  as  exchanging  slaves,  as  well  as  copper 
and  iron,  hides  and  cattle,  for  wine  and  provisions;^ 
and  all  the  poets,  tragic,  comic,  and  satirical,  have  not 
only  borne  testimony  to  the  existence  of  slavery  as  a  fact, 
but  have  derived  from  it  occasions  and  incidents  for 
pathetic  description,  for  the  keenest  sallies  of  wit  and 
shrewdness,  and  the  most  amusing  illustrations  of  life 
and  manners. 

The  wise  men  of  Greece  and  Rome  were  thrown,  for 
want  of  Divine  Revelation,  exclusively  on  the  law  of 
Nature.  They  investigated  its  principles  with  profound 
penetration,  and  deduced  from  them  the  duties  of  life 
by  rigorous  application  of  reason;  and  though  their 
instructions  failed  of  their  due  effect  for  want  of  being 
bound  on  the  conscience  by  those  awful  sanctions  which 

*  ev&ev  df)  oIvl^ovto  KaprjKOfioovTec:  ' kxatol, 

oXkoi  &h  frivols,  dXkot  6'  avryoi  ftoeaoiv, 

uXkoi  d'  dvdpa-odeooi' — Iliad  vii.,  vss.}  412,  etc. 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


107 


only  Divine  Revelation  can  furnish,  yet  undoubtedly 
they  did  much  to  prepare  the  world  for  the  candid  con- 
sideration and  cordial  reception  of  Christian  doctrine. 

I  am  well  aware  that  slavery  in  the  ancient  republics, 
particularly  in  Sparta  and  Rome,  was  accompanied  with 
excessive  violence  and  cruelty.  This  was  the  natural 
consequence  of  that  absolute  power,  vested  in  the  master, 
which  Christianity,  in  later  times,  effectually  limited  by 
those  divine  precepts  (transcending  all  the  power  of 
human  suasion)  which  accustomed  men  to  act  more  on 
the  principles  of  justice  and  benevolence,  and  from  a 
sense  of  responsibility  to  their  Master  in  Heaven.  But 
I  am  not  aware  that  the  ancient  moralists,  though  they 
reproved  the  oppression  and  cruelty  of  masters  in  the 
treatment  of  their  slaves,  ever  impugned  the  justice  of 
the  relation.  On  the  contrary  they  assumed  it,  so  far 
as  my  knowledge  extends,  to  be  just,  and  gave  directions 
for  its  humane  fulfillment.  Under  the  modest  title 
of  u  Offices,"  the  wise  men  of  antiquity  set  forth 
pithy  treatises  on  the  relative  duties  of  life  (or  offices, 
as  they  were  then  called),  which  would  better  repay  our 
study  than  some  of  the  verbose  elaborations  which,  under 
the  sonorous  titles  of  Systems  of  Moral  Philosophy,  and 
Elements  of  Moral  Science,  have  enlarged  only  to  im- 
poverish the  literature  of  our  age.  One  of  these  trea- 
tises speaks  the  sentiments  of  all  on  the  subject  under 
consideration.  "  We  ought  to  remember,"  says  Cicero, 
"that  we  are  bound  to  practise  justice  towards  the 


108  THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


lowest  of  mankind  ;  the  lowest,  both  in  condition  and 
fortune,  are  slaves :  and  they  give  us  wholesome  pre- 
cepts who  bid  us  treat  our  slaves  as  hired  laborers,  and 
make  it  our  duty  to  exact  of  them  labor,  and  to  afford 
them  in  return  the  food,  clothing,  shelter,  and  protection 
which  are  due  to  them.'*  * 

Now  I  do  not*  appeal  to  these  facts  as  proofs  that  hu- 
man society  is  in  a  healthier  state  with  slavery  than 
without  it.  It  may  be  that  slavery,  as  it  has  worn  out 
in  Great  Britain,  is  destined  also,  in  the  progress  of 
events,  to  expire  universally,  and  to  make  room  for 
something  better  in  its  place.  It  is  not  against  meas- 
ures *  designed  to  promote  its  natural  decay  (in  places 
where  it  is  in  process  of  decay)  that  I  contend,  but  against 
the  manifold  attempts  that  are  now  making  to  arrest 
and  extirpate  it,  on  the  ground  of  its  being  an  unjust 
institution,  and  at  war  with  human  rights.  Will  they 
who  reject  Revelation  because  it  allows  slavery,  go 
farther  and  proclaim  war  upon  the  common  sense  of 
mankind?  But  for  particular  men,  or  even  for  a  single 
age,  to  set  up  their  own  reason  as  the  measure  of  all 
human  reason,  what  is  this  better  than  insanity  ?  Uni- 
versal consent  has  ever  been  thought  the  most  infallible 
criterion  of  truth  ;  it  is  the  strongest  argument  that  can 

*  Meminerimus  autem,  etiam  adversus  infimos  justitiam  esse  ser- 
vandarn.  Est  autem  infima  conditio  et  fortuna  servorum,  quibus  non 
male  prsecipiunt  qui  ita  jubent  uti  ut  mercenariis ;  operam  exigendam, 
justa  prjsbenda. — De  Officiis,  Lib.  i.  c.  xiii. 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


109 


be  brought,  independently  of  Revelation,  for  the  being 
of  God,  and  the  natural  immortality  of  the  human  soul ; 
the  concurrence  of  all  nations  in  these  sentiments  being 
evidently  owing  either  to  the  traditions  of  an  original 
Revelation,  prior  to  nil  written  revelations,  or  to  the 
suggestions  of  Nature  and  the  inborn  rudiments  of  rea- 
son. There  is  no  nation,  ancient  or  modern,  barbarous 
or  civilized,  heathen  or  Christian,  which  has  not,  by  its 
laws,  condemned  the  violation  of  compacts,  the  cruel  op- 
pression of  the  innocent,  and  the  fraudulent  withholding 
of  his  wages  from  the  honest  laborer.  But  where  is  the 
nation  that  has  pronounced  a  state  of  servitude  for  life 
contrary  to  natural  justice  ?  What  age,  before  our  own, 
could  point  to  moralists  that  proclaim  it  an  Offense 
against  nature  to  hold  slaves  in  the  condition  in  which 
Providence  has  placed  them?  operam  exigere^  justa 
prcBbere,  to  exact  of  them  labor,  and  to  give  them 
board,  lodging,  and  raiment  in  compensation  for  their 
labor  ?  And  if  slavery  has,  in  fact,  existed  among  most 
nations ;  if  no  nation  has  proclaimed  it  a  violation  of 
natural  justice;  and  if  the  most  eminent  men  of  all 
time,  legislators,  sages,  and  moralists,  have  confessed  a 
state  of  servitude  for  life,  no  matter  what  name  they  have 
given,  it,  to  be  consistent  with  justice,  then  we  have,  to 
this  extent,  the  consent  of  mankind  in  its  favor ;  and 
from  this  consent  we  are  entitled  to  infer,  not  indeed  its 
expediency  in  every  country  and  every  state  of  society, 


110 


THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


but  its  agreement  with,  or  non-repugnance  to.  the  Law  OF 
Nature. 

But  if  this  conclusion  be  correct,  how  comes  the  Jus- 
tinian Code  to  define  slavery  as  an  institution  of  the  law 
of  nations  in  opposition  to  natural  justice?  This 
definition  finds  much  favor  with  the  lawyers  who  have 
lost  in  our  day  none  of  that  laudable  bias  in  favor  of 
freedom,  which  Bodin,  as  I  remember,  in  his  synopsis 
of  the  arguments  for  and  against  slavery,  ascribes  to 
them  in  his  time.  From  the  lawyers  the  definition  has 
passed  into  our  horn-books  and  periodical  journals,  so 
that  now  every  educated  man  is  supposed  to  be  aware  of 
the  fact  that  the  Justinian  Code — a  great  authority  on  a 
subject  of  this  sort — declares  slavery  to  be  an  abnormal 
state  of  society,  upheld  by  force  and  in  violation  of 
justice. 

Is  it  probable  that  a  code,  wThich  it  took  centuries  to 
mature,  which  is  founded  on  the  law  of  Nature,  and  is 
one  of  the  ablest  developments  of  its  principles  ever 
made  by  unassisted  reason,  has  stultified  itself  by  de- 
fending and  protecting  an  institution  which  it  proclaims 
in  the  outset  to  be  contrary  to  that  law?  Is  it  not  jusfc 
possible  that,  in  imputing  to  the  code  so  flagrant  an  in- 
consistency, we  may  stultify  ourselves  ? 

Let  us  examine  the  authority.  The  passage  occurs  in 
the  first  book  of  the  Institutes,  near  the  beginning,  and 
reads  thus  : 

11  Summa  itaque  divisio  de  jure  personarum  hsec  est : 


THE  JUSTINIAN  COJDE. 


Ill 


quod  onmes  homines  aut  liberi  sunt,  aut  servi.  Et 
libertas  quidem  (ex  qua  etiani  liberi  vocantur)  est  natu- 
ralis  facultas  ejus,  quod  cuique  facere  libet,  nisi  si  quid 
vi  aut  jure  -prohibetur.  Servtim  antem  est  constitu- 
tio  juris  gentium  qua  quis  dominio  alieno  contra  na- 
tyram  subjicitur" 

Which  is  translated  as  follows  by  Dr.  Harris,  in  his 
edition  of  Justinian,  with  English  notes,  London,  A.  D. 
1756: 

"  The  first  division  of  persons,  with  respect  to  their 
rights,  is  into  freemen  and  slaves. 

"  Liberty,  or  freedom,  from  which  we  are  denominated 
free,  is  that  natural  power  which  we  have  of  acting  as 
we  please,  if  not  hindered  by  force,  or  restrained  by 
the  law. 

"  Slavery  is  that,  by  which  one  man  is  made  subject 
to  another,  according  to  the  law  of  nations,  though  con- 
trary to  natural  right/' 

It  may  be  suggested  by  some,  who  read  the  original, 
that  slavery  is  said  to  be  against  Nature,  and  not 
against  the  right  or  law  of  Nature.  The  word  Nature, 
however,  is  commonly  used  for  the  right  or  law  of  Na- 
ture ;  and  therefore  I  dismiss  this  criticism  as  unworthy 
of  consideration,  and  accept  Dr.  Harris's  translation. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  the  Code  affixes  to 
the  phrase  law  of  Nature  a  meaning  different  from  that 
in  which  the  phrase  is  commonly  taken. 

By  the  law  of  Nature,  according  to  the  best  usage 


112 


THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


among  the  ancients,  and  universally  among  the  moderns, 
is  meant,  as  we  have  said,  that  rule  of  fitness  which  the 
Deity  has  established  for  the  government  of  men.  consid- 
ered as  reasonable  creatures,  and  intended  for  mutual 
society.  But  the  code  itself,  in  the  chapter  next  before 
that  which  contains  the  definition  of  slavery,  gives  us  its 
own  definition  of  the  law  of  Nature.  Adopting  the 
language  of  Ulpian  it  says  expressly,  under  the  title, 
"  De  Jure  Natorali,"  etc.  : 

"  The  law  of  Nature  is  not  a  law  to  man  only,  but 
likewise  to  all  other  animals,  whether  they  are  produced 
on  the  earth,  in  the  air.  or  in  the  waters.  From  hence 
proceeds  the  conjunction  of  male  and  female,  which  we, 
among  our  own  species,  style  matrimony  ;  from  hence 
arises  the  procreation  of  children,  and  our  care  in  bring- 
ing them  up.  We  perceive  also  that  the  rest  of  the 
animal  creation  are  regarded  as  having  a  knowledge  of 
this  law  by  which  they  are  actuated."  * 

Now  by  the  law  of  Nature,  in  this  large  sense  of  the 
phrase,  man  is  as  free  as  the  beasts  of  the  field ;  and  to 
say  that  slavery  is  against  Nature,  or  the  law  of  Na- 
ture, in  this  sense,  is  merely  to  say  that  no  precedent  or 

*  In  the  text  I  have  used  Dr.  Harris'  version ;  the  Latin  is  as  fol- 
lows :  "Jus  naturale  est  quod  natura  omnia  animalia  doeuit ;  nam  jus 
istud  non  humani  generis  propriura  est,  sed  omnium  animaliura,  quaB 
in  ccelo,  quae  in  terra,  quae  in  mari  naseuntur.  Hinc  descendit  maris 
atque  fceminae  conjunctio,  quam  nos  matrimonium  appellamus.  Hinc 
liberorum  procreatio,  hinc  educatio :  videmus  enim,  ccetera  quoque 
animalia  istius  juris  peritia  censeri." 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


113 


analogy  could  then  be  drawn  in  favor  of  slavery  from  the 
brute  creation.  I  say.  could  then  be  drawn  in  favor  of 
slavery ;  for  the  ancients  were  undoubtedly  ignorant 
of  the  astonishing  facts  which  modern  naturalists  have 
brought  to  light  in  respect  to  a  certain  species  of  ants  : 
and  which,  if  then  known,  would  have  restrained  them 
from  saying  that  slavery  was  contrary  to  Nature,  even 
in  Ulpian's  sense  of  the  word.  But  they  were  ignorant 
of  these  curious  facts,  and  they  pronounced  slavery  con- 
trary to  Nature,  on  the  supposition  that  no  precedent  or 
analo^v  in  its  favor  could  be  drawn  from  the  brute 
creation.^ 

*  I  annex  from  Harper's  Family  Library  (No.  YIIL.  p.  127),  a  pas- 
sage, which  contains  a  synopsis  of  these  extraordinary  discoveries — 
referring  the  reader  to  the  note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter,  for  many- 
interesting  details.  Among  facts,  all  of  which  are  wonderful,  not  the 
least  remarkable  and  instructive  is  the  mutual  good-will  and  affec- 
tion, which  prevails-  between  the  negro  ants  and  their  masters,  and 
that,  too.  mauger  the  fact  that  the  relation  had  its  origin  in  hostil- 
ity and  violence.  Read  the  whole  description  at  the  end  of  this 
chapter. 

"  Connected  with  the  subject  of  the  warfare  of  ants  is  the  history 
of  a  species  of  this  insect,  not  existing  in  these  islands,  called,  by 
Huber,  the  Amazon,  or  Legionary  Ant,  the  Formica  rufescens  of 
Latreille.  It  is  both  warlike  and  powerful,  and,  unlike  the  rest  of 
the  tribe,  its  habits  are  far  from  being  industrious.  Enough  has  been 
said  to  show  that  the  proceedings  of  some  insects  so  nearly  resemble 
human  actions,  as  to  excite  our  greatest  wonder :  but  the  habits  of 
the  legionary  ant  are  still  more  surprising  than  the  proceeding  of  the 
chiefs  which  we  have  just  described ;  it  is  'actually  found  to  be  a 
slave-dealer,  attacking  the  nests  of  other  species,  stealing  their  young, 
rearing  them,  and  thus,  by  shifting  all  the  domestic  duties  of  their 
republic  on  strangers,  escaping  from  labor  themselves.  This  curious 
fact,  first  discovered  by  Huber,  has  been  confirmed  by  Latreille.  and 


114 


THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


But  man  is  to  be  considered  not  only  as  an  animal. 

but  as  a  creature  endowed  with  reason,  as  intended  for 
society,  as  accountable  for  his  actions,  and  as  obliged  to 
certain  duties,  which  are  devolved  on  him  by  the  various 
relations  in  which  he  stands  to  his  fellow-men,  who  are 
by  nature  his  equals,  to  all  his  fellow-creatures  on  earth, 
and  to  God,  the  Maker  of  all.  Hence,  inasmuch  as  the 
Justinian  Code  applies  the  phrase,  law  of  Nature,  to 
those  principles  of  action  which  are  common  to  men  and 
inferior  creatures,  we  are  naturally  led  to  inquire, 
whether  it  had  no  distinctive  name  for  that  rule  of 
action  which  is  proper  to  man,  considered  as  a  reason- 
able and  sociable  creature  ?  Certainly  it  had:  and  that 
name  is  the  Lav:  of  Nations.  Let  the  code  speak  for 
itself:  the  very  next  section  to  that  last  quoted  is  as 
follows  : 

"  Civil  law  is  distinguished  from  the  law  of  nations, 
because  every  community  uses  partly  its  own  particular 
laws,  and  partly  the  general  laws,  which  are  common 
to  all  mankind.    That  law  which  a  people  enacts  for  the 

is  admitted  by  all  naturalists.  The  slave  is  distinguished  from  its 
master  by  being  of  a  dark  ash-color,  so  as  to  be  entitled  to  the  name 
of  Negro — an  epithet  now  appropriated  to  the  Formica  fusca,  or  ash- 
colored  ants.  Their  masters  are  light  ia  color.  The  negro  is  an  in- 
dustrious, peaceable,  stingless  insect;  the  legionary,  a  courageous, 
armed,  and  lazy  one.  The  relation  between  them  is  not,  however, 
that  which  exists  between  a  task-master  and  his  bondsman,  but  a 
strong  attachment  is  mutually  felt — another  instance  of  the  modifica- 
tion of  instinct,  education  obliterating  in  the  ash-colored  ant  all  its 
natural  antipathy  to  another  species." 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


115 


government  of  itself,  is  called  the  civil  law  of  that  peo- 
ple. But  that  law  which  natural  reason  appoints  for  all 
mankind,  is  called  the  law  of  Nations,  because  all  nations 
make  use  of  it." 

Hence  it  appears  that  what  the  Justinian  Code  means 
by  the  law  of  Nations,  is  the  same  that  we  now  mean  by 
the  law  of  Nature;  viz.,  the  rule  which  natural  reason 
appoints  for  all  mankind.  In  modern  times,  indeed, 
especially  since  the  time  of  Grotius,  the  phrase  law  of 
Nations  has  been  used  to  denote  those  rules  and  regula- 
tions  by  which  the  civilized  nations  govern  their  inter- 
course with  one  another.  Among  the  ancients,  however, 
the  rules  of  international  intercourse  were  too  few  in 
number,  and  too  limited  in  application,  to  be  wrought 
into  a  distinct  science.  Hence  it  very  naturally  hap- 
pened that  Tribonian,  who  digested  the  Justinian  code, 
used  the  phrase  law  of  Nations  to  distinguish  the  rule 
wrhich  natural  reason  prescribes  to  man  from  the.  law  of 
Nature  in  the  sense  in  which  he  found  it  used  by  Ulpian 
and  other  ancient  lawyers.  It  is  obvious  to  remark, 
however,  that  this  use  of  the  latter  phrase,  which  had 
probably  been  borrowed  from  the  poets  and  philosophers, 
is  improper ;  in  other  words,  that  the  wholesome  lessons 
and  examples  which  men  may  learn  from  their  observa- 
tion of  inferior  creatures,  are  not,  in  a  proper  sense,  a 
law  which  they  are  obliged  to  obey.  So  sensible  of  this 
were  the  ancients,  that  many  of  them  used  the  phrase 
lata  of  Nature  in  its  limited  and  proper  sense;  and 


116 


NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


what  is  remarkable  is,  that  even  the  Code  itself  which  is 
a  collection  from  various  sources,  uses  the  phrase  in  one 
place  at  least,  in  the  same  sense.  For  (Tit.  I  Sec.  11), 
it  refers  the  origin  of  dominion  and  property  to  the  law 
of  Nature :  and  adds,  to  leave  no  doubt  of  its  meaning, 
"which,  as  we  have  already  observed,  is  also  called  the 
law  of  Nations."  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  phrase 
law  of  Nature  has  come  to  be  used  universally  by  the 
moderns,  as  it  was  used  to  some  extent  by  the  ancients 
in  its  limited  sense,  to  denote  the  rule  of  action  proper  to 
human  nature ;  while  the  phrase  law  of  Nations  has 
been  turned  from  the  sense  affixed  to  it  in  the  Justinian 
Code,  and  appropriated  to  a  branch  of  study  which  was 
unknown  to  the  ancients. 

"  Ita  verborum  vefcus  interit  getas," 

Mr.  Maxwell,  in  his  learned  annotations  on  Bishop 
Cumberland  (London,  A.  d.  1727),  has  placed  this  mat- 
ter in  a  clear  light.  "The  civilians,"  he  remarks,  "uni- 
versally acknowledge,  'that  the  division  into  the  law 
of  Nature  and  that  of  Nations,  according  to  Justinian's 
explication,  is  only  the  explaining  two  different  senses 
of  the  same  word  ;'  the  former  improper  a,.d  metaphor 
ical,  as  Naturalists  use  the  word  law,  to  denote  those 
uniform  effects  ivhich  are  observed  in  the  motions  of 
bodies.  The  latter  is  proper.  By  the  law  of  Nature, 
the  Emperor  understands  only  uniform  instincts  ob- 
served in  all  animals ;  by  the  law  of  Nations  he 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


117 


denotes  what  our  author,  with  most  moderns  and  an- 
cients, calls  the  law  of  Nature.  Some  later  writers, 
by  the  laio  of  Nations,  understand  that  branch  of  the 
law  of  Nature  which  relates  to  sovereign  States,  or 
princes,  or  those  conventions  about  certain  privileges  of 
ambassadors,  about  goods  taken  in  open  war,  and  certain 
limitations  of  the  methods  of  hostility,  to  which,  perhaps, 
antecedently  to  conventions  express  or  tacit,  there  would 
have  been  no  obligation." 

The  Justinian  Code,  therefore,  is  so  far  from  affirm- 
ing slavery  to  be  repugnant  to  the  law  of  Nature,  in 
our  sense  of  the  expression,  that  it  affirms  the  direct 
contrary.  It  declares  slavery  to  be  a  constitution  of  the 
law  of  Nations,  having  previously  defined  this  law  to  be 
that  which  Natural  Reason  appoints  for  all  mankind; 
which  is  just  what  we  now  mean  by  the  law  of  Nature. 
It  denominates  slavery  a  constitution  or  appointment, 
and  thus  distinguishes  the  relation  of  master  and  slave 
from  those  relations  which  exist  naturally  and  without 
the  intervention  of  any  human  act ;  and,  to  make  this 
distinction  more  apparent,  it  adds  that  slavery  is  against 
Nature,  or  the  law  of  Nature,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not 
exist  by  nature,  but  is  always  brought  about  by  some  act 
or  constitution  of  human  reason.  To  illustrate  :  the  rela- 
tion of  parent  and  child  is  natural;  that  is,  it  is  not  effected 
by  any  constitution  or  appointment  of  human  reason  or 
human  law,  but  results  from  the  very  nature  of  the  par- 
ties who,  while  they  both  live,  are,  and  can  not  cease  to  "be, 


118 


NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


parent  and  child.  Not  so,  says  the  Code,  with  the  re- 
lation of  master  and  slave;  for  this  relation  does  not 
exist  by  nature,  nor  result  from  the  law  of  creation, 
but  takes  its  beginning  from  some  human  act,  and  rests 
for  support,  not  on  the  original  law  of  creation,  but  on 
the  constitution  or  appointment  of  that  law  which  natu- 
ral reason  prescribes  for  the  government  of  all  mankind. 

In  this  construction  of  the  Code  which  makes  slavery 
to  be  upheld  by  positive  law  considered  as  declarative 
of  the  law  of  Nature,  I  am  confirmed  by  two  passages 
of  Grotius,  with  the  quotation  of  which,  and  of  a  note 
by  one  of  his  commentators,  I  shall  conclude  this  chap- 
ter. In  the  second  book  of  his  great  work  (De  Jure 
Belli,  etc.)  chap.  22,  §  11,  Grotius  observes  that,  "  To  take 
up  arms  on  account  of  liberty  is  not  justifiable  either  in 
particular  persons  or  in  a  whole  community,  as  if  to  be 
in  such  a  state — a  state,  that  is,  of  autonomy,  or  inde- 
pendence— were  naturally  and  at  all  times  every  one's 
prerogative.  For  when  men  are  said  to  be  by  nature 
in  a  state  of  freedom,  by  nature  must  be  understood  to 
mean  the  risdit  of  Nature  as  it  is  antecedent  to  all  hu- 
man  acts  to  the  contrary  ;  and  the  freedom  there  meant 
is  a  freedom  in  a  privative  not  in  a  contradictory  sense  ; 
that  is  to  say,  though  a  man  be  not  by  nature  a  slave, 
or  subject  to  any,  yet  he  can  not  thence  derive  a  right 
of  being  always  exempted  from  slavery  and  subjection ; 
for  in  this  sense  nobody  living  is  free.  And  this  is  what 
Albutius  intends  when  he  says  that  no  man  is  born  either 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


119 


a  freeman  or  a  slave,  but  these  names  fortune  gives 
them  afterwards.  Thus  Aristotle  No^gj  to  pev  dovXov 
etvcu  to  de  eXevOepov^  1  To  the  law  it  is  owing  that  one 
man  is  in  a  free,  another  in  a  servile  condition.' ??  * 

And  again,  in  the  third  book  of  the  same  work,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  seventh  chapter,  the  same  author  says  : 

"No  man  is  a  slave  by  nature,  that  is,  without  any 
human  deed,  and  considered  in  the  primitive  state  of 
nature ;  as  we  have  elsewhere  said :  in  which  sense  we 
may  take  the  lawyers  when  they  say  that  slavery  is 
against  Nature.  That  slavery,  however,  should  take  its 
origin  from  some  human  act,  is  not,  as  we  have  else- 
where shown,  repugnant  to  natural  justice."  f 

On  which  passage,  in  reference  to  the  words  against 
Nature,  Gronovius  observes  :  That  slavery  is  opposed  to 

*  aSed  nec  libertas,  sive  singulorurn  sive  civitatum,  id  est  avTovo/ua, 
quasi  naturaliter,  et  semper  quibusvis  competat,  jus  bello  prsestare 
potest.  Nam  libertas  cum  natura  competere  hominibus  aut  populis 
clicitur,  id  intelligendum  est  de  jure  naturae  prascedente  factum  omne 
humanum,  et  de  libertate  Kara  oTepijoiv,  non  de  ea  quae  est  tzar3  tvav- 
TLoTrira,  hoc  est.  ut  natura  quis  servus  non  sit,  non  ut  jus  habeat  ne 
unquam  serviat ;  nam  hoc  sensu  nemo  liber  est :  quo  pertinet  illud 
Albutii;  'neminem  natura  liberum  esse,  neminem  servum;  hasc  postea 
nomina  singulis  imposuisse  fortunam '  Et  Aristotelis  illud:  N6/z<j 
to  /LLev  dov'kov  eivat,  to  de  eXtvOepov ;  e  lege  venisse  ut  alius  esset  liber, 
alius  servus." 

f  Servi  natura  quidem,  id  est,  citra  factum  humanum  aut  primssvo 
natune  statu,  hominum  nulli  sunt,  ut  et  alibi  diximus;  quo  seosu  recto 
accipi  potest  quod  a  juris-consultis  dictum  est,  contra  naturam  esse  banc 
servitutem:  ut  tamen  facto  hominis,  id  est,  pactione  aut  delicto,  sor- 
vitus  originem  acciperet,  justitise  naturali  non  repugnat,  ut  alibi  quoque 
ostendimus. 


120 


NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


liberty,  and  that  liberty  is  an  endowment  of  Nature  ;  it 
being  understood ,  however,  that  Nature  has  not  bestowed 
this  endowment  on  men  in  such  sense  as  to  prevent  some 
from  being  for  just  causes  deprived  of  it ;  for  the  endow- 
ment is  not  inalienable,  but  may  be  lost  by  fault  or  for- 
tune.^ 


K  B. — The  author  quoted  in  the  note,  pp.  113,  114,  remarks  that 
all  we  know  concerning  the  negro  ant  is  derived  from  Mr.  P.  Huber, 
and  he  adds  the  following  short  summary  of  Huber's  account ; 

"  While  walking  near  Geneva,  between  four  and  five  in  the  evening 
of  the  17th  of  June,  1804,  this  distinguished  naturalist  observed  an 
army  of  the  rufescent  or  legionary  ants  traversing  the  road.  The 
column  occupied  a  space  of  ten  inches  in  length,  by  four  in  breadth  ; 
they  rapidly  quitted  the  road,  passed  a  thick  hedge,  entered  a  pas* 
tare-ground,  wound  through  the  grass  without  breaking  the  line  of 
march,  and  approached  a  nest  inhabited  by  the  negro  or  ash-colored 
ant.  Some  of  its  inhabitants  were  guarding  the  entrance,  but  on  the 
discovery  of  an  approaching  army,  they  darted  forth  on  the  advancing 
party.  The  alarm  was  communicated  to  the  interior,  whence  their 
companions  rushed  in  numbers  to  join  in  the  defense  of  their  under- 
ground residence.  The  bulk  of  the  army  of  the  legionaries  being 
about  two  paces  off,  now  quickened  their  march,  and  in  an  instant  the 
whole  battalion  fell  upon  and  overthrew  the  negroes,  who,  after  a 
short  and  obstinate  conflict,  retired  and  took  refuge  in  the  lowest 
parts  of  their  nest.  The  legionaries  now  mounted  the  hillock ;  some 
took  possession  of  the  principal  avenues,  while  others  effected  a  new 
breach  with  their  teeth,  so  as  to  admit  the  remainder  of  the  army. 
Having  thus  taken  the  city  by  assault,  they  remained  in  it  only  a  few 
minutes :  returning  by  the  apertures  through  which  they  had  entered, 
each  carried  in  its  mouth  either  a  larva  or  a  pupa,  and  scampered 
away  without  order  or  regularity.   M.  Huber  followed  them  for  some 

*  Servitutem  esse  contrariam  illi  bono,  quod  contigit  homini  bene- 
ficio  natures  et  per  naturam,  id  est  libertati ;  quamvis  id  ita  ei  natura 
dcderit,  ut  ob  justas  causas  eripi  non  vetet ;  ut  sit  bonum  separabile, 
quod  peccato  aut  fortuna  possit  amitti. 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


121 


time,  but  lost  sight  of  them  in  a  cornfield.  Wishing  to  observe  the 
assaulted  city  again,  he  retraced  his  steps,  and  saw  a  small  number 
of  ash-colored  laborers  perched  on  the  stalks  of  plants,  holding  in 
their  mouths  the  few  larvae  which  they  had  succeeded  in  rescuing 
from  pillage. 

The  next  morning,  Huber,  taking  the  same  road,  with  the  hope  of 
once  more  seeing  a  similar  scene,  discovered  a  large  ant-hill  tenanted 
by  legionaries.  At  five' in  the  evening,  provided  the  weather  be  fine, 
and  the  temperature  67°  Fahrenheit  in  the  shade,  these  sally  out. 
During  the  other  part  of  the  day  they  appear  to  do  little ;  but  at  this 
hour  they  become  restless,  assemble  on  the  outside  of  the  city,  move 
round  it  in  circles :  a  signal  is  then  given,  which  they  pass  from  one 
to  the  other,  striking,  as  they  proceed,  with  their  antennae  and  fore- 
head, the  breasts  of  their  companions  ;  these,  in  their  turn,  approach 
those  advancing,  and  communicate  the  same  signal—it  is  that  of  de- 
parture— as  the  result  satisfactorily  proves.  Those  which  receive 
the  intimation  are  instantly  seen  to  put  themselves  on  the  march ;  the 
column  becomes  organized ;  and  not  a  single  amazon  remains  near 
the  garrison.  There  is  no  commander-in-chief;  every  ant  is  in  turn 
first,  each  seeking  to  be  foremost.  A  small  number  may,  however, 
be  observed  constantly  returning  to  the  rear :  this  is  probably  the 
means  by  which  the  whole  army  is  governed. 

With  such  dispositions,  maneuvers,  and  discipline,  Huber  saw  an 
army  of  legionaries  set  out  for  a  negro  city.  With  their  usual  im- 
petuosity of  attack,  one  party  soon  entered,  and  returned  laden  with 
the  young  of  the  assailed  ant-hill ;  a  second  detachment,  not  meeting 
with  equal  success,  separated  from  their  companions,  and  fell  on  an- 
other negro  colony,  where  they  met  with  ample  booty ;  after  which 
the  whole  number  of  legionaries  marched  to  their  nest  in  two  divi- 
sions. As  they  approached,  Huber  saw,  to  his  astonishment,  a  great 
number  of  the  very  same  species  which  had  been  pillaged,  all  around 
the  nest  of  the  legionaries.  Was  this  a  diversion  made  by  carrying 
the  war  into  the  enemy's  territory?  No  :  the  return  of  the  legion- 
aries excited  no  alarm ;  on  the  contrary,  the  negro  ants  were  seen  to 
approach  these  warriors,  caress  them  with  their  antennae,  offer  them 
nourishment,  as  is  the  custom  among  their  own  species,  while  the 
legionaries  consigned  their  prisoners  to  them  to  be  carried  to  the  in- 
terior of  the  nest. 

In  this  way  the  same  negro  colony  was  observed  to  be  attacked 
three  several  times,  and  each  time  with 'complete  success;  the  last 

6 


122 


THE  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


attack,  however,  was  made  under  different  circumstances  from  the 
first  two  :  the  negroes,  as  if  conscious  of  their  exposed  situation,  had 
lost  no  time  in  throwing  up  trenches,  barricading  the  several  entrances, 
and  reenforcing  the  guard  of  the  interior ;  "  they  had,  moreover, 
brought  together  all  the  little  pieces  of  wood  and  earth  within  their 
reach  ;  with  these  they  had  blocked  up  the  passage  to  their  habita- 
tion, in  which  they  had  posted  themselves  in  full  force." 

"  The  legionaries  at  first  hesitating  to  approach,  rambled  about  or 
returned  to  the  rear ;  they  then  on  a  given  signal  rushed  forward  en 
masse,  with  great  impetuosity,  removing  with  their  teeth  and  feet  the 
many  obstacles  which  impeded  their  progress;  having  succeeded, 
they  entered  the  ant-hill  by  hundreds,  notwithstanding  the  resistance 
of  its  inhabitants,  and  carried  off  their  prize  to  the  garrison." 

In  these  attacks  the  legionaries  never  take  the  old  negroes  prison- 
ers, knowing,  perhaps,  that  at  an  adult  age  the  love  of  home,  with  all 
its  associations,  would  be  sad  obstacles  to  transplantation;  nor  is  their 
contest  attended  with  loss  of  blood ;  they  seek  the  young,  and  these 
being  obtained,  they  speedily  decamp  with  their  booty.  Xor  do  they 
ever  begin  their  predatory  warfare  before  the  end  of  May,  or  begin- 
ning of  June  ;  if  they  commenced  at  an  earlier  period  to  purloin  the 
young  negroes,  they  might  secure  a  large  supply  of  captives,  but  then 
it  would  principally  consist  of  males  and  females,  and  these,  it  seems, 
Nature  does  not  permit  them  to  seize  :  for  she  has  ordained  that,  in 
the  ant-hills  destined  to  pillage,  the  males  and  females  shall  be  pro- 
duced earlier  than  the  males  and  females  of  the  legionaries ;  and  it  is 
only  after  their  own  males  and  females  have  undergone  the  last 
change,  that  the  instinct  which  prompts  them  to  steal  the  young  of 
others  begins  to  operate.  Hence,  Huber  has  distinctly  ascertained, 
and  Latreille  has  confirmed  the  discovery,  that  the  legionary  ant-hill 
contains  male,  female,  and  neuter  amazons,  together  with  negro-neu- 
ters, but  never  negro  males  or  females.  The  amazon  female,  after 
having  cast  off  her  wings,  lays  the  foundation  of  her  own  nest,  and 
performs  all  the  duties  of  a  laborer.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these 
creatures  have  the  ability  to  work,  and  do  so ;  but  as  soon  as  they 
obtain  slaves  to  do  that  for  them  which  they  ought  to  do  themselves, 
they  relinquish  every  domestic  duty,  and  during  the  day  t£  tranquilly 
wait,  at  the  bottom  of  their  subterranean  abode,  the  hour  of  depar- 
ture, reserving  their  strength,  courage,  and  the  address  which  they  so 
well  know  how  to  display,  for  the  purposes  of  war." 

On  the  negroes  reared  among  tbem  they  depend  not  only  for  house 


THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE. 


123 


and  home,  but  even  for  food ;  and  these  faithful  and  affectionate  ser- 
vants begrudge  neither  labor  nor  pains,  in  providing  for  their  masters. 
Huber  enclosed  thirty  amazons  with  several  pupae  and  larvae  of  their 
own  species,  and  twenty  negro  pupae,  in  a  glass  box,  the  bottom  of 
which  was  covered  with  a  thick  layer  of  earth  ;  honey  was  given  to 
them,  so  that,  although  cut  off  from  their  auxiliaries,  the  amazons 
had  both  shelter  and  food  :  at  first  they  appeared  to  pay  some  little 
attention  to  the  young ;  this  soon  ceased,  and  they  neither  traced  out 
a  dwelling,  nor  took  any  food ;  in  two  days  one-half  died  of  hunger, 
and  the  other  remained  weak  and  languid  :  commiserating  their  con- 
dition, he  gave  them  one  of  their  black  companions :  this  little  crea- 
ture, unassisted,  formed  a  chamber  in  the  earth,  gathered  together  the 
larvae,  put  everything  into  complete  order,  and  preserved  the  lives  of 
those  which  were  about  to  perish. 

In  order  to  obtain  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  facts,  the 
same  observer  of  nature  opened  and  deranged  an  ant-hill  in  which 
the  negroes  and  amazons  dwelt  together ;  in  doing  so,  the  aspect  of 
their  city  was  so  altered  as  not  to  be  recognized  by  the  amazons,  and 
they  were  seen  wandering  at  random  over  its  surface.  The  negroes, 
however,  appeared  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  new  localities  of 
the  ant-hill,  and  relieved  them  from  their  embarrassment  by  taking 
them  up  gently  in  their  mandibles,  and  conducting  them  to  the  gal- 
leries already  pierced.  "  An  amazon  was  frequently  seen  to  approach 
a  negro,  and  play  upon  its  head  with  its  antennae,  when  the  latter  im- 
mediately seized  the  former  in  its  pincers,  and  deposited  it  at  one  of 
the  entrances ;  the  amazon  ant  then  unrolled  itself,  caressed  once 
more  its  kind  friend,  and  passed  into  the  interior  of  the  nest ;  now 
and  then  the  negro  lost  its  way  too,  and  wandered  about  carrying  the 
amazon. 

"  I  observed  one,"  continues  Huber,  "  after  ineffectual  windings,  take 
the  precaution  of  laying  its  burden  on  the  ground  :  the  amazon  re- 
mained on  the  same  spot  until  the  negro  returned  to  its  assistance, 
which,  having  well  ascertained  and  examined  one  of  the  entrances, 
resumed  its  load,  and  bore  it  into  the  interior." 

If  the  entrance  to  any  gallery  happened  to  be  obstructed,  the 
negro,  depositing  its  burden;  went  to  remove  the  obstruction,  and 
again  taking  up  the  amazon,  introduced  it  into  the  nest.  It  often  hap- 
pens that  the  ant-hill  is  not  sufficiently  commodious ;  in  this  case  the 
negroes  alone  decide  upon  the  expediency  of  a  removal,  and  choose  a 
spot  for  the  new  dwelling ;  they  set  about  building,  and  as  soon  as 


124  NATURAL  JUSTICE  OF  SLAVERY. 


the  works  are  sufficiently  advanced,  appear  eager  to  conduct  the 
legionaries  to  the  new  city :  for  this  purpose,  each  negro  takes  up  an 
amazon,  which  it  carries  to  the  chosen  spot,  so  that  a  long  line  of  these 
faithful  creatures  may  be  seen  extending  all  the  way  from  the  old  to 
the  new  town ;  their  charges  are  then  deposited  at  the  various  en- 
trances, when  other  negroes  come  out,  welcome  their  arrival,  and 
usher  them  into  the  interior  of  their  new  abode. 

The  negro  is  not  the  only  species  of  ant  subjugated  by  the  legiona- 
ries. The  mining  ants  are  attacked  for  a  similar  purpose ;  but  as 
these  are  a  much  more  resolute  race  than  the  pacific  ash-colored 
tribe,  the  legionaries  are  obliged  to  vary  their  tactics. 

"  In  one  of  these  forays,  the  amazons,"  says  Huber,  "  proceeded 
like  a  torrent  along  a  deep  dike,  and  marched  in  a  more  compact 
body  than  ordinary,  and  in  a  short  time  reached  the  nest  they  pro- 
posed to  attack.  As  soon  as  the  legionaries  began  entering  the  sub- 
terranean city,  the  miners  rushed  out  in  crowds,  and  while  some  fell 
upon  the  invaders  with  great  spirit,  others  passed  through  the  scene 
of  contest,  solely  occupied  in  bearing  off  to  a  place  of  safety  their 
larvae  and  pupae." 

The  amazon  army  was  often  despoiled  of  its  booty,  but  their  supe- 
rior address  and  agilfty  at  length  gave  them  the  advantage,  and  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  they  were  seen  returning  homewards  loaded  with 
prey — not,  however,  straggling,  and  in  a  file,  as  after  an  assault  upon 
the  negroes,  but  in  a  compact  mass ;  a  precaution  so  much  the  more 
necessary,  as  the  courageous  miners  disputed  every  inch  of  ground, 
following  and  attacking  them  until  they  arrived  within  ten  paces  of 
the  amazonian  citadel. 

Besides  the  amazons,  there  is  another  slave-making  species,  called 
the  formica  sanguinea  ;  a  species  which  has  not  as  yet  been  discov- 
ered in  this  island.  They  are  larger  than  the  legiouaries ;  unlike 
them,  however,  they  share  the  labor  with  their  slaves.  Their  mode 
of  attack  is  very  different  from  that  of  the  legionaries ;  the  latter 
cany  every  thing  by  sheer  impetuosity ;  the  former  never  pour  in 
immense  masses,  but  attack  in  small  divisions ;  they  sometimes  go 
one  hundred  and  fifty  paces,  to  attack  a  negro  habitation,  and  the 
various  divisions  succeed  each  other  by  means  of  couriers,  which  are 
evidently  sent  off  to  fetch  assistance  from  the  garrison.  / 

u  On  the  15th  of  July,  at  10  a.  m."  says  Huber,  "a  small  division  of 
sanguine  ants  was  despatched  from  the  garrison,  and  arrived  in  quick 
march  near  a  nest  of  negro  ants,  situated  twenty  paces  distant,  around 
which  they  took  their  station.  The  inhabitants,  perceiving  the  stran- 
gers, rushed  forth,  and  made  several  prisoners ;  the  sanguine  ants  ad- 


4 

THE  JUSTINIAN  CODE.  125 

vanced  no  further  :  they  appeared  to  be  waiting  for  reinforcements  ; 
from  time  to  time,  little  companies  arrived  from  the  garrison  to 
strengthen  the  brigade  :  thus  reunited  they  advanced  a  little  nearer 
and  seemed  more  willing  to  run  the  risk  of  a  general  engagement ; 
but  in  proportion  as  they  approached  the  negro  dwelling,  the  more 
solicitous  did  they  seem  to  despatch  couriers  to  the  garrison,  who,  ar- 
riving in  great  haste,  produced  considerable  alarm,  when  another 
division  was  immediately  despatched  to  join  the  army.  The  negroes 
took  up  a  position  of  about  two  feet  square,  in  front  of  their  nest, 
where  nearly  their  whole  force  was  assembled,  awaiting  the  enemy." 
In  the  interim,  the  pupae  were  removed  to  the  side  of  the  nest  facing 
the  field  of  battle,  so  that  they  might  be  conveyed  away  at  a  mo- 
ment's warning,  affording  a  trait  of  what  Huber  calls  prudence,  and 
certainly  a  marvelously  singular  one  it  is.  When  fighting  with  the 
amazons,  the  impetuosity  of  the  attack  leaves  the  negro  ant  no  time 
for  thought,  but  in  their  contests  with  the  sanguine  ants,  they  vary 
their  tactics  so  as  to  meet  the  new  circumstances.  The  latter  insects, 
being  sufficiently  reenforced,  make  the  attack,  and  band  after  band 
pillage,  and  carry  away  their  booty,  not  in  a  few  minutes,  as  is  done 
by  the  amazons,  but  during  the  whole  day ;  and  if  the  pillaged  city 
should  suit  them  better  than  their  own,  they  remove  to  it  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning ;  at  least  so  it  appears  in  an  instance  observed  by 
Huber.  It  is  rare,  according  to  that  author,  that  they  do  not  change 
at  least  once  during  the  year.  They  certainly  inspire  the  negroes 
with  great  terror,  for  these,  once  attacked  by  them,  generally  forsake 
their  nest  for  ever. 

"  To  their  own  slaves  they  are  much  attached;  the  sanguine  ants 
are  often  besieged  by  the  fallow  ants  :  on  these  occasions  they  carry 
their  servants  to  the  lowest  chambers,  and  these,  as  if  aware  of  the 
intention  of  their  removal,  immediately  begin  barricading  the  differ- 
ent entrances,  with  every  species  of  material  lying  within  their  reach. 

The  sanguine  ants  evince  extraordinary  foresight  in  these  engage- 
ments ;  for,  while  one  party  is  fighting,  another  is  engaged  in  bearing 
away  the  negroes,  who  immediately  begin  by  constructing  a  new 
dwelling  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  scene  of  combat." 

Such  is  the  extraordinary  recital  contained  in  that  delightful  work 
of  Huber's,  every  fact  of  which  lias  been  confirmed  by  the  subse- 
quent observations  of  the  accurate  and  learned  Latreille.  It  would 
seem  that  the  negro  and  miner  ants  are  both  occasionally  enslaved, 
and  dwell  together  in  the  sanguine  ant-hills.  And  Huber  has  brought 
up  legionaries  and  sanguine  ants,  which  are  both  slave-makers,  with 
negroes,  iu  one  common  dwelling. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS  A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 

Having  shown  that  slavery  may  be  introduced  into 
human  society  without  violence  to  justice,  and  that  even 
when  it  originates  in  war,  it  passes  by  a  tendency  of 
human  nature,  amounting  almost  to  a  law,  into  a  peace- 
ful and  orderly  form  of  society,  I  come  now  to  show 
that,  having  been  once  introduced,  it  extends  itself  con- 
sistently with  justice,  and  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  Nature 
and  Providence,  unless  its  extension  is  violently  arrested 
by  some  exterior  agency.  I  do  not  mean  that  slavery  is 
destined  to  be  perpetual  in  every  country  in  which  it  is 
planted :  it  partakes,  we  know,  of  the  mutability  of  all 
things  human ;  it  rises  and  grows  to  maturity,  remains 
stationary  for  a  time,  and  then  decays  and  dies  out  in 
conformity  with  certain  laws  which  history,  by  its  large 
induction  of  facts,  enables  us  to  perceive  and  unfold. 
But  I  mean  that  slavery  once  introduced  becomes  a  just 
and  settled  institution  of  society;  liable,  indeed,  to  the 
changes  effected  by  violent  revolutions,  or  by  other  causes 
slower  in  their  operation,  and  of  a  more  insidious  nature ; 
but  still  a  fixed  social  institution,  entitled,  while  it  lasts, 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 


127 


in  a  degree  proportioned  to  its  importance,  to  the  same 
religious  regard  which  is  paid  by  all  good  men,  with 
common  consent,  to  the  orderly  institutions  of  society, 
not  only  in  their  own  country,  but  in  every  country  on 
earth. 

In  the  first  place,  as  a  presumptive,  though  not,  I 
confess,  a  conclusive  argument  in  favor  of  a  derivative 
servitude  from  parent  to  child,  I  desire  it  may  be  con- 
sidered that  children,  as  a  general  rule,  "follow  the  con- 
dition of  their  parents ;  as,  for  example,  that  the  children 
of  the  Arabs  are  Arabians,  and  that  the  natives  of  New 
England  are  not  savages,  like  the  aboriginal  Indians, 
but  are  an  enlightened,  civilized,  and  Christian  people, 
after  the  fashion  of  their  Puritan  forefathers.  No  man 
can  deny  the  fact,  and  all  my  readers,  I  trust,  will  agree 
with  me  in  ascribing  it  to  the  wise  order  of  that  Divine 
Providence  which  governs  the  wrorld.  The  posterity  of 
Abraham  inherited,  by  this  Divine  Providence,  the  priv- 
ileges which  their  father's  faith  had  earned  for  them,  as 
well  as  for  himself  ;  the  descendants  of  Ham  have  been 
born  to  the  curse  pronounced  on  their  progenitor ;  and, 
universally,  from  Pekin  to  Boston,  from  Cape  Horn  to 
Labrador,  and  from  the  time  of  Adam  to  the  present  day, 
children  have,  as  a  general  rule,  followed  the  condition 
of  their  parents;  reaping  in  some  instances  the  happy 
fruits  of  their  piety  and  virtue,  and  exemplifying  in 
other  instances,  the  misery  entailed  on  them  by  the  fol- 
lies and  iniquities  of  the  generation  that  preceded  them. 


128 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS 


What  would  be  thought  of  the  man  who  should  wail  over 
the  hard  lot  of  the  children  of  the  Esquimaux,  because 
they  were  not  born  in  France  and  Germany,  or  shed 
tears  of  compassion  over  the  Musquito  Indians,  because 
they  could  enjoy  only  the  "  protection"  of  England,  and 
were  debarred,  by  the  misfortune  of  their  birth,  from  all 
participation  in  the  liberties  bestowed  on  her,  by  "our 
Great  Deliverer,"  as  Lord  John  Russell  calls  the  Dutch 
William  ?  Why,  then,  should  it  be  esteemed  either  a 
wrong  or  a  grievance  that  the  children  of  slaves  are  not 
born  to  civil  freedom  ?  I  say,  civil  freedom,  since  the 
only  freedom  to  which  they  are  not  born  is  a  certain  civil 
state  or  condition;  for,  as  to  natural  freedom,  all  men 
are  born  alike ;  and  we  do  not  need  the  Declaration  of 
Independence  to  tell  us  that  new-born  infants,  whether 
they  first  see  the  light  in  London  or  in  Timbuctoo,  in  a 
king's  palace  or  a  slave's  cabin,  are  all  equal  by  nature. 
The  parents  of  slaves  are  not  more  in  a  state  of  nature 
than  their  masters ;  they  are  equally  with  them  members 
of  civil  society,  only  standing  in  a  different  relation  to 
society. 

The  difference,  then,  between  the  children  of  slaves 
and  the  children  of  their  masters  being  not  a  difference 
of  Nature  (for  in  this  respect  both  are  equal),  but  a,  dif- 
ference of  condition  in  human  society,  what  reason,  I 
ask  again,  has  any  man  to  wail  and  mourn  over  the  sad 
condition  of  the  children  of  slaves  because  they  are  not 
born  to  civil  freedom  ?    It  is  no  more  an  impeachment 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION.  129 

of  God's  justice  (for  really  it  is  God's  Providence,  and 
not  man's  agency,  against  which  this  objection  is  leveled) 
— it  is,  I  say,  no  more  an  impeachment  of  God's  justice 
and  goodness  that  men  should  be  born  unequal  in  for- 
tune, than  that  divers  orders  of  creatures  should  be 
made  unequal  in  nature.  Whatever  any  creature  has 
that  is  positive,  either  by  its  nature  or  condition,  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  bounty  of  the  All  Glorious  Giver ; 
whatever  any  creature  is  not  or  has  not,  is  a  mere  nega- 
tion, and  to  be  ascribed,  not  to  any  defect  of  God's  good- 
ness, but  to  the  original  nonentity  out  of  which  the 
creature  was  produced.  And,  if  it  be  an  illustration  of 
the  wisdom  and  benevolence  of  the  Deity,  that  He  has 
made  an  infinite  variety  of  creatures  of  divers  kinds,  how 
is  it  an  impeachment  of  His  Providence  that  He  permits 
the  greatest  possible  diversity  of  fortune  or  condition 
among  creatures  of  the  same  kind  ?  Why  the  condition 
of  horses  should  be  diversified ;  why  some  of  the  noble 
animals  should  be  trained  to  the  turf,  or  pampered  for 
a  nabob's  chariot,  while  others,  their  equals  in  all  the 
essentials  of  the  equine  nature,  should  be  degraded  to 
the  dray,  and  doomed  to  be  starved  and  beaten  by  some 
brute  of  an  owner,  it  might  puzzle  a  philosopher  to  ex- 
plain. But  man,  who  is  placed  in  this  world  on  proba- 
tion for  the  future,  whose  character  is  capable  of  an 
infinite  variety  of  development,  and  needs  a  correspond  • 
ing  variety  of  circumstances  in  order  to  its  development — 
why  should  it  be  thought  strange  that  his  natural  equal- 

G* 


130 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS 


ity  should  be  checkered  with  an  infinite  diversity  of 
fortune  ?  Must  we  raise  the  heathen  from  the  dead  to 
teach  the  nineteenth  century  Christians  that  the  choice 
of  our  lot  is  not  in  ourselves  but  in  God,  and  that  it 
becomes  us  to  act  well  our  own  part  in  life  because  it 
is  that  which  the  Master  of  the  drama  has  assigned 
to  us  ?# 

Do  our  philanthropists  really  think  that  every  human 
being  has  not  scope  enough  for  virtue  in  the  rank  and 
station  in  which  God  has  placed  him,  that  they  are  thus 
forever  moving  Acheron  to  make  men  as  equal  in  for- 
tune and  condition  as  they  are  in  nature  ?  Is  it  not 
enough  for  woman  to  cultivate  the  grace  and  gentleness 
proper  to  her  sex  ?  Is  the  English  collier  incapable  of 
all  virtue,  because  he  is  not  born  a  peer  of  the  realm  ? 
Are  all  the  civilities  and  charities  and  amenities  of  life 
of  necessity  bound  up  with  that  structure  of  society 
which  exalts  the  individual — man,  woman,  or  child — above 
the  State,  and  can  they  only  grace  the  car  of  that 
heaven- defying  liberty  which  this  sort  of  republicans 
have  chosen  for  their  tutelary  goddess  ?  Are  there  no 
virtues ;  nay,  rather,  are  there  not  many  of  the  noblest 
virtues  and  charities,  and  among  them  that  divine  and 

*  MefivriGO,  on  vnoKptr^  el  Spd/xarog,  olov  dv  6iXy  6  dtddoKalo? 
dv  Ppaxv,  f3paxeog'  dv  juatcpbv,  /uaKpov,  dv  nruxov  viroKplvaodai  as 
deTiri,  iva  teal  tovtov  eixpv&g  viroKpLvy'  dv  x^ov,  dv  dpxovra,  dv  16l6- 
tt]v,  gov  yap  tovt1  eon,  to  doOtv  VTzoKplvaodai  nuoGconov  KaTitog'  e/cAe- 
tjaoOai  &  avrb,  uTilov. — Epict.    Ey^p.  e.  17. 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 


131 


chastened  liberty  which  God  most  approves,  which  either 
grow  exclusively  out  of  the  relation  of  master  and  ser- 
vant, or  are  indebted  to  it  for  their  fuller  expansion  ? 
It  is  a  narrow  view  which  limits  all  the  virtues  to  one 
form  of  society ;  some  flourish  best  on  one  soil,  some  on 
another ;  and  all  of  them,  in  all  their  successive  stages 
and  manifold  forms  of  development,  are  necessary  to  a 
complete  humanity.  Faith  in  God's  providence  should 
teach  us,  that  He  has  so  ordered  the  birth  of  every  hu- 
man being  as  to  place  him  in  that  condition  and  those 
circumstances  which  he  sees  to  be  best  for  him,  both  as 
to  this  world  and  the  world  to  come ;  and  that  he  who  is 
lowest  (to  the  eye  of  man)  in  the  scale  of  fortune,  has 
infinitely  more  reason  to  be  thankful  for  his  humanity 
than  to  be  discontented  with  his  lot  in  life.  And  so  men 
would  think,  if  they  were  permitted  to  receive  the  gospel 
of  Christ  without  the  fumes  of  Exeter  Hall  and  the 
everlasting  din  and  clatter  of  fanatical  busy-bodies. 

But,  it  may  be  said,  all  other  children  have,  indeed, 
no  cause  to  complain  that  they  follow  the  condition  of 
their  parents,  because,  whatever  be  its  hardships,  they 
are  at  least  allowed  their  natural  rights ;  but  the  chil- 
dren of  slaves  differ  herein  from  all  others,  that  they  are 
at  once,  and  as  soon  as  born,  deprived  of  their  natural 
rights.  This  is  a  mistake ;  they  are  not  deprived  of 
their  natural  rights,  but  are  protected  in  them  by  the 
masters,  in  whose  service  they  are  born,  just  as  children, 
born  free,  are  protected  in  their  natural  rights  by  their 


132 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS 


parents.  But  let  us  look  at  the  matter,  for  a  moment, 
on  the  popular  supposition,  and  see  what  it  will  come  to. 
"  0  that  the  children  of  slaves,"  you  exclaim,  "had  but 
their  natural  rights,  I  would  ask  no  more  !?r  Nay,  my 
dear  reader,  you  shall  have  more.  I  will  be  as  liberal 
to  you  as  wras  the  good  fairy  to  the  honest  couple  in  the 
nursery  tale.  I  will  give  you  three  wishes,  and,  my 
word  for  it,  your  third  wish,  like  that  of  the  said  honest 
couple,  will  be  prompted  by  the  vanity  of  the  two  others. 
You  wish  that  the  children  of  the  slaves  might  have 
their  natural  rights.  Done !  And  now  let  me  ask 
what  have  you  gained  for  them  ?  What  provision  doe3 
Nature  make  for  them  ?  She  gives  them  the  light  of 
the  sun  by  day,  and  the  light  of  the  moon  and  stars  by 
night,  and  the  air  of  heaven  to  breathe.  This  is  their 
freedom  by  nature,  and  to  these  rights  they  are  born. 
But  how  long  will  they  live  to  enjoy  this  natural  free- 
dom without  food,  and  shelter,  and  clothing  ?  The  young 
of  brutes  may  soon  take  care  of  themselves,  but  the  off- 
spring of  human  parents  are  utterly  helpless;  they 
must  be  indebted  for  years  to  the  care  of  others  for 
maintenance,  before  they  can  provide  for  themselves. 

The  result,  then,  of  your  first  wish  is,  that  you  leave 
the  children  to  perish !  Your  second  wish  is,  I  suppose, 
that  their  parents  also  may  have  the  rights  of  nature, 
so  as  to  be  at  liberty  to  take  care  of  their  offspring. 
Agreed !  Take  away,  then,  from  the  parents  the  advan- 
tages they  have  received  from  their  masters  and  from 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION.  133 


that  intercourse  with  human  society  which  they  have 
enjoyed  through  their  masters,  and  restore  them  to  their 
pure  and  inalienable  natural  rights.  Can  more  miserable 
creatures  be  imagined  ?  Naked,  and  without  the  use  of 
language,  they  pluck  herbs  and  roots,  and  gather  wild 
fruits ;  quench  their  thirst  at  the  next  spring,  river,  or 
ditch  ;  and  shelter  themselves  from  the  injuries  of  the 
wreather  by  creeping  into  some  cave,  or  covering  them- 
selves after  any  sort  with  moss,  or  grass ;  pass  away 
their  tedipus  life  in  idleness;  start  at  every  noise,  and 
are  afraid  at  the  sight  of  any  other  animal ;  and  perish 
at  last,  either  by  hunger  or  cold,  or  some  wild  beast. 
Oh,  the  blessed  rights  of  Nature  !  And  now,  reader, 
tell  me  honestly  whether  your  third  wish  will  not  be  to 
revoke  the  two  former  wishes,  and  to  restore  these  poor 
infants  to  the  masters  to  whose  care  the  good  providence 
of  God  has  committed  them  ?  For,  believe  me,  God  has 
never  dealt  so  harshly  with  the  descendants  of  Adam 
since  the  fall,  as  to  leave  them  to  their  natural  rights 
alone.  Look  the  world  through,  and  you  will  find  that 
Nature,  to  use  the  words  of  the  elder  Pliny,  has  acted 
the  part,  rather  of  a  cruel  step-dame,  than  of  a  kind 
mother  to  the  young  of  human  parents ;  and  that  the 
providence  of  Almighty  God  has  been  far  more  bounti- 
ful than  Nature  to  the  children  of  our  American  slaves, 
by  giving  them  Christian  masters,  who,  from  motives 
both  of  duty  and  interest,  provide  for  their  helpless 


134 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS 


infancy,  and  thus  justly  bind  them  to  their  service  in 
their  maturer  years. 

But  before  we  proceed  with  the  argument,  the  men- 
tion of  the  elder  Pliny  leads  me  to  pause  for  a  moment 
and  invite  the  reader  to  refresh  himself  with  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  passages  of  heathen  antiquity.  This 
great  naturalist,  having  surveyed  all  inanimate  creation, 
enters,  in  the  seventh  book  of  his  Natural  History,  on 
the  description  of  living  creatures.  And  here,  in  the 
first  place,  his  attention  is  arrested  by  the  fact  just  re- 
ferred to — the  singular  helplessness  and  wretchedness  of 
human  infancy.  To  us  Christians,  who  have  been  in- 
structed in  the  fall  and  redemption  of  man,  the  fact  is 
not  inexplicable ;  but  to  this  inquisitive  and  intelligent 
heathen  it  was  a  mystery  and  a  marvel ;  and  the  per- 
plexity which  it  gave  him  probably  excited  him  to  study 
and  exhibit  the  fact  with  a  force  and  fullness  which  no 
Christian  divine,  to  my  knowledge,  has  ever  equaled. 
I  give  the  passage  in  the  telling  old  English  of  a  Church 
of  England  divine  of  the  seventeenth  century ;  and  al- 
though it  be  not  exactly  the  material  for  a  fourth  of  July 
oration,  it  will  yet  prove,  I  trust,  at  least  equally  sug- 
gestive of  salutary  thoughts  : 

"Thus,  as  you  see,  we  have  in  the  former  books  suf- 
ficiently treated  of  the  universal  world,  of  the  lands, 
regions,  nations,-  seas,  islands,  and  renowned  cities  there- 
in contained.  It  remaineth  now  to  discourse  of  the  living 
creatures  comprised  within  the  same,  and  their  natures : 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 


135 


a  point,  doubtless,  that  would  require  as  deep  a  specula- 
tion as  any  part  else  thereof  whatsoever,  if  so  be  the 
spirit  and  mind  of  man  were  able  to  comprehend  and 
compass  all  things  in  the  world.  And  to  make  a  good 
entrance  into  this  treatise  and  history,  methinks  of  right 
we  ought  to  begin  at  Man,  for  whose  sake  it  would  seem 
that  Nature  produced  all  other  creatures  besides  :  though 
this  great  favor  of  hers,  so  bountiful  and  beneficial  in 
that  respect,  hath  cost  full  dear.  Insomuch  as  it  is  hard 
to  judge,  whether  in  so  doing,  she  hath  done  the  part  of 
a  kind  mother,  or  an  hard  and  cruel  step-dame.  For, 
first  and  foremost  of  ail  other  living  creatures,  man  she 
hath  brought  forth  all  naked,  and  clothed  him  with  the 
good  and  riches  of  others.  To  all  the  rest  given  she 
hath  sufficient  to  clad  (clothe)  them  every  one,  accord- 
ing to  their  kind :  as,  namely,  shells,  cods,  hard  hides, 
pricks,  shags,  bristles,  hair,  down,  feathers,  quills,  scales, 
and  fleeces  of  wool.  The  very  trunks  and  stems  of  trees 
and  plants  she  hath  defended  with  bark  and  rind,  yea, 
and  the  same  sometimes  double,  against  the  injuries  both 
of  heat  and  cold.  Man  alone,  poor  wretch,  she  hath 
laid  all  naked  upon  the  bare  earth,  even  on  his  birth-day, 
to  cry  and  wrawl  presently  from  the  very  first  hour  that 
he  is  born  into  this  world:  in  such  sort  as,  among  so 
many  living  creatures,  there  is  none  subject  to  shed 
tears  and  weep  like  him.  And,  verily,  to  no  babe  or 
infant  is  given  once  to  laugh  before  he  be  forty  days  old, 
and  that  is  counted  very  early,  and  with  the  soonest. 


136 


SLAVERY  REGARDED  AS 


Moreover,  so  soon  as  he  is  entered  in  this  manner  to  en- 
joy the  light  of  the  sun,  see  how  he  is  immediately  tied 
and  bound  fast,  and  hath  no  member  at  liberty ;  a  thing 
that  is  not  practised  upon  the  young  whelps  of  any  beast 
among  us',  be  he  never  so  wild.  The  child  of  man,  so 
untowardly  born,  and  who  another  day  is  to  rule  and 
command  all  other,  lo  how  he  lieth  bound  hand  and  foot, 
weeping  and  crying,  and  beginning  his  life  with  misery, 
as  if  he  were  to  make  amends  and  justification  by  his 
punishment  unto  Nature,  for  his  only  fault  and  trespass, 
that  he  is  born  and  brought  into  the  world.  '  0  folly  of 
all  follies,  ever  to  think  (considering  this  simple  beginning 
of  ours)  that  we  were.sent  into  this  world  to  live  in  pride, 
and  carry  our  head  aloft !  The  first  hope  that  we  con- 
ceive of  our  strength,  the  first  gift  that  time  affordeth  us, 
maketh  us  no  better  than  four-footed  beasts  ;  how  long  is 
it  ere  we  can  go  alone  !  How  long  before  we  can  prattle 
and  speak,  feed  ourselves  and  chew  our  meat  strongly ! 
What  a  while  continueth  the  mold  and  crown  of  our 
heads  to  beat  and  pant,  before  our  brain  is  well  settled  ; 
the  undoubted  mark  and  token  that  bewrayeth  our  ex- 
ceeding great  weakness  above  all  other  creatures.  What 
should  I  say  of  the  infirmities  and  sickness  that  soon 
seize  upon  our  feeble  bodies  ?  What  need  I  speak  of  so 
many  medicines  and  remedies  devised  against  these  mala- 
dies ?  besides  the  new  diseases  that  come  every  day,  to 
check  and  frustrate  all  our  provision  of  physic  what- 
soever.   As  for  all  other  living  creatures  there  is  not 


A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 


137 


one,  but  by  a  secret  instinct  of  nature  knoweth  his  own 
good,  and  whereto  he  is  made  able :  some  make  use  of 
their  swift  feet,  others  of  their  flight  wings ;  some  are 
strong  of  limbs,  others  are  apt  to  swim,  and  practice  the 
same  :  man  only  knoweth  nothing,  except  he  be  taught; 
he  can  neither  speak,  nor  go,  nor  eat,  otherwise  than  he 
is  trained  to  it ;  and  to  be  short,  apt  and  good  at  nothing 
he  is  naturally,  but  to  pule  and  cry. 

"  And  hereupon  it  is,  that  some  have  been  of  this  opin- 
ion, That  better  it  had  been,  and  simply  best  for  man, 
never  to  have  been  born,  or  else  speedily  to  die.  None 
but  we  do  sorrow  and  wail,  none  but  we  are  given  to 
excess  and  superfluity,  infinitely  in  everything,  and 
show  the  same  in  every  member  that  we  have.  Who 
but  we,  again,  are  ambitious  and  vainglorious  ?  Who 
but  we  are  covetous  and  greedy  of  gathering  good  ? 
We,  and  none  but  we,  desire  to  live  long,  and  never  to 
die,  are  superstitious,  careful  of  our  sepulture  and  burial, 
yea,  and  what  shall  beticle  us  when  we  are  gone.  Man's 
life  is  most  frail  of  all  others,  and  in  least  security  he 
liveth :  no  creature  lusteth  more  after  everything  than 
he ;  none  feareth  like  unto  him,  and  is  more  troubled 
and  amazed  in  his  fright ;  and  if  he  be  set  once  upon 
anger,  none  more  raging  and  wood  (mad)  than  he.  To 
conclude,  all  other  living  creatures  live  orderly  and 
well,  after  their  own  kind ;  we  see  them  flock  and  gather 
together,  and  ready  to  make  head  and  stand  against  all 
others  of  a  contrary  kind ;  the  lions,  as  fell  and  savage 


138        SLAVERY  A  PROVIDENTIAL  INSTITUTION. 


as  they  be,  fight  not  with  one  another ;  serpents  sting 
not  serpents,  nor  bite  one  another  with  their  venomous 
teeth;  nay,  the  very  monsters  and  huge  fishes  of  the 
sea,  war  not  amongst  themselves  in  their  own  kind ;  but, 
believe  me,  man,  at  man's  hand,  receiveth  most  harm 
and  mischief."  # 

*  Jackson's  Works,  fol.  ed.,  vol.  iii.,  b.  10,  c.  8.  For  the  original, 
see  Appendix. 


CHAPTER  X. 


AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED  AS  A  SOCIAL 
INSTITUTION. 


But  to  return  to  our  argument.  We  have  seen  that 
the  contract  which  tacitly  subsists  between  the  master 
and  his  slaves  devolves  on  the  one  party  the  duty  of 
care  and  protection,  and  on  the  other  party  the  duty  of 
service.  Now  the  children  of  slaves  are  naturally  part 
of  their  parents — bone  of  their  bone,  and  flesh  of  their 
flesh.  Naturally,  therefore,  as  well  as  justly,  and  by  a 
moral  necessity,  they  become  parties  to  the  contract  that 
subsists  between  their  parents  and  the  master.  That  in- 
fants, as  soon  as  born,  are  incapable  of  becoming  parties 
to  a  contract,  will  be  affirmed  by  no  person  who  is  even 
moderately  conversant  with  moral  science.  The  consent 
and  custom  of  all  nations  ;  the  theories  of  the  profound- 
est  authors  on  the  constitution  of  human  society;  the 
divinely  prescribed  usage  of  the  Jewish  Church ;  the 
entire  consent  of  the  Christian  Church  ;  and,  with  few 
exceptions,  of  all  professing  Christians,  from  the  time 
of  the  Apostles  to  the  present,  concurring  with  the  Jew- 
ish Church  in  not  only  recognizing  infants  as  capable  of 


140  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


a  covenant  relation,  but  in  formally  sealing  and  ratifying 
that  relation,  put  it  out  of  all  doubt  that  infants  may  be 
justly  held  to  be  parties  to  a  contract  for  their  own  ben- 
efit. As  respects  the  children  of  slaves,  it  is  so  obvi- 
ously beneficent,  so  clearly  just,  so  imperatively  obliga- 
tory to  admit  them  to  the  same  contract  with  their 
parents,  that  the  master  who  should  refuse  them  this 
boon,  who  should  turn  tliem  off  his  hands,  where  the 
providence  of  God  has  placed  them,  and  throw  them 
back  on  the  mere  rights  of  Nature,  instead  of  according 
to  them  the  more  sacred  and  important  rights  that  justly 
accrue  to  them  by  their  birth  of  parents  in  his  service ; 
who.  in  a  word,  should  leave  them  to  perish,  instead  of 
providing  for  their  wants,  would  be  branded,  and  justly, 
as  a  monster  of  impiety,  injustice,  and  cruelty.  He  can 
not  escape  froru  his  responsibility  without  bringing  on 
himself  the  displeasure  of  God  and  the  scorn  and  execra- 
tion of  men  ;  he  is  morally  and  religiously  bound  by  ties 
of  the  most  sacred  nature,  to  provide  for  the  wants  of 
these  infants,  to  feed  and  to  lodge  them,  and  to  train 
them  for  the  duties  of  their  humble  station. 

You  say  that  it  is  his  interest  to  rear  them,  and  that 
he  does  it  from  sordid  motives,  and  in  order  to  enrich 
himself  by  their  future  labor.  I  answer  that  his  motives 
concern  nobody  but  himself  and  his  Maker  ;  and  as  to 
his  profiting  by  their  labors,  how  unreasonable  to  carp  at 
a  man  for  not  declining  a  duty  because  the  Providence 
of  God  has  made  it  his  interest  to  discharge  it !  Hard, 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


141 


indeed,  would  be  our  lot  if  we  were  compelled  to  work, 
either  for  this  world  or  the  next,  without  the  hope  of  re- 
ward ! 

Now  if  it  be  granted,  and  I  see  not  how  it  can  be 
fairly  denied,  that  the  master  is  bound  to  extend  support 
and  maintenance  to  the  children  of  his  slaves  during 
their  infancy,  then  it  inevitably  follows  that  these  chil- 
dren are  indebted  to  him  for  this  support  and  mainten- 
ance ;  and  since  he  gives  them  support  on  condition  of 
their  future  service,  and  they  can  not  otherwise  repay 
the  debt,  it  follows  that  they  owe  him  service  as  soon  as 
they  are  capable  of  rendering  it ;  nor  is  it  just  or  equit- 
able that  they  should  quit  his  service  unless  they  pay 
him  an  equivalent  for  his  care  and  nurture.  Thus  the 
bond  of  servitude  is  formed  by  Providence  ;  it  is  the  off- 
spring not  of  a  physical  but  of  a  moral  necessity,  that  is 
to  say,  not  of  arbitrary  power  but  of  benevolence  and 
justice;  it  is  formed  under  circumstances  under  which 
it  can  not  but  be  formed  without  impiety  to  God  and 
injustice  to  man  :  it  is  formed  on  the  one  part  in  infancy 
and  helplessness,  and  is,  therefore,  next  in  sacredness  to 
the  ties  of  blood ;  and  for  the  State  to  step  in  and  annul 
the  relation  and  cancel  the  real  though  implied  contract, 
without  the  mutual  consent  of  the  parties,  would  be,  as 
it  seems  to  me,  a  stretch  of  arbitrary  power  that  could 
only  be  justified  by  the  same  law  of  expediency  and  phy- 
sical force  on  which  slavery  itself  is  thought,  by  many, 
to  rest  for  its  support. 


142 


AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


That  I  may  not  be  thought  to  be  broaching  any  private 
fancies  of  my  own,  I  beg  to  fortify  my  positions  with  the 
names  of  men,  whose  authority  alone,  I  am  not  ashamed 
to  confess,  would  silence  my  objections,  even  if  their 
arguments  failed  to  carry  conviction  to  my  reason. 

The  illustrious  Grotius,  after  having  mooted  the  ques- 
tion, not  essential  to  our  present  argument,  whether  chil- 
dren are  required  by  the  law  of  Nature  to  follow  the 
condition  of  the  father  or  the  mother  on  the  supposition 
that  the  one  was  free  and  the  other  a  slave  :  the  Civil 
law,  as  is  well  known,  making  the  child  take  its  condi- 
tion from  the  mother,  the  old  English  law  from  the 
father,  the  Saxons  and  some  other  nations  from  the  slave 
parent,  whether  father  or  mother,  and  the  West  Gothic 
law,  in  case  the  parents  belonged  to  different  masters, 
requiring  the  value  of  the  issue  to  be  divided  in  two 
equal  parts  between  the  respective  masters  ;  Grotius,  I 
say,  having  adverted  to  the  difficulties  involved  in  this 
question,  with  wThich  we  have  no  occasion  to  encumber 
our  present  inquiry,  proceeds  as  follows  : 

"  Let  us  suppose,  then,  for  the  ease  of  the  inquiry, 
that  both  parents  are  slaves,  and  let  us  see  whether  so 
their  children  would  be  naturally  slaves  too.  If  there 
were,  indeed,  no  other  way  of  maintaining  their  children, 
parents  might,  with  themselves,  bring  their  future  pro- 
geny into  slavery  ;  because,  upon  the  very  same  account, 
parents  may  even  sell  their  free-born  children.  But 
since  this  right  does  naturally  arise  from  mere  necessity, 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


143 


it  is  in  no  other  circumstances  allowed  that  parents 
should  enslave  their  children ;  nor  have  masters  any 
other  right  over  the  children  of  their  slaves,  than  as 
they  are  to  find  them  victuals  and  other  necessaries  of 
life ;  and,  therefore,  when  the  children  of  slaves  have 
been  for  a  long  time  maintained  before  they  are  capable  of 
being  serviceable  to  their  master ',  and  their  work  then  can 
only  answer  the  expense  of  their  present  maintenance, 
such  children  can  never  quit  their  service,  unless  they 
pay  what  is  reasonable  for  all  their  former  entertain- 
ment." * 

Puffendorf,  a  name  of  equal  weight  with  Grotius,  and 
who  wrote  after  him  is  still  more  explicit  and  cogent : 

"  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  master  doth  no  injury  to 
his  slave's  offspring,  by  dooming  it  to  the  same  subjec- 
tion. For,  since  the  mother  hath  nothing  of  her  own,  it 
is  impossible  she  should  maintain  the  child  but  with  the 
master's  goods.  And,  inasmuch  as  the  master  is 
obliged  to  furnish  such  an  infant  with  food,  and  other 
necessaries,  long  before  he  is  capable  of  making  any 
requital  for  his  labor  ;  and  since,  when  he  first  begins 
to  work,  his  pains  are  scarce  equivalent  to  his  daily 
maintenance,  he  can  not  escape  servitude,  unless  by  the 
master's  particular  dispensation.  And  this  reason  will 
hold,  not  only  while  he  is  supposed  to  continue,  as  it 
were,  in  the  master's  debt,  but  ever  after ;  because  the 

*  Right  of  War.  and  Peace,  Book  IL,  c.  v.,  sect,  xxix.,  paragraphs 
1  and  2. 


144  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


condition,  on  which  the  master  first  undertook  to  keep 
him,  was,  that  he  should  perform  perpetual  service,  and 
to  this  condition  he  is  presumed  to  have  yielded  his  tacit 
consent ;  especially,  if  it  be  considered  that  his  very 
birth  is  owing  to  his  master's  favor,  who,  by  the  right 
of  war,  might  have  put  his  parents  to  death.  And  as 
for  that  natural  freedom,  with  which  all  men  are  in 
common  invested,  it  then  only  takes  place,  when  no  act 
or  agreement  of  ourselves  or  others,  hath  rendered  us 
obnoxious  to  a  state  of  inferiority.'7^ 

From  all  which  it  appears  that,  wherever  slavery  ex- 
ists as  a  settled  condition  or  institution  of  society,  the 
bond  which  unites  master  and  servant  is  of  a  moral  na- 
ture ;  founded  in  rights  not  in  might ;  and  obligatory 
on  the  conscience,  as  really  so  as  the  bond  that  unites 
men  in  the  higher  and  more  sacred  relations  of  life.  Let 
the  origin  of  the  relation  have  been  what  it  may,  yet 
when  once  it  can  plead  such  prescription  of  time  as  to 
have  received  a  fixed  and  determinate  character,  it  must 
be  assumed  to  be  founded  in  the  consent  of  the  parties, 
and  to  be,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  compact  or  cov- 
enant, of  the  same  kind  with  that  which  lies  at  the  foun- 
dation of  all  human  society.  The  parties  are  knit  to- 
gether by  numerous  ties  ;  care  and  protection  are  due  to 
the  slave,  who  is  bound,  in  his  turn,  to  render  the  duty 
of  gratitude  and  service  to  the  master.   The  relation  can 

*  Law  of  Nature  and  Nations,  Book  VI.,  chap,  iii.,  sect.  9. 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


145 


not  be  severed  at  the  will  of  the  parties  ;  it  has  passed 
beyond  their  control,  and  is  established  by  the  decree 
and  order  of  divine  Providence.  The  slave  can  not  in 
equity  fall  back  on  his  natural  right  of  freedom ;  for  he 
must  be  presumed,  by  his  own  consent,  to  have  waived 
that  right  for  the  sake  of  the  life  and  nurture  which  he 
owes  under  God  to  his  master.  He  can  not  justly  claim 
exemption  on  the  ground  that  a  definite  portion  of  his 
time  and  labor  is  an  adequate  compensation  for  his  early 
nurture ;  since  the  very  conditions  on  which  the  contract 
was  undertaken,  and  to  which  he  is  presumed  to  have  con- 
sented, are  perpetual  service  on  the  one  hand,  and  per- 
petual maintenance  on  the  other  ;  and  he  has  the  less 
inducement  to  make  this  claim,  when  it  is  considered 
that  the  contract  includes  his  support  in  sickness  and  in 
old  age.  Hence  the  law  of  Nature,  a  prime  principle 
of  which  is  fidelity  to  contracts,  enjoins  servants  to  obey 
their  masters  in  all  lawful  commands  ;  and  Revelation 
does  but  expand  with  greater  clearness,  and  enforce  un- 
der higher  sanctions,  the  law  which  Nature  imposes, 
when  it  commands  servants  to  be  subject  to  their  mas- 
ters. It  is  the  same  here  as  in  other  compacts  :  nothing 
can  justify  failure  of  duty  on  the  part  of  the  slave  but 
the  abuse  of  his  right  on  the  part  of  the  master.  Oppres- 
sion and  cruelty  on  the  part  of  the  master  may  justify, 
as  they  are  pretty  sure  to  cause,  desertion  or  revolt  on 
the  part  of  the  slave.    But  the  case  is  exceptional ;  and 

hence  the  scriptures  enjoin  submission  in  this  as  well  as 

7 


146 


AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


in  the  case  of  children  and  other  subjects  of  legitimate 
authority,  without  limitation  or  reserve :  "  Servants, 
obey  your  masters;"  "  Children,  obey  your  parents;" 
and,  "  Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers; 
for  there  is  no  power  but  of  God." 

It  may  be  said  that  American  slavery  originated  nei- 
ther in  the  wants  of  society,  nor  in  legitimate  warfare, 
but  that  it  began  in  piracy  and  robbery,  and  was  intro- 
duced under  circumstances  of  aggravated  cruelty.  Be 
it  so.  I  see  no  occasion  to  investigate  its  origin,  and 
have  certainly  no  disposition  to  defend  it.  For,  in  spite 
of  the  ingenious  pleas  of  Mr.  Dunning  ^  and  all  its  apol- 
ogists, I  believe  the  way  in  which  African  slavery  was 
introduced  into  this  country  to  be  the  foulest  of  all  blots 
on  human  nature ;  the  most  baneful  fruit  of  that  ac- 
cursed greed  of  gold,  f  which  sucks  its  poisonous  nutri- 
ment from  baseness  and  cruelty,  and  from  all  the  mean- 
est and  boldest  vices  under  heaven. 

Be  the  guilt  on  the  heads  of  its  authors  !  It  does  not 
affect  the  American  people  who  have  declared  the  slave- 
trade  to  be  piracy :  it  does  not  stain  the  slavery  that 
now  exists  under  the  laws  of  our  Southern  States ; 
it  does  not  touch,  in  the  slightest  degree,  the  relation  of 
master  and  slave  as  it  now  exists  on  the  American  soil. 
For  the  relation  which  now  ties  the  Southern  master  to 

*  See  his  argument  in  the  Somerset  case,  as  given  in  Loft's  Re- 
ports. 

\  Sacra  auri  fames. 


AS  A.  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


147 


his  slaves  is  formed  with  those  who  are  born  under  his 
own  roof,  or  on  his  own  domain,  and  not  with  their  Afri- 
can progenitors.  It  is  a  personal  relation ;  and  like  all 
other  personal  relations,  derives  its  moral  quality  from 
the  parties  that  directly  form  and  sustain  it,  and  from  no 
others ;  and  is  either  right  or  wrong  in  virtue  of  acts 
that  have  passed  between  the  persons  directly  united  in 
it,  and  not  in  virtue  of  acts  that  transpired  before  they 
were  born;  and  for  which,  therefore,  they  can  not,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  be  in  the  least  degree  responsible. 
The  rape  of  the  Sabines  was  no  derogation  to  the  peace- 
ful and  honorable  marriages  that  followed  it  in  the  set- 
tled times  of  the  Roman  republic ;  and  as  little  can  the 
violence  in  which  slavery  originated  in  any  wise  taint  or 
corrupt  the  relation  that  naturally  grows  up  between  a 
master  and  the  slaves  born  in  his  house  and  nurtured  by 
his  care.  And  England,  for  it  is  servility  to  English 
opinion  which  has  generated  this  Northern  hatred  of 
Southern  institutions;  England,  I  say,  should  learn  to 
discriminate  between  the  slavery  which  was  introduced 
by  violence  and  piracy  into  our  colonies  under  her  pa- 
tronage, and  the  peaceful  and  orderly  institution  which 
has  grown  up  under  the  shadow  of  our  laws  since  our 
own  self-respect  moved  us  to  withdraw  from  her  juris- 
diction. 

For  the  relation,  however  it  may  have  originated,  in- 
volving, as  it  now  does  in  our  Southern  States,  mutual 
obligations,  and  knitting  together  innocent  parties  in 


148  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


sacred  ties,  manifestly  rests  less  on  the  will  of  men,  than 
on  the  appointment  of  God,  "in  whom  is  no  injustice, 
and  who  alone. knoweth  best  how  to  proportion  His  pun- 
ishment unto  men's  offenses;"  and  we  might  as  reason- 
ably call  on  the  New  Englanders  to  restore  their  country 
to  the  ghosts  of  the  aboriginal  Indians,  whom  their 
fathers  drove  out  of  it,  or  on  the  United  States  to  return 
to  their  subjection  to  Great  Britain,  as  to  deny  the  right 
of  the  Southern  planter  to  the  labor  of  his  slaves  because 
their  progenitors  some  two  hundred  years  ago  were  ab- 
ducted from  Africa.  Why  can  not  men  understand  that 
there  is  a  Providence  which  governs  the  world,  as  well 
as  a  God  that  created  it,  and  that,  while  they  reject  the 
appointments  of  God,  they  are  on  the  high-road  to  the 
denial  of  His  being  ?  It  is  the  fact  of  slavery,  the  now 
established  relation  of  master  and  servant,  and  not  the 
origin  of  that  relation,  with  which  we  of  this  generation 
are  concerned.  If  the  relation  be  innocent  in  itself,  we 
are  under  no  moral  obligation  to  abrogate  it ;  if  it  be 
productive  of  mutual  benefits  which  could  not  be  so  well 
obtained  without  it,  it  would  be  folly  to  abolish  it ;  if  it 
involve,  as  it  clearly  does,  a  sacred,  though  tacit  com- 
pact, it  would  be  criminal  to  neglect  the  obligations  of 
that  contract;  and  if  it  be  maintained  in  good  faith,  and 
cemented  in  the  bonds  of  peace  and  friendship  and  social 
order,  it  is  purely  diabolical  to  sow  the  seeds  of  aliena- 
tion and  hatred  among  its  subjects,  and  to  seek  to  over- 
throw it  by  violence  and  bloodshed. 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION.  149 

To  the  theory  that  slavery  rests  on  the  hasis  of  con- 
tract, it  has  been  objected  ;  1,  that  the  slave  had  no 
power  to  transfer  to  another  his  natural  rights  ;  and,  2, 
that  he  receives  from  his  master  no  competent  considera- 
tion for  his  labor ;  both  objections  being  founded  on  the 
nature  of  contracts,  to  the  existence  of  which  it  is  neces- 
sary that  there  should  be  a  power  to  give,  a  power  to 
receive,  and  a  sufficient  consideration. 

As  to  the  former  :  Pray,  what  natural  rights  does 
the  slave  transfer  to  his  master  ?  Eight  to  life  ?  The 
slave  has  neither  given  it,  nor  does  the  master  pretend 
to  have  received  it.  Right  to  liberty?  The  slave,  in- 
deed, is  presumed  to  have  transferred  to  the  master  the 
use  of  his  bodily  liberty,  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  in  order 
to  that  service  for  life,  which  he  is  presumed  to  have 
promised  and  bound  himself  to  render.  But  has  he  not 
the  right  to  do  this  ?  Say  no,  and  who,  then,  deprives 
bim  of  his  natural  right?  You  who  deny  him  the  right 
to  dispose  of  his  labor  for  life,  because  the  municipal  law 
would  forbid  him  if  he  lived  at  the  North,  or  I  who  contend 
that  the  slave,  in  virtue  of  his  humanity  and  in  common 
with  all  mankind,  has  this  right  until  the  State,  for  the 
real  or  fancied  good  of  the  individual,  steps  in  to  restrain 
him  in  this  right  and  to  forbid  its  exercise  ?  Or  is  it  the 
right  to  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  the  transfer  of  which 
is  to  annul  the  contract?  But  neither  has  the  slave 
transferred  this  right  :  he  has  merely  exchanged,  or  is 
justly  presumed  to  have  exchanged  the  pursuit  of  happi- 


150  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


ness  in  the  wilds  of  uncultivated  nature  for  the  pursuit 
of  happiness-  in  an  humble  vocation  in  civilized  and 
Christian  society. 

The  truth  is,  that  this  whole  class  of  objections  applies 
only  to  the  English  theory,  which  supposes  slavery  to  be 
founded  on  force,  and  to  vest  the  master  with  an  absolute 
power  over  his  servants.  It  does  not  apply  to  slavery, 
considered  as  a  peaceable  and  settled  relation  of  orderly 
society,  and  therefore  not  to  American  slavery. 

The  other  objection  represents  the  theory  of  contract 
as  untenable  for  want  of  a  competent  consideration  ; 
meaning  that  the  provision  made  for  the  slave  by  the 
master  is  not  a  consideration  of  sufficient  value  to  consti- 
tute a  contract.  But  is  this  so  ?  What  is  a  competent 
consideration  for  the  labor  of  the  poor  if  it  be  not  nur- 
ture in  infancy,  maintenance  in  health,  support  in  sick- 
ness and  old  age,  and  a  relief  from  the  uncertainty  and 
mental  anxieties  inseparable  from  the  lot  of  those  who 
are  compelled  to  provide  for  themselves  ?  Are  our  Amer- 
ican slaves  deprived  of  thfs  provision  ?  On  the  contrary, 
their  rights  in  this  respect  are  secured  by  the  laws  of  the 
States  in  which  they  live  ;  and  it  is,  I  believe,  the  com- 
mon testimony  of  those  who  have  either  visited  or  resided 
in  those  States,  that  the  slaves  are  a  happy  and  contented 
people.  Dr.  Lieber  himself,  certainly  no  friend  to  the 
institution,  tells  us  that  "it  is  generally  admitted  that 
the  slave  is  nowhere  better  treated  than  in  the  slave- 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


151 


holding  States  of  this  Union  and  I  believe  he  might 
have  added  with  truth  that  slaves  are  better  cared  for  in 
our  Southern  States  than  the  laboring  classes  of  any 
other  country  on  earth.  And  the  England  and  New 
England  assailants  of  the  institution,  instead  of  denying 
the  fact  when  pressed  with  it,  do  but  ascribe  it  to  the 
mercenary  motives  of  the  master  (who  provides  for  his 
slaves,  it  is  said,  on  the  same  principle  as  for  his  horses 
and  cattle),  and  redouble  their  dismal  ululations  over  the 
besotted  ignorance  of  the  negro,  who  is  content  to  remain 
a  slave  ! — themselves  slaves  to  a  word  ! 

The  statistical  tables  tell  us  that  the  blacks  of  New 
England  increased  six  per  cent,  in  ten  years,  while  those 
of  the  Slave  States  increased  twenty-six  per  cent,  in 
the  same  time ;  which,  allowing  a  large  margin  for  the 
influence  of  climate,  and  for  the  number  of  free  blacks 
in  the  South,  still  leaves  us  pretty  fair  ground  to  con- 
clude that  the  slaves,  on  the  whole,  have  no  reason  to 
complain  of  insufficient  compensation.  Besides,  if  they 
are  not  well  paid  for  their  labor,  how  shall  we  explain 
the  fact,  insisted  on  by  our  political  economists,  that 
slave  labor  is  more  unproductive  than  free  labor  ?  For 
what  does  this  mean,  if  it  be  not  that  the  negroes,  while 
slaves,  get  more  comforts  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of 
work  they  perform,  tlym  they  would  get  if  they  were 
free  ?    And,  once  more,  if  our  American  slaves  are  not 

*  Encyclopedia  Americana.    Art.,  Slavery, 


152 


AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


contented  with  their  condition,  how  shall  we  explain  the 
feet,  attested  by  a  hundred  witnesses,  of  their  fidelity 
and  attachment  to  their  masters  ?  How  account  for  the 
notorious  failure  of  the  abolitionists,  after  thirty  years  of 
diabolical  agitation,  to  excite  them  to  an  insurrection  ? 
A  number  of  fugitives,  not  more  in  proportion  to  the 
millions  of  slaves  than  are  the  women  who  claim  men's 
rights  in  the  North,  in  proportion  to  the  myriads  who 
are  content  to  shine  in  the  proper  virtues  of  their  sex, 
are  about  all  they  have  accomplished  in  the  way  of  lib- 
eration. 

Do  you  say  that  the  slave  works  on  compulsion  and 
from  fear  of  the  lash,  and  that,  therefore,  slavery  can 
not  rest  on  moral  grounds,  but  is  upheld  by  violence  ?  I 
repeat,  that  facts  are,  as  a  general  rule,  against  this  view 
of  the  case.  Southern  men,  men  who  are  on  the  spot, 
who  know  whereof  they  affirm,  and  are  incapable  of  mis- 
representation, tell  us,  almost  with  one  voice,  that  their 
slaves,  as  a  general  rule,  love  their  masters  and  are  be- 
loved by  them ;  and  that  they  are  contented  and  happy, 
except  so  far  as  they  are  inspired  with  hatred,  made  dis- 
contented with  their  lot,  and  turned  into  fiends  by  anti- 
slavery  agitators.  Citizens  of  our  Northern  States,  who 
have  visited  and  resided  at  the  South,  bear  testimony  by 
hundreds  to  the  same  facts.  Nay,  the  abolitionists  them- 
selves confirm  the  facts  ;  for,  instead  of  disproving  them, 
they  twist  them  into  a  proof  of  the  degradation  of  the 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION.  153 

slave,  who  must  be  free  according  to  their  notions  of  free- 
dom, or  else  his  contentment  in  servitude  is  a  proof  of 
his  abject  and  miserable  condition  !  So  they  dispose  of 
general  statements  on  the  one  side  of  the  question.  But 
particular  and  exceptional  cases  on  the  other  side,  how 
eagerly  do  they  press  them  into  proofs  of  wholesale 
oppression  and  violence  !  "  Contract  !"  methinks  I 
hear  them  exclaim;  ' 4  look  at  the  poor  fugitive  from 
his  master's  service  !  He  bound  by  contract  !  A 
good  joke,  truly."  But  ask  these  same  men  wThat 
binds  them  to  society  ?  Are  they  slaves  to  their 
rulers?  0.  no!  They  are  bound  together  by  the 
compact  on  which  society  is  founded.  Very  good  ; 
but  did  you  ever  sign  this  compact  ?  Did  your  fathers 
ever  sign  it?  "  No;  it  is  a  tacit  and  implied  compact/ 7 
Good  again  !  But  some  there  are  who  break  this 
compact ;  who  turn  vagrants,  robbers,  murderers ;  and 
you  take  them  and  shut  them  up  in  your  poor-houses, 
jails,  and  state-prisons  or  you  hang  them  on  a  gal- 
lows. Does  this  prove  the  social  compact  a  nullity  ?  or 
that  the  people  are  not  obliged  by  such  compact  to  be 
subject  to  civil  government  ?  Not  at  all ;  it  only  proves 
that  a  few  unprincipled  and  ungovernable  men,  who  have 
violated  the  compact,  have  received  their  deserts.  And 
yet,  though  the  great  body  of  masters  and  slaves  are,  in 
fact,  tied  to  each  other  by  the  like  tacit  and  implied 

compact,  you  cite  the  case  of  a  runaway  slave  as  a  proof 

7* 


154  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


that  there  is  no  such  compact,  and  that  slavery  is  upheld 
only  by  violence. 

It  is  the  same  compact,  with  the  addition  of  certain 
formalities  that  make  it  express,  instead  of  leaving  it  to 
be  tacit  and  implied,  which  supplies  our  army  and  navy 
with  labor,  our  commercial  marine,  and  mechanical  fac- 
tories. Insubordinates  in  the  army  and  navy  are  flogged  ; 
insurgents  and  deserters  are  shot ;  the  master  mechanic 
may  seize  his  fugitive  apprentice  and  throw  him  into  the 
nearest  jail ;  and  the  merchant,  though  he  can  not  seize 
the  sailors  that  abscond  from  their  captain  in  a  foreign 
port,  will  yet  denounce,  in  no  measured  terms,  their  ras- 
cality in  breaking  their  engagements,  deserting  their  ves- 
sel, and  depriving  the  owners  of  the  profits  of  the  voyage. 
Not  a  word  of  complaint  have  we  in  these  cases  of  the 
want  of  justice  and  equity  in  holding  men  to  their  con- 
tracts (made  perhaps  in  an  unguarded  moment),  at  the 
expense  of  their  comfort  and  lives;  not  a  thought  of  sym- 
pathy for  the  deserter  that  is  shot,  or  the  apprentice  that 
is  imprisoned,  or  the  sailor  that  is  denounced  and  not 
punished  only  because  he  can  not  be  caught ;  but  show  us 
a  fugitive  slave,  and  forthwith  the  community  is  in  a 
blaze ;  his  obligations  to  his  master,  or  his  possible  delin- 
quencies are  not  thought  of ;  but,  in  the  name  of  liberty, 
humanity,  and  justice,  men  are  summoned  to  his  rescue  ! 
Neither  the  soldier,  nor  the  seaman,  nor  the  apprentice,  but 
only  the  colored  gentleman  from  the  South,  may  honor- 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


155 


ably  repudiate  his  obligation  to  labor.  Verily,  we  live  in 
"  an  age  of  progress." 

With  these  evidences  before  me  that  the  slaves  do  re- 
ceive a  competent  consideration  for  their  labor,  I  hope  I 
may  be  allowed,  under  the  lead  of  publicists  of  the 
greatest  name,  to  regard  slavery  as  resting  on  contract ; 
and  to  believe,  moreover,  that  under  this  contract  for 
life,  which  neither  master  nor  slave  can,  as  a  general 
rule,  escape,  but  which  is  bound  on  them  both,  by  the 
providence  of  Almighty  God,  the  slave  does  infinitely 
better  for  himself  than  he  would  do  if  he  were  left  to 
make  contracts  for  himself,  without  a  master,  and,  from 
time  to  time,  as  his  humor  might  move  him,  or  his 
natural  indolence  allow.  Nay,  more ;  I  believe  that  the 
slaves  themselves  are  sensible  that  the  contract  now 
tacitly  subsisting  between  them  and  their  masters  is  to 
their  own  advantage  ;  for  it  is  inconceivable  to  my  mind 
that  four  millions  of  human  creatures  would,  in  spite  of 
the  incessant  efforts  of  abolition  emissaries,  for  the  last 
thirty  years,  to  excite  them  to  rebellion,  remain  in  ser- 
vitude, unless  they  were  content  to  remain  in  it ;  and 
this  feeling  of  child-like  contentment  (for  these  slaves 
are  but  children  in  mind),  could  it  assume  the  shape  of 
intellectual  expression,  and  be  translated  into  the  lan- 
guage of  educated  minds,  would  be  a  plain  confession 
that  God,  by  raising  up  for  them  humane  and  considerate 
masters,  had  made  a  better  provision  for  them  than  they 
could  have  made  for  themselves. 


156  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


Since  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  our  Northern  States 
a  new  generation  has  arisen,  who  know  nothing  of  its 
actual  working,  and  are  apt  to  take  their  notions  of  it 
from  works  of  fiction.  We  who  are  old  enough  to  re- 
member this  sort  of  servitude,  however  thankfully  we 
may  acquiesce  in  the  wisdom  which,  by  abolishing  it,  has 
added  to  the  comfort  of  the  rich,  in  proportion  as  it  les- 
sened their  responsibility  for  the  poor,  know  that  slaves 
were  not  all  either  oppressed,  or  despised,  or  discontented 
with  their  lot.  I  myself  have  known  slaves  (at  the 
North,  I  mean ;  for,  with  the  exception  of  one  very 
brief  and  melancholy  visit  in  Virginia,  I  have  never  been 
south  of  the  dividing  line)  who  were  an  honor  to  human 
nature  ;  who  justly  appreciated  their  condition,  and  were 
content  and  happy  in  the  discharge  of  its  duties  ;  and 
it  may,  perchance,  be  a  relief  to  the  reader,  after  the 
perusal  of  a  tedious  chapter,  if  I  give  him  the  history  of 
one  such.  It  is  the  case  of  Cane,  who  was  a  slave  in 
the  possession  of  Major  H.,  of  Long  Island — a  man, 
much  respected  in  his  day,  but  for  many  years  de- 
ceased. 

Cane  was  a  man  ;  intelligent,  honest,  and  trust- 
worthy ;  with  a  certain  dignity  of  demeanor,  relieved  by 
a  vein  of  comic  humor.  He  well  knew,  though  he  had 
never  learned  it  from  Plautus  : 

Simul  flare  sorbereque  haud  facile 

Est ;  ego  hie  esse  et  illic  simul  haud  posse  ; 

that  he  could  not  suck  and  whistle  in  the  same  breath ; 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


157 


could  not  at  the  same  time  enjoy  his  freedom  and  his 
claim  on  his  master  for  support ;  and  of  the  two  he  had 
sense  enough  to  see  that  the  latter  was  more  suited  to 
his  capacity  and  condition.  When  the  time  which  the 
law  had  prescribed  for  the  limit  of  slavery  had  expired, 
and  the  hour  of  emancipation  had  come,  the  Major  took 
I  Cane  aside,  and  a  dialogue  to  the  following  effect  took 
place  between  them.  I  give  it  from  memory,  and  sub- 
stantially as  it  was  told  me  by  a  grandson  of  Major  H. , 
who,  then  a  boy,  was  present,  and  heard  it  : 

Major  H. — u  Well,  Cane,  the  day  has  arrived,  which 
the  law  has  set  for  the  termination  of  your  slavery  ;  and 
I  have  called  you  to  tell  you  that  you  are  now  a  free 
man." 

C. — "  Sorry  for  it,  master." 

Major  H. — "  What,  Cane  !  sorry  to  be  free  ?" 

C. — "  Well,  master,  Cane  has  always  been  free  enough 
to  look  after  master's  business,  and  to  mind  his  own  ; 
and  that  is  all  the  freedom  Cane  wants." 

Major  H. — "  Well,  but,  Cane,  you  will  have  that 
freedom  now.  You  are  an  industrious  man,  and  can 
work,  and  be  paid  for  your  labor.  There  are  many  per- 
sons that  will  be  glad  to  employ  you." 

C. — u  Sorry  to  leave  old  master." 

Major  H. — "Why,  for  that  matter,  Cane,  you  need 
not  leave  me.  You  may  continue  to  work  for  me  as  you 
have  done,  and  I  will  pay  you  your  wages  at  the  end 
of  every  month." 


158  AMERICAN  SLAVERY  CONSIDERED 


C. — "  That  will  not  suit  Cane,  master." 

Major  H.—u  Why  not,  Cane  ?" 

C. — "-Well,  master,  suppose  Cane  takes  sick,  or 
grows  old,  what  is  to  become  of  him  ?" 

Major  J9T.— -"  That's  right,  Cane;  look  out  for  a  rainy 
Jay ;  but  the  way  to  provide  for  that  is  to  save  your 
money.77 

C. — "  What  does  Cane  know  about  money?  He  has 
no  place  to  keep  it.  Suppose,  he  saves  it,  and  takes  it 
to  Master  S.  or  Master  J.  to  keep  for  him ;  and,  before 
the  rainy  day  comes,  Master  S.  or  Master  J.  blows  up, 
and  goes  to  smash  ;  how  will  Cane  get  his  money  then  ? 
Tell  me  that,  master.77 

Major  H. — "True,  Cane,  such  a  thing  might  hap- 
pen, but  77 

C. — "  But  I  tell  you,  master,  what  might  not  happen, 
and  that  is  that  while  I  work  for  old  master,  I  should  not 
always  find  a  good  home  in  old  master7  s  house.  That  is 
the  best  bank  for  Cane7s  money.77 

Major  H. — "  Well,  then,  Cane,  you  wish  to  stay  and 
work  on  the  farm,  and  live  with  me  all  the  same  as  if  the 
law  had  never  given  you  your  freedom  ?77 

C. — "That7s  what  I  should  like,  if  it  had  not  been 
for  this  law.  But  now,  suppose  master  dies  first?  If 
master  will  promise  that  Cain  shall  always  live  in  his 
family,  then  Cain  will  promise  always  to  work  in  his 
family.77 


AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


159 


"  So  be  it,  Cane,"  was  his  master's  response;  and  so 
it  was.  Cain  continued  to  live  in  his  master's  family  for 
the  remainder  of  his  days,  ashamed  neither  of  the  con- 
dition nor  of  the  name  of  slave.  On  the  contrary,  he  had 
little  respect  for  the  free  blacks,  and  several  amusing 
colloquies  which  he  had  with  them  are  still  remembered. 
It  was  Cane's  fixed  opinion  that  the  negroes  needed  the 
protection  of  the  whites,  and  were  not  competent  to  take 
care  of  themselves.  "I  am  sure  I  am  not,"  he  would 
say,  '-'and  I  think  myself  equal  to  the  best  of  them." 
And  before  the  days  of  emancipation  dawned,  if  Cane 
caught  a  straggler  whom  he  suspected  of  being  a  run- 
away slave,  he  was  pretty  sure  to  lock  him  up  in  the 
barn  till  his  master  came  to  claim  him,  and  never  suffered 
him  to  depart  without  some  wholesome  advice  on  the 
duties  of  his  station,  and  the  misery  of  being,  to  use  his 
own  words,  ua  poor,  shivering,  starving  free  negro." 

Though  a  faithful  and  industrious  creature,  Cain  was 
sadly  profane,  and  as  neglectful  of  religious  duties  as 
any  man  of  fashion.  But  time  brought  its  changes.  He 
lived  to  be  old  and  infirm,  and  under  the  sadness  of  old 
age,  became  serious  and  thoughtful  of  the  future  world. 
The  same  kindness  which  supplied  his  temporal  wants  in 
health,  ministered  to  his  spiritual  wants  in  sickness  and 
old  age.  Some  member  of  the  family  daily  read  to  him, 
at  his  own  request,  a  portion  of  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
He  died  beloved  by  them  all,  and  was  buried  in  the  fam- 


160     AMERICAN  SLAVERY  AS  A  SOCIAL  INSTITUTION. 


ily  ground,  where  a  monument  is  still  to  be  seen  with 
the  following  inscription  to  his  memory : 

"Beneath  this  stone  was  put 
The  mortal  part  of  Cane,  a  colored  person : 
He  was  born  27  th  of  December,  1738, 
And  died  the  12th  of  January,  1814; 
In  the  11th  year  of  his  age. 


Cane  was  an  honest  man. 
Tho'  nature  tinged  his  skin,  and  custom  marked  him  slave, 
His  mind  was  free  and  independent. 
His  life  all  through  was  such  as  did  command 

Esteem  from  those  who  loved  him ; 
And  in  death  he  showed  examples  of  Religion 
Full  (of  proofs)  convincing  of  his  Christian  faith 
That  his  Redeemer  lived  and  he  should  see  His  face. 
"Act  well  thy  part;  there  all  the  honor  lies.'  " 


CHAPTER  XL 

ANGLICAN    THEORY    OF  SLAVERY. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  evidently  appears  that 
slavery,  when  founded  on  mutual  consent  and  productive 
of  mutual  benefit,  is  agreeable  to  the  law  of  Nature. 
Not  that  the  law  of  Nature  creates  the  relation  of  mas- 
ter and  slave  any  more  than  it  creates  other  social  rela- 
tions, but  that  when  the  relation  is  once  formed,  the  law 
of  Nature  requires  its  faithful  observance  and  forbids  its 
violent  dissolution.  Just  as  the  law  of  Nature  does  not 
oblige  a  man  to  marry  and  to  have  children,  but  on  the 
supposition  that  he  is  a  father,  obliges  him  and  his  chil- 
ren  to  the  reciprocal  duties  growing  out  of  their  mutual 
relation ;  or  as  it  does  not  oblige  men  to  form  contracts 
and  to  hold  real  estate,  yet  when  contracts  are  formed 
and  the  distinctions  of  property  are  defined,  it  does  oblige 
them  to  keep  their  engagements  and  to  refrain  from  tres- 
passing on  their  neighbors'  premises  ;  so,  though  the  law 
of  Nature  does  not  oblige  some  men  to  be  masters  and 
others  to  be  slaves,  yet  when  once  the  compact  is  formed 
and  the  relation  fairly  established,  the  law  of  Nature 
clearly  ratifies  the  compact  and  regulates  the  relation 


162  ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 

that  grows  out  of  it.  It  binds  the  parties  together  with 
the  tics  of  a  moral  union  ;  it  enjoins  on  both  reciprocal 
duties ;  it  forbids  the  master  to  withhold  care  and  pro- 
tection from  the  slave,  and  the  slave  to  withhold  fealty 
and  service  from  the  master.  The  law  itself  is  immut- 
able and  becomes  operative  as  soon  as  occasion  arises  for 
its  use  and  application. 

But  there  is  another  condition  of  life  which  is  also 
called  slavery,  but  which  is  very  unlike  the  former,  and 
indeed  has  nothing  in  common  with  it  except  the  name, 
and  which,  yet,  chiefly  from  the  force  of  language,  is 
often  confounded  with  it.  This  condition  of  life,  for  I 
can  not  call  ,it  a  condition  of  human  society,  is  upheld 
by  force,  and  supposes  master  and  slave  to  be  joined 
together  by  none  of  the  common  ties  and  offices  of  human- 
ity, but  to  live  in  a  constant  state  of  war  and  enmity. 
The  consideration  of  this  unhappy  relation  is  proper  to 
the  lawT  of  Nations,  in  the  treatises  on  wThich  it  occupies 
a  large  space,  and  is  not  otherwise  connected  with  the 
law  of  Nature  than  as  this  law  is  appealed  to  in  sup- 
port of  the  principles  on  which  the  J.aw  of  Nations  is 
founded. 

For  the  better  satisfaction  of  the  reader  I  shall  describe 
this  sort  of  slavery  in  the  words  of  others. 

Having  remarked  that  "it  is  not  repugnant  to  natural 
law,  that  slavery  may  be  derived  from  some  personal  act/' 
i.  e.,  from  some  voluntary  agreement  or  for  some  crime, 
and  having  treated  of  both  these  species  of  slavery,  in 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY.  163 

his  first  and  second  book,  in  connection  with  the  law  of 
Nature,  Grotius,  in  the  third  book  of  his  treatise  (Dn 
Jure  Belli  et  Pads),  and  in  the  seventh  chapter  (en- 
titled "Of  the  Right  over  Prisoners"),  proceeds  as  fol- 
lows : 

"  But  by  the  law  of  Nations  (which  I  am  now  treat- 
ing of)  slavery  is  of  a  more  large  extent,  both  as  to 
persons  and  effects.  For  if  we  consider  the  persons,  not 
only  they  who  surrender  themselves,  or  engage  by  prom- 
ise to  do  it,  are  reputed  slaves,  but  all  persons  whatsoever, 
taken  in  a  solemn  war,  as  soon  as  they  shall  be  brought 
within  our  garrisons,  as  Pomponius  tells  us/' 

Grotius  next  quotes  several  authorities  to  show  that 
captives  in  solemn  wars,  whatever  may  have  been  their 
previous  standing,  were  anciently  regarded  as  the  slaves 
of  the  conqueror;  that  both  they  and  their  children 
(after  their  captivity)  were  accounted  his  absolute  prop- 
erty— to  be  put  to  death,  sold  into  bondage,  or  otherwise 
disposed  of  at  his  will.    He  then  adds  : 

"But  the  effects  of  this  right  are  infinite,  so  that 
there  is  nothing  that  the  lord  (or  master)  may  not  do  to 
his  slave ;  as  Seneca  the  father  said,  no  torment  but  what 
may  be  inflicted  on  him  with  impunity,  nothing  com- 
manded him,  but  what  may  be  exacted  with  the  utmost 
rigor  and  severity ;  so  that  all  manner  of  cruelty  may  be 
exercised  by  the  lords  (masters)  on  their  slaves;  but 
that  this  license  is  somewhat  restrained  by  the  civil  law\ 
£It  is  generally  allowed  by  all  nations  to  the  lord  (mas- 


164  ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 

ter)  to  have  power  of  life  and  death  over  his  slave,'  we 
are  told  by  Caius  the  lawyer.  He  also  adds  that  this 
large  power  had  been  limited  by  the  Roman  laws  in  their 
own  territories.  Hither  we  may  refer  that  of  Donatus 
to  Terentius,  1  What  may  not  a  lord  (master)  lawfully 
do  to  his  slave?'  " 

Here  follow  two  short  paragraphs,  not  relevant  to  my 
present  purpose  ;  after  which,  Grotius  adds  : 

"  Now  this  large  power  is  granted  by  the  law  of 
Nations  for  no  other  reason  than  that  the  captors,  being 
tempted  by  so  many  advantages,  might  be  inclined  to 
forbear  that  utmost  rigor  allowed  them  by  the  law  of 
killing  their  prisoners,  either  in  the  fight,  or  in  cold 
blood.  As  I  said  before,  the  name  of  servants  (Pom- 
ponius  tells  us)  arose  from  this,  that  generals  sold  their 
prisoners,  thereby  preserving  them  from  death.  I  said 
that  they  might  be  inclined  to  forbear;  for  there  is  no 
argument  to  engage  them  to  it,  if  we  respect  this  law  of 
Nations,  but  a  motive  drawn  from  interest." 

We  have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  the  law  of  Na- 
tions, as  understood  and  acknowledged  among  modern 
and  civilized  peoples,  forbids  the  putting  of  prisoners  to 
death,  except  they  have  committed  some  crime  worthy 
of  death,  and  that  the  humane  and  salutary  customs 
which  have  been  introduced  for  the  alleviation  of  the 
evils  of  war  (such  as  exchange  of  prisoners,  releasing 
them  on  parole,  etc.),  have  cut  off  all  pretexts  for  the 
barbarous  practice.    But  this  does  not  affect  the  point  in 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY.  165 


hand,  which  is  to  show  that  the  right  of  the  master  over 
the  slave  was  anciently  derived  from  the  law  of  Nations, 
and  was  made  by  that  law  to  include  an  absolute  power 
over  the  slave;  and  that  this  right  of  dominion  was 
acknowledged  at  Rome,  and  among  all  nations  (see  the 
above  quotation  from  Caius  the  lawyer),  except  in  so  far 
as  it  was  restrained  and  limited  by  the  civil  law. 

Here,  then,  Ave  have  two  conditions  of  life,  essentially 
distinct  from  each  other,  and  yet  both  denominated 
slavery.  The  one  confers  a  right  of  dominion  derived 
from  the  law  of  Nature,  which  is  immutable  and  every- 
where the  same,  and  of  necessity  subject  to  the  limita- 
tions of  this  law,  which  allows  nothing  contrary  to  jus- 
tice ;  while  the  other  confers  a  right  of  dominion,  derived 
from  the  law  of  Nations,  which  is  mutable,  and  in  fact 
now  revokes  the  right  which  it  once  conferred ;  and  a 
right,  moreover,  which  is  absolute,  and  authorizes  the 
master  to  inflict  on  his  slave  all  sorts  of  cruelties  which 
the  law  of  the  State  does  not  specifically  forbid. 

This  sort  of  slavery,  founded  on  the  right  of  conquest, 
and  upheld  merely  by  force,  formerly  existed,  as  in  all 
the  nations  of  Europe,  so  also  in  Great  Britain.  It  has 
long  since  died  out  in  fact,  but  it  is  still  this,  and  no- 
thing else  than  this,  which  the  English  people  mean  by 
the  word  slavery.  I  have  before  alluded  to  the  follow- 
ing passage  of  Mr.  Locke,  and  now  beg  the  reader's  pe- 
rusal of  it  entire  : 

"  Freedom  from  absolute,  arbitrary  power  is  so  neces- 


166 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


sary  and  closely  joined  with  a  man's  preservation,  that 
he  can  not  part  with  it,  but  by  what  forfeits  his  life  and 
preservation  together.  For  a  man  not  having  the  power 
of  his  own  life,  can  not,  by  compact,  or  his  own  consent, 
enslave  himself  to  any  one,  nor  put  himself  under  the 
absolute,  arbitrary  power  of  another,  to  take  away  his 
life  when  he  pleases.  Nobody  can  give  more  power 
than  he  has  himself  ;  and  he  that  can  not  take  away  his 
own  life,  can  not  give  another  power  over  it.  Indeed, 
having  by  his  fault  forfeited  his  own  life,  by  some  act 
that  deserves  death,  he  to  whom  he  has  forfeited  it,  may 
(when  he  has  him  in  his  power)  delay  to  take  it.  For, 
whenever  he  finds  the  hardship  outweighs  the  value  of 
his  life,  'tis  in  his  power,  by  resisting  the  will  of  his 
master,  to  draw  on  himself  the  death  he  desires. 

"This  is  the  perfect  condition  of  slavery,  which  is 
nothing  else  but  the  state  of  war  continued  between  the 
lawful  conqueror  and  a  captive.  For  if  once  compact 
enter  between  them,  and  make  an  agreement  for  a  limited 
power  on  the  one  side,  and  obedience  on  the  other,  the 
state  of  rear  and  slavery  ceases,  as  long  as  the  compact 
endures.  For,  as  has  been  said,  no  man  can,  by  agree- 
ment pass  over  to  another  that  which  he  hath  not  in 
himself,  a  power  over  his  own  life. 

lI  confess,  we  find  among  the  Jews  as  well  as  other 
nations,  that  men  did  sell  themselves ;  but  it  is  plain  this 
was  only  to  drudgery,  not  to  slavery.  For  it  is  evident 
the  person  sold  was  not  under  an  absolute,  arbitrary,  des- 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


167 


potical  power.  For  the  master  could  not  have  power 
to  kill  him  at  any  time,  whom,  at  a  certain  time  he  was 
obliged  to  let  go  free  out  of  his  service ;  and  the  master 
of  such  a  servant  was  so  far  from  having  an  arbitrary 
power  over  his  life  that  he  could  not  at  pleasure  so  much 
as  maim  him,  but  the  loss  of  an  eye  or  a  tooth  set  him 
free."    Ex.  xxi.* 

I  have  somewhere  seen  this  eminent  man  charged  with 
inconsistency  and  a  departure  from  his  own  principles, 
because  the  constitution  of  the  Carolinas,  which  he 
drafted,  contains  provisions  in  favor  of  slavery  Proba- 
bly the  inconsistency  is  merely  verbal. 

I  now  ask  particular  attention  to  a  passage  which  I 
shall  transcribe  from  the  Leviathan  of  Hobbes ;  a  man 
whose  principles  I  detest,  but  who  for  clearness  and 
vigor  of  thought  and  expression  is  unsurpassed,  I  believe, 
by  any  author  in  the  English  language. 

"  Dominion  acquired  by  conquest,  or  victory  in  war, 
is  that  which  some  writers  call  despotical,  from  Aga-rro- 
tt}s,  which  signifieth  a  lord,  or  master;  and  is  the 
dominion  of  the  master  over  his  servant.  And  this  do- 
minion is  then  acquired  to  the  victor,  wThen  the  van- 
quished, to  avoid  the  present  stroke  of  death,  covenanteth, 
either  in  express  words,  or  by  other  sufficient  signs  of 
the  will,  that  so  long  as  his  life  and  the  liberty  of  his 
body  is  allowed  him,  the  victor  shall  have  the  use  thereof 


*  Locke's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  165. 


168  ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


at  his  pleasure.  And  after  such  covenant  made,  the 
vanquished  is  a  servant,  and  not  before ;  for  by  the 
word  servant  (whether  it  be  derived  from  servire,  to 
serve,  .or  from  servare,  to  save,  which  I  leave  the  gram- 
marians to  dispute),  is  not  meant  a  captive  which  is  kept 
in  prison,  or  bonds,  till  the  owner  of  him  that  took,  or 
bought  him  of  him  that  did,  shall  consider  what  to  do 
with  him ;  for  such  men,  commonly  called  slaves,  have 
no  obligation  at  all,  but  may  break  their  bonds,  or  the 
prison,  and  kill,  or  carry  away  captive  their  master, 
justly;  but  one  that  being  taken,  hath  corporal  liberty 
allowed  him,  and  upon  promise  not  to  run  away,  nor  to 
do  violence  to  his  master,  is  trusted  by  him. 

"It  is  not,  theftfore,  the  victory  that  giveth  the  right 
of  dominion  over  the  vanquished,  but  his  own  covenant. 
Nor  is  he  obliged  because  he  is  conquered,  that  is  to  say 
beaten  and  taken,  or  put  to  flight,  but  because  he  cometh 
in  and  submitteth  to  the  victor.  Nor  is  the  victor 
obliged  by  an  enemy  rendering  himself  (without  promise 
of  life),  to  spare  him  for  this  his  yielding  to  discretion, 
which  obliges  not  the  victor  longer  than  in  his  own  dis- 
cretion he  shall  think  fit. 

"  And  that  which  men  do  when  they  demand  (as  it  is 
now  called)  quarter,  (which  the  Greeks  called  Zcoypta, 
taking  alive)  is  to  evade  the  present  fury  of  the  victor 
by  submission,  and  to  compact  for  their  life  with  ran- 
som, or  service;  and,  therefore,  he  that  hath  quarter, 
hath  not  his  life  given,  but  deferred  till  further  delibera- 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


169 


tion;  for  it  is  not  a  yielding  on  condition  of  life,  but  to 
discretion.  And  then  only  is  his  life  in  security,  and 
his  service  due,  when  the  victor  hath  trusted  him  with 
his  corporal  liberty.  For  slaves  that  work  in  prisons, 
or  fetters,  do  it  not  of  duty,  but  to  avoid  the  cruelty  of 
their  task-masters."^ 

There  are  two  remarkable  positions  in  this  passage 
which  I  can  not  help,  in  passing,  commending  to  the  at- 
tention of  our  modern  radicals,  (who,  or  whose  progeni- 
tors, have  drawn  from  Hobbes  many  of  their  detestable 
maxims)  and  especially  to  those  of  them  who  have  given 
him  the  sonorous  appellation  of  "The  philosopher  of 
Malmesbury." 

The  first  is  that  Hobbes  concedes  %o  slaves  (or  ser- 
vants, as  he  more  accurately  calls  them)  the  possession 
of  liberty.  The  slave  (servant),  according  to  him, 
has,  like  other  men,  liberty  as  well  as  life  ;  and  the  pre- 
cise difference  between  the  slave  and  the  freeman,  in  this 
respect,  is  that  the  slave,  or  servant,  has,  while  the  free- 
man has  not,  transferred  the  use  of  his  liberty  to  an- 
other. 

The  other  is  that  servitude,  or  slavery,  as  we  now  call 
it,  in  its  ordinary  form,  is,  according  to  Hobbes,  founded 
on  compact  or  covenant.  The  relation  of  master  and 
servant,  even  though  it  originate  in  conquest,  yet,  as 
Hobbes  clearly  shows,  is  capable  of  exchanging,  and  for 


*  Hobbes's  Leviathan,  folio,  London,  a.  d.  1651,  pp.  108,  104, 
S 


170 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


the  most  part  actually  exchanges,  its  hostile  character  for 
one  that  is  peaceable  and  friendly.  It  passes,  he  says 
(as  indeed  it  is  very  apt  to  pass),  from  the  law  of  might 
to  the  law  of  right;  so  that  the  slave  is  morally  and  re- 
ligiously hound  to  serve  his  master,  and  defrauds  him  by 
becoming  a  fugitive  from  his  service.  Strange  that 
Hobbes,  the  arthor  of  the  Leviathan,  to  whose  poison 
Bramhall,  Cumberland,  and  Clarendon,  his  contempora- 
ries, and  the  brightest  intellects  of  their  age,  taxed  their 
energies  to  furnish  an  antidote  ;  that  Hobbes,  a  name 
which  has  been  handed  down  to  execration  in  Church 
and  State,  and  which  will  be  execrated  as  long  as  the 
interests  of  government  and  religion  are  united  ;  that 
Hobbes,  I  say,  should  be  needed  in  this  age  to  give  les- 
sons in  government  and  religion  to  Christian  statesmen 
and  ministers  of  the  gospel !  But  so  it  is  ;  and  as  I 
would  cheerfully  give  the  father  of  mischief  and  all  his 
progeny  their  due,  so  I  take  particular  pleasure  in  add- 
ing "  the  philosopher  of  Malmesbury  !"  to  the  names  of 
Grotius  and  Puffendorff,  and  other  eminent  civilians, ' 
who,  by  resting  slavery  on  the  ground  of  contract, 
have  helped  us  to  clear  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  which 
require  slaves  to  obey  their  masters,  from  the  imputation 
of  favoring  arbitrary  power,  and  to  resolve  them  into  the 
prime  principles  of  reason  and  nature. 

But  to  return  from  this  digression.  The  reader  will 
have  observed  that,  as  Mr.  Locke  distinguishes  slavery 
from  drudgery,  so  Hobbes  distinguishes  slavery  from 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


171 


servitude  ;  and  that  both  these  authors  agree  in  making 
slavery  consist  in  an  unlimited  subjection  to  absolute  do- 
minion. The  slave,  in  their  sense  of  the  word,  is  one 
who  holds  his  life  and  liberty  subject,  not  to  the  con- 
ditional use,  but  to  the  absolute  disposal  of  the  master  ; 
who,  by  the  right  of  conquest,  and  under  the  law  of 
nations,  may  at  any  time,  and  of  his  own  mere  will, 
deprive  him  of  both  ;  may  maim  his  limbs;  or  take 
his  life,  without  being  liable  to  be  called  to  account  by 
any  human  authority.  This  sort  of  slavery,  as  Hobbes 
intimates,  was  common  among  the  Romans;  who  either 
could  not  or  would  not  admit  all  their  captives  into  a 
covenant  relation,  or  wTork  them  on  parole,  but  confined 
many  of  them  in  their  ergastula,  in  prisons  and  in  gal- 
leys, and  made  them  work  in  chains  and  fetters  :  not 
trusting  them  with  any  degree  of  bodily  liberty,  nor 
seeking  to  influence  them  by  higher  motives,  but  govern- 
ing them  solely  by  fear  and  cruelty. 

It  would  be  easy  to  fill  a  volume  with  extracts  from 
the  writings  of  philosophers  and  historians,  orators  and. 
poets,  and  authors  of  every  class,  who  use  the  word 
slavery  in  the  sense  so  clearly  defined  by  Hobbes  and 
Mr.  Locke.  But  to  what  end  ?  Who  does  not  know 
that  this  notion  of  slavery,  derived  from  its  most  aggra- 
vated form  among  the  ancient  Romans,  has  been  incor- 
porated in  the  philosophy,  the  divinity,  the  science,  the 
literature,  the  poetry,  and,  of  late  years,  in  the  states- 
manship oi  the  British  nation  ?    I  do  not  mean  that  this 


172  ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


notion  of  slavery  is  peculiar  to  Great  Britain  :  it  pre- 
vails to  a  considerable  extent  in  Europe,  and  shows 
itself  in  European  writers.  Vattel,  for  instance,  has  no 
other  idea  of  slavery  than  as  ua  state  contrary  to  the 
nature  of  man,'7  w'*a  continued  state  of  war;"  and  he 
rejoices  (and  every  defender  of  American  slavery  will 
cordially  and  consistently  rejoice  with  him)  that  "this 
disgrace  of  mankind  is  happily  extinct  in  Europe."  But 
I  mean  that  this  notion  of  slavery  prevails  in  Great 
Britain  to  the  exclusion  almost  of  every  other.  Villein- 
age itself,  which  formerly  existed  in  England,  was  an 
aggravated  form  of  slavery.  The  villeins  (in  gross) 
were  originally  captives  at  the  Conquest ;  they  were 
compelled  to  perform  the  most  servile  offices  ;  and  "  both 
they  and  their  children,"  says  Dr.  Harris'  Notes  on 
Justinian,  u  were  the  absolute  property  of  their  lords, 
who  might  lease  them  out  to  others  for  years,  or  for  life, 
or  make  an  absolute  sale  of  them."  And  slavery  in  the 
British  West  Indies,  left  to  the  management  of  overseers, 
while  the  proprietors  were  absent  from  their  plantations, 
was,  very  probably,  upheld  by  terror  and  cruelty,  and 
had  no  opportunity  of  transition  into  that  peaceable  and 
friendly  relation,  which  subsists  in  our  Southern  States. 
In  fact,  we  shall  look  in  vain,  if  I  mistake  not,  to  the 
jurists  of  Great  Britain,  in  modern  times,  for  those  just 
and  profound  views  of  slavery,  considered  as  a  social 
institution,  which  have  been  developed  *by  Grotius,  Puf- 
fendorf  and  other  European  authors.      Our  English 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


1T3 


friends  and  cousins  have  no  idea  of  a  slavery,  which  is 
founded  in  contract,  and  which,  because  it  is  founded  in 
contract,  secures  the  natural  rights  of  the  slave.  Their 
traditionary  and  sole  notion  of  slavery  is  that  of  servi- 
tude founded  on  conquest,  and  upheld  only  by  terror  and 
cruelty. 

And  this  tradition  of  the  English  mind  has  been  trans- 
mitted  to  New  England,  and  made  the  generative  cause 
of  all  its  abolition  proclivities.  Differing  essentially  and 
by  unmistakeable  features  from  that  form  of  slavery  which 
exists  in  our  Southern  States,  and  agreeing  with  it  only 
in  name,  it  is  yet  put  forward  persistently  and  in  every 
variety  of  form  as  essentially  the  same  thing ;  and  that 
just  and  laudable  hatred  which  every  ingenuous  mind 
feels  against  the  one  form  of  servitude  is  cunningly  or 
ignorantly  excited  by  argument  and  declamation,  and 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  other ;  and  the  southern  plan- 
ter, surrounded  by  his  attached  and  affectionate  domes- 
tics, and  resorting  to  coercion  only  as  an  ultimatum  for 
the  necessary  support  of  authority  (as  is  done  in  the 
army  and  navy,  and  indeed  in  schools  and  families,  and  in 
almost  every  form  of  secular  government)  is  held  up  to 
the  execration  of  mankind  for  no  better  reason,  that  I 
can  see,  than  because  his  servants  are  called  slaves,  and 
the  poets  and  philosophers,  the  Cowpers  and  Lockes  of 
England  have  chosen  to  affix  a  very  horrid  meaning  to 
the  name. 

But  I  have  another  reason  for  calling  these  two  des- 


174  ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 

criptions  of  slavery,  the  one  limited  and  sanctioned  by 
the  law  of  Nature,  the  other  unlimited  and  supported 
only  by  an  exploded  dictum  of  the  law  of  Nations ;  I 
say,  I  have  another  reason  for  calling  the  one  American 
and  the  other  British  ;  and  that  is,  that  the  government 
of  the  United  States,  by  its  highest  public  functionaries, 
has  solemnly,  and  in  the  face  of  the  world,  recognized 
and  declared  the  slavery  of  our  Southern  States  to  be  of 
the  former  description,  and  has  disallowed  and  repelled 
the  assumption  of  the  British  government  referring  it  to 
the  latter  description.    To  explain  my  meaning  : 

It  has  often  happened  that  coasting  vessels,  under  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  United  States,  having  slaves  on 
board,  either  as  hands  or  as  servants,  attending  their 
owners,  or  for  the  purpose  of  being  carried  from  port  to 
port,  have  been  driven  by  stress  of  weather  or  other 
necessity,  to  take  refuge  in  harbors  belonging  to  some  of 
the  British  dependencies  of  America ;  and  that  in  some 
such  cases,  the  slaves,  owned  by  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  have  been  set  free  by  the  authorities  of  the  place. 
The  Creole  was  an  example  of  this  kind.  This  vessel, 
having  slaves  on  board,  was  taken,  in  consequence  of  a 
mutiny,  into  a  port  of  the  British  dominions,  and  the 
slaves,  as  was  alleged,  were  liberated  by  the  interference 
of  the  local  authorities. 

In  a  letter,  dated  August  1,  1842,  Mr.  Webster,  at 
that  time  Secretary  of  State  for  the  United  States, 
brought  the  case  of  the  Creole  to  the  attention  of  Lord 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


175 


Ashburton,  then  residing  at  Washington,  and  clothed 
with  general  powers  by  the  British  government  to  act  in 
its  behalf  in  the  adjustment  of  the  disputes  that  were 
pending  between  the  two  governments.  In  this  docu- 
ment Mr.  Webster  does  not  confine  himself  to  the  parti- 
cular case  of  the  Creole,  but  goes  at  length  into  the  sub- 
ject, and  affirms  generally  the  right  of  the  United  States 
to  exact  compensation  of  {he  British  government  in  be- 
half of  American  proprietors,  whose,  slaves  have  been  set 
at  liberty  in  the  manner  above  indicated.  In  the  course 
of  his  argument,  Mr.  Webster  remarks  : 

"  If  a  vessel  be  driven  by  weather  into  the  ports  of 
another  nation,  it  would  hardly  be  alleged  by  any  one 
that,  by  the  mere  force  of  such  arrival  within  the  waters 
of  the  State,  the  law  of  that  State  would  so  attach  to  the 
vessel  as  to  affect  existing  rights  of  property  between 
persons  on  board,  whether  arising  from  contract  or 
•otherwise.  The  local  law  would  not  operate  to  make 
the  goods  of  one  man  to  become  the  goods  of  another 
man.  Nor  ought  it  to  affect  their  personal  obligations 
or  existing  relations  between  themselves ;  nor  was  it 
ever  supposed  to  have  such  effect  until  the  delicate  and 
exciting  question  which  has  caused  these  interferences  in 
the  British  islands  arose.  The  local  law  in  these  cases 
dissolves  no  obligations  or  relations  lawfully  entered 
into  or  lawfully  existing  according  to  the  laws  of  the 
ship's  country.  If  it  did,  intercourse  of  civilized  men 
between  nation  and  nation  must  cease.    Marriages  are 


176 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


frequently  celebrated  in  one  country  in  a  manner  not 
lawful  or  valid  in  another ;  but  did  anybody  ever  doubt 
that  marriages  are  valid  all  over  the  civilized  world,  if 
valid  in  the  country  in  which  they  took  place  ?  Did  any 
one  ever  imagine  that  local  law  acted  upon  such  mar- 
riages to  annihilate  their  obligation,  if  the  party  should 
visit  a  country  in  which  marriages  must  be  celebrated  in 
another  form  ? 

£ £  It  may  be  said  that,  in  such  instances,  personal  re- 
lations are  founded  in  contract,  and  therefore  to  be 
respected  ;  but  that  the  relation  of  master  and  slave  is 
not  founded  in  contract,  and  therefore  is  to  be  respected 
only  by  the  law  of  the  place  which  recognizes  it.  Who- 
ever so  reasons,  encounters  the  authority  of  the  whole 
body  of  public  law,  from  Grotius  down ;  because  there 
are  numerous  instances  in  which  the  law  itself  presumes 
or  implies  contracts  ;  and  prominent  among  those  in- 
stances is  the  very  relation  which  we  are  now  consider- 
ing, and  which  relation  is  holden  by  law  to  draw  after  it 
mutuality  of  obligation."  * 

Personal  relations  that  are  founded  in  universal  jus- 
tice, are  worthy  of  universal  respect ;  but  personal  rela- 
tions which  are  founded  in  injustice,  and  are  upheld  in 
opposition  to  natural  justice,  by  the  laws  of  a  particular 
country,  have  no  claim  to  respect  outside  of  that  coun- 
try.    In  demanding,  therefore,  that  the  relation  of 

*  See  Correspondence  with  Lord  Ashburton,  Webster's  Works,  vol 
vi.,  pp.  303-318. 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


177 


master  and  slave,  both  belonging  to  the  United  States, 
and  continuing  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  same, 
should  be  respected  in  British  ports,  Mr.  Webster  was 
sure  to  be  met  with  the  objection,  that  this  relation  is  not 
a  just  and  social  relation,  like  that  of  husband  and  wife, 
parent  and  child,  but  one  which  exists  in  opposition  to 
universal  justice,  and  only  in  virtue  of  local  laws ;  which, 
in  the  case  under  consideration,  are  the  laws  of  some 
one  of  the  United  States,  and  the  guaranty  of  the  Fed- 
eral Government;  and  that  the  relation  consequently 
expires  when  its  subjects  pass  beyond  the  limits  within 
which  those  laws  are  operative,  and  to  which  that  guar- 
antee extends.  For  example,  if  a  citizen  of  New  York 
is  traveling  with  his  minor  child,  or  if  a  master  with  his 
apprentice  is  traveling  in  a  foreign  country,  and  in  com- 
pany with  him  is  a  citizen  of  South  Carolina,  with  his 
slave ;  it  would  be  accounted  barbarous  in  the  author- 
ities of  that  country  to  interfere  with  the  father  in  the 
government  of  his  child,  or  with  the  master  in  the  gov- 
ernment of  his  apprentice,  because  these  relations  are 
consistent  with  natural  justice,  and  entitled  to  universal 
respect.  On  the  other  hand,  it  wouid  be  no  violation  of 
the  comity  of  nations,  but  an  evidence  of  high  civiliza- 
tion, if  the  authorities  of  the  same  country  interfered  in 
order  to  effect  the  enfranchisement  of  the  slave,  because 
the  relation  of  master  and  slave  is  repugnant  to  natural 
justice,  and  ceases  to  exist  when  it  passes  beyond  the 

protection  of  positive  law.    This  I  understand  to  be 

8* 


178 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


the  objection ;  and  I  wish  to  fix  the  reader's  attention 
on  Mr.  Webster's  answer  to  the  objection.  Mr.  Web- 
ster, as  the  reader  will  have  observed,  takes  the  ground 
that  the  relation  of  master  and  slave  is  not  repug- 
nant to  natural  justice,  but  that  it  is  founded  in  con- 
tract, and  involves  mutual  obligations ;  and  he  declares 
distinctly  and  boldly,  and  under  the  high  responsi- 
bility of  his  exalted  station,  that  whoever  takes  the 
opposite  ground — whoever  denies  that  slavery  is  founded 
in  contract,  and  is  consonant  to  natural  justice — i'*  EN- 
COUNTERS THE  WHOLE  BODY  OF  PUBLIC  LAW  FROM 
Grotius  down  !"  Of  course  this  declaration  of  Mr. 
Webster,  or  rather  of  the  President  of  the  United  States 
through  him,  does  not  apply  to  slavery  universally :  it 
does  not  apply  to  slavery  as  it  may  exist  by  the  law  of 
Nations ;  nor  to  the  slavery  of  barbarous  countries, 
where  captives  are,  for  no  personal  crimes,  totally  de- 
prived of  bodily  liberty,  and  subjected  to  unmerciful 
treatment :  but  it  is  limited,  by  the  occasion  on  which  it 
was  made,  to  that  form  of  slavery  which  exists  in  our 
Southern  States,  under  the  guaranty  of  the  Constitu- 
tion of  the  United  States ;  and  so  understood  and  lim- 
ited, the  declaration,  I  believe,  can  never  be  successfully 
impugned.* 

*  A  legal  friend,  who  first  directed  my  attention  to  the  above 
quoted  letter  of  Mr.  W.,  adds  the  following : 

"  In  the  speech  delivered  by  Mr.  Webster,  in  defense  of  the  treaty 
of  Washington,  in  the  United  States  Senate,  6th  and  7th  April,  1846, 
he  says,  ?  I  refer  to  the  letter  to  Lord  Ashburton  on  this  subject  (tbg 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


179 


Now,  mark  the  consequence.  It  is  impossible  to  re- 
gard a  man  as  a  party  to  a  contract,  without  regarding 
him  at  the  same  time  as  possessed  of  his  natural  rights  as 
a  member  of  human  society,  and  as  having  a  definite 
status  under  the  government  wThich  protects  that  con- 
tract. The  United  States,  therefore,  until  they  repudi- 
ate the  doctrine  which  Mr.  Webster  promulgated  in  their 
name,  are  committed  to  the  recognition  of  slavery  (in 
those  States  in  which  it  exists)  as  a  social  institution, 
and  not  as  a  monster  that  is  at  war  with  human  society, 
and  refuses  to  coalesce  with  the  elements  of  good  order; 
they  are  committed  to  the  recognition  of  slaves  (in  the 
several  States  in  wThich  they  exist)  as  persons  capable  of 
contract,  and  actually,  or  at  least,  impliedly  bound  by 
contract,  and  therefore  possessed  of  those  natural  rights 
and  faculties  without  which,  no  creature  can  be,  either 
expressly  or  by  implication,  a  party  to  a  contract ;  and 
they  are  committed,  moreover,  to  the  recognition  of  the 
relation  of  master  and  slave  as  legitimate  by  the  law  of 
Nature,  and  entitled,  as  well  (I  say  not  in  the  same  de- 
gree) as  that  of  husband  and  wife,  or  of  father  and  child, 
to  universal  respect.    This  is  American  slavery. 

Lord  Ashburton,  in  his  reply  to  Mr.  Webster,  con- 
fesses that  the  American  secretary  has  "  advanced  some 
propositions  which  rather  surprise  and  startle" ;  him:  his 
lordship,  however,  does  "not  pretend  to  judge  them," 

Creole  case)  1  as  containing  what  the  American  government  regarded 
as  the  true  principle  of  the  maritime  law/  " 


180 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


but  refers  Mr.  Webster  to  London  for  their  discussion. 
What  ground  the  British  government  ultimately  took  in 
this  particular  I  do  not  know,  and  it  is  needless  to  in- 
quire ;  for  the  temper  and  opinions  of  the  British  public 
(to  follow  which  has  become  the  genius  of  the  English 
government,  and  the  hard  necessity  of  the  English 
Church),  point  to  the  conclusion,  in  opposition  to  Mr. 
Webster  and  uthe  whole  body  of  public  law,"  that  the 
slavery  existing  in  our  Southern  States  is  not  founded 
in  contract ;  that  it  is  repugnant  to  natural  justice ;  that 
the  bond  which  unites  master  and  slave  derives  its  whole 
strength  from  local  laws,  and  dissolves  of  its  own  accord 
when  it  passes  beyond  the  reach  of  those  laws ;  and  that 
the  slave,  under  the  laws  of  a  country  that  tolerates 
slavery,  has  no  natural  rights,  but  is  a  mere  chattel  of 
his  master,  distinguished  from  his  inanimate  chattels  by 
a  principle  of  vitality,  and  from  his  cows  and  horses  by 
the  possession  of  a  human  form  and  figure.  This  view 
of  slavery  seems  to  be  indigenous  to  the  British  soil, 
and  therefore  I  call  it  the  British  view,  and  am  willing 
to  accord  to  the  British  people  whatever  glory  it  may 
reflect  on  them.  How  the  clergy  of  the  English  Estab- 
lishment, consistently  with  such  a  theory,  would  recon- 
cile the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  inculcating  obedience  to 
masters,  wTith  the  dictates  of  universal  reason;  or  how 
they  would  refute  the  principles  of  the  abolitionists, 
while  resisting  (as  I  believe  they  would  resist)  the  ap- 
plication of  those  principles  to  practice,  I  am  unable  to 


ANGLICAN  THEORY  OF  SLAVERY. 


181 


say.  If  they  were  compelled  to  attempt  a  practical  solu- 
tion of  the  problem,  they  would  be  driven,  I  apprehend, 
either  to  surrender  their  theory,  or  to  Inculcate  princi- 
ples of  duty  too  ethereal  for  the  grasp  of  English  sense, 
and  too  sublimated  for  English  practice.  However  this 
be,  though  no  man  rates,  or  can  rate,  more  highly  than 
-I  do, the  obligations  of  our  people  to  their  mother  coun- 
try, I  have  yet  felt  at  liberty  to  investigate  this  subject 
without  the  bias  of  English  authority;  and  I  am  ha] 
that  the  result  of  the  investigation  enables  me  to  take, 
with  a  deep  conviction  of  its  truth,  the  ground  which  my 
country  has  in  a  manner  prescribed ;  to  regard  the  slav- 
ery existing  in  our  Southern  States  as  resting  on  con- 
tract, and  to  regard  the  relation  of  master  and  slave  as 
no  cause  of  shame  or  reproach,  but  as  entitled  to  respect, 
both  at  home  and  abroad ;  as  entitled  to  respect,  because 
legitimate,  not  only  by  the  laws  of  the  particular  States 
which  uphold  it,  and  by  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States,  which  guaranties  its'  protection,  but  also  by  the 
principles  of  universal  justice  ;  that  is,  by  the  law  of 
Gob.  And  I  can  not  but  indulge  the  hope  that  the 
avowal  of  this  sentiment,  however  it  may  at  first  "  startle 
and  surprise,"  will  in  the  end  approve  itself  to  the  more 
sober  and  judicious  members  of  the  Anglican  Church. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


LIMITATIONS    OF  AUTHORITY. 

Bishop  Cumberland,  than  whom,  in  his  "  De  Legibus 
Natures"*  no  author  has  searched  more  deeply  into  the 
foundations  of  society,  virtue,  and  religion,  in  the  course 
of  his  chapter  "On  the  original  of  Dominion  and  the 
Moral  Virtues,"  makes  the  following  observation  : 

"  Before  I  had  universally  and  distinctly  considered 
the  original  of  all  dominion  and  right  whatsoever,  I  used, 
indeed,  as  most  others  do,  to  deduce  the  Divine  dominion 
entirely  from  His  (Cod's)  being  the  Creator;  for  I  thought 
it  self-evident  that  every  one  was  lord  of  his  own  powers, 
which  are  little  different  from  the  essence  of  anything, 
and  that  therefore  any  effect  must  be  subject  to  him, 
from  whose  powers  it  received  its  whole  essence,  as  is  the 
case  in  creation,  by  which  the  whole  substance  of  the 
thing  is  produced  into  being. 

"  But  because  all  dominion  supposes  some  right,  and 

*  The  work,  published  in  the  seventeenth  century,  was  translated 
by  Mr.  Maxwell,  a  Prebendary  of  the  Church  of  Ireland,  and  printed 
(with  several  dissertations  of  his  own)  at  London,  a.  d.  1727.  The 
above  quotation  is  from  Mr.  Maxwell's  translation. 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY.  183 

all  right  is  a  power  granted  or  permitted  by  some  law, 
at  least  analogically  such  ;  therefore,  the  law  granting 
or  permitting  dominion,  ought  first  to  be  acknowledged. 
But  law  there  is  none  prior  to  the  natural  law,  or  that 
dictate  of  the  Divine  wisdom,  concerning  the  best  end 
and  the  means  thereto  necessary,  which  is  perfectly 
agreeable  to  the  law  of  Nature,  and  may  analogically  be 
called  the  Law  of  the  Divine  Actions  ;  I  therefore 
came  to  this  conclusion  :  That  the  dominion  of  God  is  a 
right  or  power  given  Him  by  His  own  wisdom  or  good- 
ness, as  by- a  law,  for  the  government  of  all  those  things 
which  ever  have  been,  or  shall  be  created  by  Him.  In 
the  Divine  wisdom  is  necessarily  contained  a  dictate  to 
pursue  the  best  end  by  the  necessary  means  ;  and  in  the 
goodness  or  perfection  of  the  Divine  will  is,  by  a  like 
necessity,  included  a  ready  consent  to  promote  the  same ; 
and  these,  by  a  natural  analogy,  answer  to  a  ratification 
of  this  eternal  law,  wThence  the  divine  dominion  may  take 
its  original.7' 

If,  then,  God's  right  to  dominion  is  derived,  not  from 
His  irresistible  power,  but  from  His  infinite  wisdom  and 
goodness,  which  serve  after  the  manner  of  a  law  to  direct 
the  operation  of  His  infinite  power  ;  evident  it  is,  that 
mere  power  confers  on  no  human  creature  the  right  of 
dominion,  and  that  no  one  man  has  the  right  to  govern 
another  otherwise  than  agreeably  to  those  laws  which 
our  Creator  has  given  for  the  government  of  all  men. 
Absolute  dominion,  or  the  power  to  direct  and  dispose  of 


184 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


persons  and  things  without  regard  to  justice  and  equity, 
which  are  for  us  men  the  surest  expressions  of  the  Divine 
wisdom  and  goodness,  is  an  attribute  neither  of  God  nor 
of  good  men,  and  is  coveted  only  by  that  pride  and  self- 
ishness which  are  the  origin  of  evil  and  the  eternal  tor- 
ment of  the  wicked. 

Whatever  rights,  then,  accrue  to  us  under  the  law  of 
Nature,  are  limited  by  the  law  of  Nature,  which  com- 
mands us  to  render  to  all  their  dues,  and  restrains  us  in 
every  relation  of  life,  and  in  all  our  actions,  from  injus- 
tice, cruelty,  and  oppression.  The  law  of  Nature,  for 
example,  gives  the  husband  authority  to  govern  his  wife, 
but  it  does  not  permit  him  to  treat  her  harshly  or 
cruelly ;  it  gives  the  father  authority  over  his  children, 
but  not  to  maltreat  and  abuse  them  :  in  neither  case  is 
the  authority  absolute,  but  in  both  cases  it  is  limited  and 
restrained  to  the  ends  for  which  it  is  given  by  the  very 
law  which  creates  it.  So  with  the  relation  of  master 
and  slave  :  the  law  of  Nature  gives  the  master  authority 
to  govern  his  slave,  but  not  to  abuse  him  :  it  limits  the 
exercise  of  his  authority  by  a  just  regard  to  the  end  for 
which  it  is  conferred  ;  that  is,  to  render  the  slave  obedient 
to  his  just  demands,  and  to  obtain  from  him  that  service 
which  is  the  master's  due.  All  beyond  this,  is  usurpa- 
tion and  cruelty — abhorrent  to  the  law  of  Nature. 

In  truth  the  law  of  Nature,  in  requiring  us  to  love 
God  supremely,  and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves  (and 
this  is  seen  to  be  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  law  of 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


185 


Nature  when  revealed  to  us  in  its  full  dimensions),  im- 
poses an  immutable  limitation  to  all  the  authority  it  con- 
fers ;  and  a  limitation  -which  would  be  as  effectual  as 
immutable,  if  the  precept  imposing  it  were  duly  con- 
sulted. Unhappily,  however,  the  very  precept  which  is 
designed  by  God  to  limit  authority  is  used  by  the  per- 
versity of  man  to  subvert  and  destroy  it ;  being  made  a 
pretext  for  annihilating  the  distinctions  of  rank  and 
property  in  society ;  and  consequently  of  obliterating  the 
moral  virtues  of  temperance  and  frugality,  benevolence 
and  modesty,  which,  without  these  distinctions,  would 
have  no  scope  for  exercise,  and,  indeed,  no  possibility  of 
existence.  But  the  love  or  benevolence  enjoined  by  the 
divine  law  is  no  such  leveling  principle.  It  requires  us 
to  do  good  offices  to  all  men  in  their  various  relations, 
and  in  such  manner  and  degree  as  is  best  fitted  to  fulfill 
the  ends  of  those  relations.  Hence  it  can  not,  in  its  due 
exercise,  subvert  the  authority  which  God  has  entrusted 
to  any  man :  but  it  serves  to  temper  authority,  to  whom- 
soever entrusted,  and  to  direct  it  to  the  fulfillment  of  its 
legitimate  end.  We  admit  this  in  other  relations  :  why 
not  also  in  that  which  is  under  consideration  ?  A  man's 
love  for  his  wife  does  not  require  him  to  abjure  his  au- 
thority over  her,  but  so  to  exercise  it  as  to  attach  her  to 
himself,  and  to  make  her  the  trusting  and  trusted  part- 
ner of  his  life.  A  father's  love  to  his  children  does  not 
require  him  to  renounce  his  authority  over  them,  but  so 
to  exercise  his  authority  as  to  fit  tbem  for  their  destined 


186 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


stations  in  life.  A  ruler's  love  for  his  subjects  does  not 
require  him  to  change  places  with  them,  but  so  to  govern 
them  as  he,  if  a  subject  and  an  honest  and  upright 
man,  would  desire  to  be  governed  himself.  The  love  of 
a  judge  for  a  criminal  at  the  bar  does  not  require  him 
to  divest  himself  of  his  office,  or  to  violate  its  duties,  but 
it  requires  him  so  to  exercise  his  authority  as  to  show  all 
possible  kindness  and  clemency  to  the  accused,  consistent 
with  the  paramount  purpose  of  giving  effect  to  the  just 
and  humane  intention  of  the  law.  A  rich  man's  love  for 
his  poor  neighbors  does  not  require  him  to  beggar  him- 
self, but  so  to  use  his  riches  as  to  relieve  their  necessi- 
ties. All  these  things  are  so  nearly  self-evident  that 
they  scarcely  admit  of  proof,  and  are  commonly  received 
without  it.  Why,  then,  should  the  relation  we  are  con- 
sidering be  counted  an  exception  ?  Why  imagine  that 
love,  which  is  the  principle  of  universal  attraction  in  the 
moral  world,  and  binds  men  together  in  every  other  just 
relation  of  life,  should  in  this  relation  alone  become 
a  principle  of  repulsion  which  must  of  necessity  rend 
them  asunder?  Surely,  unless  we  are  determined  to 
violate  all  principle  and  all  analogy,  we  must  acknowl- 
edge that  the  love  of  the  master  for  his  slaves  does  not 
require  him  to  raise  them  to  the  same  state  of  freedom 
with  himself,  but  that  it  serves  to  temper  his  authority 
over  them,  and  to  direct  the  exercise  of  it  to  the  end  for 
which  it  is  given  ;  i.  e.,  to  make  them  faithful  and  affec- 
tionate servants. 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


187 


It  is  in  this  law  of  universal  benevolence,  which,  as 
imperfectly  and  in  its  rude  outlines  apprehended  by 
reason,  requires  us  to  abstain  from  injury  and  to  do  jus- 
tice to  all  men,  and  which,  when  revealed  to  us  in  its 
full  proportions  by  its  divine  Author,  becomes  the  charity 
of  the  gospel,  requiring  us  not  only  to  be  just,  but  full 
of  mercy  and  compassion ;  it  is,  I  say,  in  this  law  that 
we  find  the  limitation  of  all  human  authority.  It  is  by 
this  law  that  the  master  (as  well  as  the  father  and  all 
others  invested  with  authority)  is  taught  and  directed, 
not  only  to  do  justice  to  those  under  him,  but  to  render 
them,  as  far  as  he  can,  comfortable  and  happy  in  the 
relations  which  they  hold  to  him.  He  is  bound  to  regard 
them  as  his  fellow-creatures,  remembering  that  the  dif- 
ference between  himself  and  them  is  not  a  difference  of 
nature,  but  of  fortune ;  that  he  is  made  of  the  same  clay 
with  them,  and  that  they  are  made  in  the  same  image  of 
God  with  him ;  that  his  authority  is  but  a  brief  trust  for  the 
just  and  equitable  use  of  which  he  must  account  to  his 
Master  in  heaven.  They  are  his  servants,  and  he  has 
the  right  to  exact  of  them  the  service  which  is  his  due ;  but 
he  has  no  right  to  overtask  them,  nor,  indeed,  to  require 
of  them  any  greater  labor  than  is  conducive  to  his  and 
their  mutual  benefit,  regard  being  had  to  their  different 
stations  in  life.  They  are  part  of  his  family,  and  he  has 
therefore  the  right  to  govern  them  without  accounting  to 
the  State,  except  for  such  inordinate  abuses  as  its  laws 
prohibit ;  but  he  has  no  right  (by  the  law  of  Nature,  I 


188 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


mean,  which  restrains  us  all  within  much  narrower  lim- 
its than  the  law  of  the  land)  to  punish  them  except  for 
just  cause,  for  their  indolence  and  other  faults  and  vices, 
and  in  no  other  kind  or  greater  degree  than  is  necessary 
to  their  amendment.  He  has  a  right  to  the  use  of  their 
bodily  liberty  (for  how  else  could  he  command  their  ser- 
vice?), but  he  has  no  right  to  require  of  them  anything 
impossible  in  Nature  or  unlawful  in  morals.  The  rela- 
tion in  which  he  stands  to  them  is  not  inalienable  by 
Nature,  like  that  of  parent  and  child,  nor  indissoluble 
by  the  law  of  God.  natural  or  positive,  like  that  of  hus- 
band and  wife,  but  is  superinduced  on  him  by  Provi- 
dence, with  their  implied  consent,  and  may  be  alienated 
and  dissolved,  but  not  capriciously  or  wantonly.  Strictly 
speaking,  the  master  has  a  right  only  to  the  service  of 
the  slave :  and  there  is  evidently  nothing  in  the  nature 
of  this  right  to  prevent  its  transfer  to  another  with  the 
slave's  consent,  either  expressed  or  gathered,  in  cases  of 
incapacity,  by  reasonable  implication.  Reason,  too,  al- 
lows the  transfer,  in  cases  of  necessity,  arising  either 
from  the  master's  misfortunes  or  from  the  incurable  vice 
and  obstinacy  of  the  slave,  which  requires  his  dismissal 
from  his  master's  service.  All  beyond  this,  if  justifi- 
able at  all,  must  be  justified,  I  apprehend,  not  by  the 
law  of  Nature,  but  only  by  the  laws  of  the  land. 

To  say  that  this  authority  is  always  exercised  within 
the  limit3  which  the  law  of  Nature  prescribes,  would  be 
to  affirm  of  the  master  more  than  can  be  affirmed  of  any 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


189 


class  of  men  invested  with  authority  in  the  body  politic, 
in  the  family,  or  in  other  associations  involving  the  gov- 
ernmental relation.  Magistrates,  husbands,  and  fathers, 
clergymen,  teachers,  masters,  or  employers,  as  we  now 
call  them,  are  all  liable  to  the  charge  of  cruel  and  ca- 
pricious conduct  toward  their  subordinates.  What  good 
reason  have  we  to  believe  that  the  proprietor  of  slaves 
abuses  his  trust  more  than  others  ?  His  authority  is  in 
some  respects  analogous  to  that  of  tbe  father  over  his 
children ;  and  although  it  is  not  restrained  by  the  senti- 
ment of  paternal  affection,  yet  it  is  restrained  by  that 
sentiment  of  kindliness  which  is  implanted  in  every  hu- 
man bosom,  and  by  that  dictate  of  our  common  humanity 
which  excites  every  man's  solicitude  in  behalf  of  all  those 
who  are  dependent  on  him,  and  look  to  him  for  protec- 
tion. What  reason  have  we  to  believe  that  our  Southern 
brethren  are  the  only  men  on  earth  on  whom  these  sen- 
timents are  inoperative  ?  And  if  these  motives  are  less 
efficacious  than  the  sympathies  created  by  closer  ties, 
may  not  their  defects  be  compensated  by  that  principle 
of  self-interest  which,  in  the  present  state  of  our  nature, 
is  more  stringent  and  steady  in  its  operation  than  any 
other  motive  of  human  action,  and  which  does  not,  as  a 
general  rule,  suffer  the  master  to  neglect  the  welfare  of 
his  slaves  ?  In  this  respect,  it  will  be  found,  I  appre- 
hend, that  the  good  providence  of  God,  by  infusing  seeds 
of  attachment,  and  by  an  interweaving  of  interests  among 
those  who,  however  different  in  station,  are  under  his 


190 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


common  charge,  and  the  objects  of  his  common  bounty, 
but  has  acted  the  part  of  a  kind  philanthropist,  and  a 
wise  economist. 

In  another  respect,  the  authority  of  the  master  is 
analogous  to  that  of  the  magistrate  :  he  is  obliged  to 
punish  his  slaves  for  numerous  offenses,  which  in  free 
States  can  be  taken  cognizance  of  only  by  the  magistrate. 
I  would  not  underrate  the  advantages  that  are  derived 
from  the  formalities  of  law,  and  the  safeguards  with 
which  they  surround  the  liberty,  reputation,  and  pro- 
perty of  the  humblest  citizen.  But  are  the  advantages 
all  one  side  ?  Is  nothing  to  be  said  in  favor  of  that  state 
of  society,  in  which  the  great  body  of  the  laboring  class 
stands  only  in  a  mediate  relation  to  the  State  ?  Is  the 
master  less  interested  than  the  magistrate  in  the  preven- 
tion of  crime?  Is  he  less  likely  to  be  lenient  and 
discriminating  in  his  judgments  ?  Has  he  fewer  induce- 
ments to  make  the  punishments  which  he  awards  answer 
the  true  end  of  punishment,  the  reformation  and  im- 
provement of  the  offender?  For  my  part  I  shall  be 
more  ready  to  quarrel  with  arbitrary  power  at  the 
South  when  we  get  rid  of  jails  and  state-prisons  at  the 
North. 

I  am  not  depreciating  freedom,  nor  am  I  insensible  to 
the  advantages  which  have  been  conferred  on  the  white 
population  of  the  North  (at  the  expense  of  the  blacks)  by 
the  abolition  of  slavery.  But  if  there  be  any  redeeming 
points  in  that  state  of  society  which  exists  at  the  South, 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


191 


I  think  we  can  well  afford  to  take  them  into  account  and 
pass  them  to  the  credit  of  our  Southern  brethren,  in  the 
comparisons  which  we  draw  between  our  own  condition 
and  theirs. 

Besides  the  motives  already  mentioned,  there  are 
others  of  a  more  general  nature,  which  may  be  presumed 
to  operate  beneficially  upon  the  master.  He  is  respon- 
sible to  his  Maker  equally  with  other  men :  he  has  a 
reputation  to  maintain  among  his  neighbors  and  acquaint- 
ances, and  throughout  the  world  ;  he  has  a  large  stake 
in  society,  and  is  proportionately  prompted  by  public 
spirit  to  redress  abuses,  and  to  introduce  salutary  re- 
forms ;  his  slaves,  moreover,  are  part  of  his  family,  and 
his  agency  for  their  temporal  and  spiritual  welfare,  if  he 
be  a  Christian  man,  is  quickened  by  the  apostolic  pre- 
cept, 4  4  If  any  man  provide  not  for  his  own,  and  espe- 
cially for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the 
faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel.7'  If  the  slaveholder 
has  strong  temptations  to  oppression  and  cruelty,  let  us 
remember  that  he  has  strong  motives  also  to  resist  these 
temptations.  That  he,  like  other  men,  is  often  be- 
trayed into  excess,  is  probable ;  in  which  case,  it  may  be 
hoped,  he  will  be  honest  enough  to  confess  his  fault,  and 
not  seek  to  justify  himself  by  an  equivocation  like  thnt; 
of  Browne,  the  reputed  father  of  the  Independents,  who 
(I  have  the  story  from  one  of  his  contemporaries)  when 
accused  of  unmercifully  beating  his  wife,  defended  him- 


192 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


self  by  saying,  that  he  did  not  beat  her  as  his  wife,  but 

as  a  termagant.* 

It  is  hardly  fair  to  visit  the  faults  of  individuals  on 
the  class  to  which  they  belong,  and  on  the  institutions 
under  which  they  live.  I  am  sure  that  we  at  the  North 
would  think  we  had  great  reason  for  complaint,  if  our 
magistrates,  husbands,  fathers,  and  free  institutions  to 
boot,  were  all  brought  into  disgrace  because  individuals 
among  us  abuse  their  authority.  As  to  punishments  for 
laziness  and  lighter  offenses.  I  believe,  from  what  I  can 
learn,  that  there  is  more  flogging  done  in  an  oid-fash- 
ioned  English  school,  than  on  a  well  ordered  Southern 
plantation.  And  I  should  be  glad  to  know  if  the  lot  of 
the  slave  would  be  less  degraded  and  miserable,  if  he 
were  compelled  to  labor  from  fear  of  starvation,  which, 
if  left  to  himself,  he  could  not  avoid,  than  it  is  when  he 
is  compelled  to  labor  from  fear  of  the  lash,  which,  as  a 
general  rule,  he  can  escape  if  he  will  ?  And  as  to  pun- 
ishments for  more  serious  offenses,  are  they  less  severe 
in  kind  and  degree,  less  wholesome  in  their  effects,  and 
more  expensive  to  the  State,  than  those  which  it  would 
be  necessary  to  inflict  on  the  same  class  of  people,  if 
they  were  emancipated  from  their  masters,  brought  into 

*  Ephraim  Pagitt,  in  hjs  account  of  the  Brownists,  Chapter  13th, 
<;  Of  their  equivocating"  gives  this,  among  other  instances:  "And  old 
father  Browne,  being  reproved  for  beating  his  old  wife,  distinguished, 
that  he  did  not  beat  her  as  his  wife,  but  as  a  curst  old  woman." 
Keresiography,  or  a  description  of  the  Heretics  and  Sectaries  sprung 
up  in  these  latter  times.    London,  a.  d.  1648. 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


193 


immediate  relation  with  society,  tried  by  judge  and  jury, 
sent  for  a  while  to  jails  and  state-prisons,  to  be  thrown 
back  upon  the  community,  greater  vagabonds  than  be- 
fore ?  These,  as  it  seems  to  me,  are  the  true  points  of 
comparison,  though  they  are  such  as  novelists  and  de- 
claimers  against  slavery  find  it  convenient  to  overlook. 

We  are  very  apt,  at  tha  North,  to  estimate  the  char- 
acter of  Southern  masters  from  the  laws  of  their  respec- 
tive States,  and  to  impute  to  them,  as  a  class,  those  ab- 
uses of  authority  which  the  laws  do  not  forbid.  Nothing 
can  be  more  manifestly  or 4  flagrantly  unjust.  What 
would  the  father  of  a  family,  in  a  free  State,  think  of 
those  who  should  impute  to  him  every  act  of  tyranny 
and  cruelty  which  the  laws  of  his  State  do  not  forbid 
him  to  exercise  ?  And  so  with  persons  in  other  relations. 
The  truth  is  that  persons  possessed  of  authority  are  re- 
strained from  its  abuse  by  a  sense  of  humanity,  of  jus- 
tice and  reputation,  and  the  thousand  other  benign  mo- 
tives with  which  Providence  has  surrounded  them  in  a 
Christian  community,  infinitely  more  than  by  the  laws 
of  the  land ;  which  are  designed  to  guard  against  the 
most  scandalous  abuses,  and  to  operate  chiefly  on  ignoble 
minds.  But  allowing  the  objection  its  due  weight,  it 
deserves  to  be  Remarked  that  Southern  legislatures  have 
not  been  so  unmindful  of  their  slaves  as  we  of  the  North 
are  apt  to  suppose.  They  acknowledge  the  rights  of 
slaves,  and  have  already  done  much,  and,  if  left  to 
themselves,  and  not  hampered  by  the  officiousness  of 

9 


194 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


others,  will,  in  the  natural  course  of  things,  do  more  to 
protect  them  in  these  rights.  On  this  subject  I  beg  the 
attention  of  the  reader  to  the  following  extract  from  an 
essay  on  the  Slave  Laws  of  the  South/*  by  the  Hon. 
J.  B.  O'Xeall.  of  South  Carolina.  I  quote  from  the 
essay  as  given  by  De  Bow,  in  his  u  Industrial  Re- 
sources,** who  remarks  that  the  essay,  *'  though  based 
upon  the  slave  system  of  that  State  (S.  C),  gives  a 
fair  idea  of  the  system  throughout  the  entire  South*'  : 

u  Although  slaves.'"  says  Judge  O'Xeall,  *'"'by  the 
act  of  1740.  are  declared  to  be  chattels  personal,  yet 
they  are  also  in  our  law  considered  as  persons  with 
many  rights  and  liabilities,  civil  and  criminal. 

"  The  right  of  protection  which  would  belong  to  a 
slave,  as  a  human  being,  is,  by  the  law  of  slavery,  trans- 
ferred to  the  master. 

••  A  master  may  protect  the  person  of  his  slave  from 
injury,  by  repelling  force  with  force,  or  by  action,  and 
in  some  cases  by  indictment. 

£:  Any  injury  done  to  the  person  of  his  slave,  he  may 
redress  by  action  of  trespass  vi  et  aivnis,  without  laying 
the  injury  done,  with  a  per  quod  servitium  amisit.  and 
this,  even  though  he  may  have  hired  the  slave  to  an- 
other. 

11  By  the  act  of  1821,  the  murder  of  a  slave  is  de- 
clared to  be  a  felony,  without  the  benefit  of  clergy ;  and 
by  the  same  act,  to  kill  any  slave  on  sudden  heat  and 
passion,  subjects  the  offender,  on  conviction,  to  a  fine  not 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY. 


195 


exceeding  five  hundred  dollars,  and  imprisonment,  not 
exceeding  six  months. 

"  To  constitute  the  murder  of  a  slave,  no  other  ingre- 
dients are  necessary  than  such  as  enter  into  the  offense 
of  murder  at  common  law.  So  the  killing  on  sudden 
heat  and  passion  is  the  same  as  manslaughter,  and  a 
finding  by  the  jury,  on  an  indictment  for  the  murder  of 
a  slave,  of  a  killing  on  sudden  heat  and  passion,  is  good, 
and  subjects  the  offender  to  the  punishment  of  the  act ; 
or,  on  an  indictment  for  the  murder  of  a  slave,  if  the 
verdict  be  guilty  of  manslaughter,  it  is  good,  and  the 
offender  is  to  receive  judgment  under  the  act. 

"  An  attempt  to  kill  and  murder  a  slave  by  shooting 
at  him,  was  held  to  be  a  misdemeanor,  and  indictable  as 
an  assault  with  an  intent  to  kill  and  murder.  This  was 
a  consequence  of  making  it  murder  to  kill  a  slave. 

"  The  act  of  1841  makes  the  unlaw  fid  whipping  or 
beating  of  any  slave,  without  sufficient  provocation  by 
word  or  act,  a  misdemeanor ;  and  subjects  the  offender, 
on  conviction,  to  imprisonment  not  exceeding  six  months, 
and  a  fine  not  exceeding  five  hundred  dollars. 

"  This  act  has  received  no  judicial  construction  by  the 
Court  of  Appeals.  It  has  been  several  times  presented 
to  me  on  circuit,  and  I  have  given  it  construction.  The 
terms  1  shall  unlawfully  whip  or  beat  any  slave  not 
under  his  charge,  without  reasonable  provocation,'  seem 
to  me  convertible.  For,  if  the  beating  be  excusable  from 
reasonable  provocation,  it  can  not  be  unlawful.    So,  if 


196 


LIMITATIONS  OF  AUTHORITY, 


the  beating  be  either  without  provocation ,  or  is  so  enor- 
mous that  the  provocation  can  be  no  excuse,  then  it  is 
unlawful.  What  is  sufficient  provocation  by  word  or 
deed,  is  a  question  for  the  jury.  The  question  is  whether, 
as  slave-owners  and  reasonable  men,  if  they  had  been  in 
the  place  of  the  defendant,  they  would  have  inflicted  the 
whipping  or  beating  which  the  defendant  did  ?  If  they 
answer  this  question  in  the  affirmative,  then  the  defend- 
ant must  be  acquitted — otherwise,  convicted. 

"  The  acts  of  1821  and  1841  are  eminently  wise,  just, 
and  humane.  They  protect  slaves,  who  dare  not  raise 
their  own  hands  in  defense  against  brutal  violence.  They 
teach  men  who  are  wholly  irresponsible  in  property,  to 
keep  their  hands  off  the  property  of  other  people.  They 
have  wiped  away  a  shameful  reproach  upon  us,  that  we 
were  indifferent  to  the  lives  or  persons  of  our  slaves. 
They  have  had,  too,  a  most  happy  effect  on  slaves  them- 
selves. They  know  now,  that  the  shield  of  the  law  is 
over  them ;  and,  thus  protected,  they  yield  a  more  hearty 
obedience  and  effective  service  to  their  masters." 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


OBJECTIONS   THEORETICAL    AND  PRACTICAL. 

In  resting  slavery  on  contract,  we  remove  the  ground 
of  those  theoretical  objections  which  impugn  it  as  a  sys- 
tem necessarily  subversive  of  natural  rights  and  upheld 
only  by  violence.  Some  of  these  objections  have  been 
sufficiently  considered,  but  there  is  one  which  it  may 
be  well  to  subject  to  a  fuller  and  more  distinct  exam- 
ination. 

The  objection  to  which  I  refer,  when  simply  enun- 
ciated, denies  the  right  to  buy  and  sell  human  beings. 
Sometimes  the  objection  is  rhetorically  amplified,  as  when 
we  are  told  that  men  have  no  right  to  traffic  in  human 
souls  or  make  merchandise  of  human  flesh  ;  and  at  other 
times  it  is  stated  with  an  appearance  of  philosophic  pre- 
cision, as  when  it  is  said  that  man  can  not  rightfully 
hold  property  in  man.  But,  however  varied  the  expres- 
sion, the  exact  point  of  the  objection  seems  to  be  that  no 
one  human  being  can  really  own  another,  and  conse- 
quently that  men  are  not  marketable  commodities  to  be 
bought  and  sold. 

The  really  remarkable  thing  in  regard  to  this  objec- 


198      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 


tion  is,  that  the  objector  himself  should  believe  that  he 
has  an  antagonist.  How  comes  he  to  think  that  when  a 
man  is  said  to  buy  or  sell  a  slave  he  is  understood  to 
acquire  or  give  an  absolute  right  to  the  ownership  of  his 
person,  body  and  soul  ?  The  idea  is  so  extravagant,  so 
contrary  to  all  just  conceptions  of -human  nature,  that 
one  feels  curious  to  learn  something  of  its  origin  ;  and 
how  it  has  come  to  pass  that  any  man  should  entertain  it 
himself  or  impute  it  to  another.  Who  needs  to  be  told 
that  no  man  but  himself  can  sell  his  own  soul,  and  that 
only  in  a  figurative  sense,  and  with  Satan  for  a  pur- 
chaser ?  Who  needs  to  be  told  that  it  is  impossible  for 
one  man  to  make  the  body,  limbs,  and  muscles  of  an- 
other his  own  ?  .What  man  in  this  age  and  country  will 
affirm  that  any  man  has  a  right  to  his  own  life,  much 
less  to  the  life  of  another  ?  Few  propositions,  I  think, 
can  be  more  indisputable  than  that  one  man  can  not 
really  own  another,  and  consequently  can  not  be  said,  in 
a  proper  sense,  to  buy  or  sell  another.  If  I  ask  a  book- 
seller the  price  of  "  Virgil"  or  "  Juvenal,"  "  Hume,"  or 
"  Macaulay,"  does  it  ever  enter  his  head  that  I  wish  to 
buy  these  worthies  themselves,  and  become  the  owner  of 
their  muscles,  as  well  as  of  the  products  of  their  minds  ? 
Was  ever  slave  so  stupid  as  to  believe,  when  told  to  boil 
the  kettle,  that  he  must  reduce  the  veritable  iron  to  a 
fluid  state  and  make  it  bubble  with  heat  ?  How  comes 
it,  then,  that  when  servants  are  said  to  be  bought  and 
sold,  we  do  not  see  that  the  wTord  servants  is  used  by  one 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  ID!) 


of  the  most  common  figures  of  speech  for  the  service 
which  they  owe  ?  What  else  can  be  bought  and  sold 
among  civilized  and  Christian  people  but  the  man's  ser- 
vice or  labor  ?  When  I  read  in  the  Scriptures,  without 
a  word  of  censure  on  the  practice,  that  the  patriarchs 
bought  and  sold  slaves,  and  that  the  Levitical  law  en- 
joined on  the  Hebrews  to  buy  servants  of  the  heathen 
round  about  them  and  of  the  strangers  that  sojourned 
among  them,  and  to  make  them  their  "  possession/'  and 
to  transmit  them  as  an  inheritance  to  their  children  after 
them  u  to  inherit  them  for  a  possession;"  it  certainly 
never  enters  into  my  mind  that  the  Hebrews  thereby 
acquired  an  absolute  right  over  the  persons  of  their 
slaves,  so  as,  if  they  pleased,  to  eat  their  bodies  and  de- 
stroy their  souls ;  or,  indeed,  any  other  right  to  them 
than  a  right  to  their  service  and  labor,  and  to  the  gov- 
ernment of  their  persons  in  order  to  their  service  and 
labor.  Nor  do  I  suppose  that  any  reader,  left  to  the 
working  of  his  own  mind,  would  put  any  other  construc- 
tion on  the  language,  or  suppose  that  the  heathen  slaves 
are  called  the  u  possession"  or  property  of  the  Hebrews 
in  any  other  than  a  limited  and  figurative  sense ;  the 
limitation  so  obvious  that  it  needs  not  be  expressed,  the 
figure  so  natural  that  to  avoid  it  would  be  a  miserable 
affectation  of  philosophic  precision.  The  servants  were 
the  possession  or  property  of  the  Hebrews  only  for  cer- 
tain purposes,  and  even  for  these  purposes  they  were 
not  literally  their  possession,  but  merely  called  so  by 


200      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 

one  of  those  common  figures  of  speech,  by  which  the 
cause  is  put  for  the  effect,  or  the  whole  for  a  part. 

All  this  seems  to  me  to.be  so  obvious  that  I  doubt 
whether  men  in  modern  times  wTould  have  put  any  other 
construction  on  the  words  were  it  not  for  the  influence 
of  a  preconceived  theory.  They  would  read  in  the  Old 
Testament  that  servants  were  a  possession,  and  think  (if 
they  thought  about  the  matter  at  all)  that  servants  was 
put  for  service  as  naturally  as  when  they  read  in  the 
New  Testament:  "Lord,  let  me  go  first  and  bury  my 
father,"  they  think  (if  they  chance  to  think  of  the  mat- 
ter at  all)  that  only  the  corpse  was  to  be  buried ;  or,  at 
all  events,  they  would  never  dream  of  the  "  possession" 
involving  an  absolute  right  to  the  servant's  body  and 
soul,  were  not  their  minds  prepossessed  with  certain 
notions  of  slavery  that  were  as  foreign  to  the  Hebrew 
mind  as  they  are,  happily 7  to  American  practice. 

Under  the  Roman  law,  in  the  palmy  days  of  the  Re- 
public, there  was  nothing  in  the  theory  of  slavery  to 
restrain  or  limit  the  right  of  sale.  Men  were  made 
slaves  by  captivity,  and  the  slave  was  the  property  of 
his  master  to  dispose  of  as  he  pleased.  In  the  time  of 
the  Emperors  the  law  restrained  some  of  the  abuses  of 
the  master's  authority,  but  it  never  regarded  the  slave 
as  under  its  protection.  The  theory  was  that  the  master 
had  an  absolute  right  to  the  life  of  the  slave,  a  right 
which  he  held  in  abeyance  on  certain  conditions,  but 
which  he  resumed  the  moment  that  the  slave  refused  his 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  201 

consent  to  those  conditions ;  and,  as  the  greater  included 
the  less,  he  had  consequently  the  right  to  subject  the 
slave  to  any  treatment,  however  barbarous,  which  was 
short  of  death.  On  this  theory  the  sale  of  a  slave  was 
the  transfer  of  that  absolute  right  to  life  and  limb  which 
the  owner  was  supposed  to  possess.  This  theory  of  sla- 
very, as  we  have  shown,  has  been  adopted  by  modern 
writers  on  civil  liberty,  and  depicted  in  all  its  native 
horrors,  in  order  to  render  the  civil  liberty  which  they 
have  justly  commended,  more  lovely  and  noble  by 
contrast. 

Slavery  in  the  United  States  rests  on  a  different  foun- 
dation. The  master  has  no  right  to  the  life  of  the  slave, 
no  absolute  right  to  his  person,  no  absolute  right  even 
to  his  service  and  labor.  In  no  proper  sense,  therefore, 
can  he  be  said  to  be  the  owner  of  the  slave,  and  what  he 
does  not  own  himself  he  can  not  be  said,  in  a  proper 
sense,  to  give  or  transfer  to  another.  He  has  a  condi- 
tional right  to  the  service  of  the  slave ;  this  service  he 
may  give  or  transfer  to  another,  on  the  same  condition 
on  which  he  holds  it  himself ;  and  the  transfer  of  it  for 
a  valuable  consideration  is  said,  in  legal  and  popular 
language,  to  be  the  sale  of  the  slave.  The  law  of  the 
land,  indeed,  declares  the  slave  to  be  his  master's  prop- 
erty, his  "  chattel  personal/'  as  the  phrase  is ;  and  as  the 
service  is  inseparable  from  the  servant,  I  see  not  in  what 
other  way  the  law  can  secure  the  master's  right.  But 

to  take  such  legal  phrase  in  a  philosophical  sense,  and  to 

9* 


202     OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 

infer  from  it  that  the  slave  is  neither  a  human  person, 
nor  a  member  of  civil  society,  nor  possessed  of  the 
rights  (unless  he  had  forfeited  them  by  crime)  of  life 
and  liberty  (the  liberty  proper  to  his  station),  is  to  do 
injustice,  I  apprehend,  both  to  the  letter  and  spirit  of 
the  law. 

The  truth  is,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  that  the  obligation 
to  service  for  life,  on  condition  of  protection  and  sup- 
port, is  the  essence  of  American  slavery.  Servitus  in 
totum  hominem  non  descendit,  says  Seneca,  The 
heathens  saw,  plainly  enough,  that  slavery  does  not  pass 
upon  the  soul :  and  we  Christians  know  and  proclaim 
by  our  laws  that  it  does  pass  on  the  body,  except  so  far 
as  to  secure  from  the  slave  that  labor  for  life,  the  obli- 
gation to  which  is  the  essence  of  servitude. 

The  framers  of  our  Federal  Constitution  touched  the 
precise  point  of  the  relation,  when,  rejecting  a  word 
which  has  one  meaning  at  Boston  and  another  at 
Charleston,  they  referred  to  slaves  as  persons  bound 
to  service.  The  transfer  of  this  right  to  service,  or 
the  sale  of  slaves,  however  common,  is  no  essential  or 
necessary  part  of  the  relation,  but  merely  made  a  part 
of  it  by  custom.  The  facility  and  frequency  with  which 
it  is  effected  is,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  most  revolting  abuses 
of  slavery,  but  it  is  one  which  may  be  greatly  restrained, 
if  not  wholly  removed,  without  impairing  any  essential 
feature  of  the  institution. 

"  This  continual  change,"  says  Judge  O'Neall,  in  the 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  203 


essay  above  referred  to,  "  of  the  relation  of  master  and 
slave,  with  the  consequent  rending  of  family  ties  among 
them,  has  induced  me  to  think  that,  if  by  law  they  were 
annexed  to  the  freeholds  of  their  owners,  and  when  sold 
for  partition  among  distributers,  tenants  in  common, 
joint  tenants,  and  coparceners,  they  should  be  sold  with 
the  freehold,  and  not  otherwise,  it  might  be  a  wise  and 
wholesome  change  of  the  law.  Some  provision,  too, 
might  be  made,  which  would  prevent,  in  a  great  degree, 
sales  for  debts.  A  debtor's  lands  and  slaves,  instead  of 
being  sold,  might  be  sequestered,  until,  like  vivum  vadi- 
um,  they  would  pay  all  his  debts  in  execution  by  the 
annual  profits.  If  this  should  be  impossible,  on  account 
of  the  amount  of  the  indebtedness,  then  either  court,  law, 
or  equity,  might  be  empowered  to  order  the  sale  of  the 
plantation  and  slaves,  together  or  separately — the  slaves 
to  be  sold  in  families. '? 

It  is  certainly  matter  of  the  very  deepest  regret,  that  the 
reciprocal  rights  involved  in  the  relation  should  be  over- 
shadowed in  the  public  mind  by  the  master's  right  of 
property  in  the  slave.  Perhaps  this  prominence  of  the 
legal  question  has  been  unavoidable ;  but,  however  this 
be,  its  effect  has  been  most  disastrous,  by  turning  away 
public  attention  from  the  relation  itself  to  one  of  its  sub- 
ordinate and  most  repulsive  features. 

Another  objection,  closely  allied  to  the  former,  is,  that 
slavery  involves  the  breaking  up  of  families,  the  separa- 
tion of  husband  and  wife,  parents  and  children. 


204      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 


It  is  doubtless  true,  that  the  laws  of  the  Southern 
States  allow  to  the  master  a  greater  latitude  in  the  trans- 
fer of  his  slaves  than  is  consistent  with  the  dictates  either 
of  humanity  or  of  a  sound  and  enlightened  policy.  Put 
yourself,  then,  in  the  place  of  your  Southern  brethren, 
and  tell  me  frankly,  Would  you  make  the  law  of  the 
State  in  all  things  the  measure  of  your  duty  and  the  rule 
of  your  practice?  Would  you,  in  the  spirit  of  greed 
and  without  mercy,  grasp  at  every  right  which  the  law 
of  the  land  concedes  to  you  ?  Would  not  you  govern 
your  conduct  by  higher  motives  ?  Would  not  you  act 
towards  your  dependents  with  that  forbearance  and  clem- 
ency, with  that  kindness  and  charity  which  have  their 
origin  in  a  far  higher  source  than  legal  prescriptions  and 
statutes?  What  right  have  you,  then,  to  charge  upon 
your  brethren  a  conduct  which  you  would  yourself  de- 
spise? What  right  have  you  to  think  that  they,  in  the 
transfer  of  their  slaves,  avail  themselves,  with  reckless 
and  avaricious  temper,  of  the  liberty  which  their  laws  con- 
cede ?  Or  that  they  do  not,  in  obedience  to  the  dictates 
of  humanity  and  religion,  do  all  in  their  power  to  miti- 
gate those  rigors  of  slavery  which  the  law  of  the  land 
can  not  or  does  not  reach  ? 

But  perhaps  on  this  point  you  do  justice  to  your 
Southern  brethren  ;  you  admit  that  they  do  endeavor, 
and  for  the  most  part  with  success,  to  prevent  the  sepa- 
ration of  families.  But  such,  you  argue,  is  their  mis- 
fortune, such  the  withering  curse  of  slavery,  that  they 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  205 


can  not  wholly  remove  this  evil.  Masters  are  sometimes 
cruel,  creditors  always  merciless  ;  and  hence,  from  the 
inherent  nature  of  slavery,  these  cruel  separations  will 
occur :  southern  planters  can  not  prevent  the  evil,  if  they 
would. 

Can  you  prevent  it?  Try  the  experiment  first  at 
home,  and  on  freemen.  Can  you  so  adjust  the  mechanism 
of  human  society  as  to  enable  its  members  to  earn  their 
livelihood  without  the  rupture  of  domestic  ties?  Can 
you  prosecute  commerce  on  this  basis,  or  raise  an  army, 
or  support  a  navy  ?  Look  round  among  your  neighbors. 
Is  there  a  family  that  has  not  been  separated  ?  and  do 
you  not  find  many  wThose  members  are  scattered  to  the 
four  quarters  of  the  earth,  driven  to  this  separation  by 
their  wants,  or  by  that  sense  of  duty  which  is  the  stern- 
est of  all  necessity  ?  Have  these  separations  caused  no 
anxious  thoughts,  no  sleepless  nights,  no  bleeding  hearts? 
Look  at  your  jails  and  prisons,  to  which  you  send  those 
incorrigible  offenders  wTho,  in  a  different  form  of  society, 
would  be  sold  to  some  distant  and  rigid  master ;  have 
the  inmates  of  these  dismal  abodes  left  no  relatives  out- 
side the  walls  that  confine  them  to  mourn  over  their  dis- 
grace, their  incarceration  and  sufferings?  What  do  we 
learn  from  this  ?  That  freedom  has  no  advantage  over 
slavery  ?  God  forbid  !  That  slaves  are  not  the  lowest 
class  of  human  society  ?  We  know  that  they  are.  But 
this  we  learn — that  the  evil  under  consideration  is  not 
peculiar  to  slavery ;  that  it  is  incident  to  man  in  every 


206      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 


age  and  country  5  every  form  and  condition  of  society ; 
that  it  falls  equally,  though  in  different  ways  and  from 
the  operation  of  different  causes,  both  on  bond  and  free ; 
that  if  it  produce  greater  sufferings  among  slaves  than 
others  (which  I  am  apt  to  doubt)  it  has  also,  though  we 
may  not  see  it,  a  proportionate  compensation ;  that  we 
are  bound  to  use  our  best  efforts  (in  the  way  of  duty  and 
consistently  with  the  order  of  human  society)  to  avert 
this  as  well  as  other  evils  from  those  over  whom  it  im- 
pends ;  and  when  these  efforts  have  failed,  then  to  acqui- 
esce in  the  calamity  as  God's  appointment;  to  receive 
it  at  His  hands  without  peevish  complaints  and  mur- 
murs. 

Another  common  objection  to  slavery  is,  that  it  pro- 
scribes marriage ;  slaves,  it  is  said,  being  degraded  by 
the  necessity  of  their  condition  to  the  level  of  brutes, 
and  compelled  to  live  in  a  state  of  universal  concub- 
inage. 

It  was  some  time  before  I  could  discover  the  grounds 
of  this  objection.  My  inquiries  of  clergymen  and  others 
who  had  resided  at  the  South  satisfied  me  that  marriage 
was  recognized  and  respected  by  the  bond  in  the  church 
to  which  I  belong,  as  well  as  by  the  free ;  that  persons 
of  both  classes  were  married  after  the  same  form,  and 
that  no  distinction  was  made  in  the  performance  of  the 
rite,  except  that  in  the  case  of  slaves  the  written  consent 
of  the  master,  or  masters,  to  the  marriage  was  required. 
My  informants  also  assured  me,  that  to  the  best  of  their 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  207 


knowledge,  the  same  custom  prevailed  among  other  relig- 
ious denominations.  One  clergyman,  who  has  spent  most 
of  his  professional  life  at  the  North,  told  me,  that  while 
residing  at  the  South,  he  had  himself  solemnized  more 
than  fifty  marriages  among  slaves  ;  and  he  added,  that 
the  Roman  Catholics  (and  I  record  the  fact  to  their 
honor)  make  a  point  of  the  matter  and  insist  on  mar- 
riage among  the  slaves  under  their  charge  as  a  condition 
of  cohabitation.  With  these  facts  before  me,  I  was  much 
at  a  loss  to  understand  the  grounds  of  this  common  state- 
ment in  regard  to  the  concubinage  of  slaves ;  a  statement 
not  confined  to  the  slaves  of  remote  plantations,  but  ap- 
plied in  the  broadest  terms  to  slaves  of  every  description ; 
and  it  is  only  since  I  have  been  engaged  in  the  prepara- 
tion of  the  present  essay,  that  I  have  been  enlightened 
on  the  subject.  For  this  light  I  am  indebted  to  a  work 
entitled  u  The  Higher  Law  in  its  Relations  to  Civil  Gov- 
ernment ;  with  particular  Reference  to  Slavery  and  the 
Fugitive  Slave  Law,7'  written  by  William  Hosmer, 
published  at  Auburn,  N.  Y.,  1852.  In  this  work,  page 
90,  as  one  of  several  illustrations  of  what  he  calls  the 
"  Natural  Injustice"  of  Slavery,  Mr.  Hosmer  gives  us 
the  following  : 

u  5.  It  (slavery)  destroys  the  marriage  relation. 
So  far  as  we  have  any  knowledge,  slaves  are  incapable 
of  contracting  marriage.  They  are,  in  this  respect,  ex- 
actly on  a  level  with  brutes.  Indeed,  it  is  not  possible 
that  marriage  should  exist,  for  marriage  is  a  legal  rela- 


208      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 

tion,  and  implies  contracting  power  ;  but  the  slave  can 
make  no  contract.  He  is  unknown  in  law,  except  as 
belonging  exclusively  and  entirely  to  another.  He  may 
live  as  if  married,  but  it  would  be  a  desecration  of  law 
to  repeat  its  forms  over  those  who  have  not  power  to 
keep  the  slightest  of  its  requirements.  The  slave,  if  he 
could  be  married,  could  not  protect  his  wife  from  insult 
and  defilement,  for  she  would  not  belong  to  him,  but  to 
his  owner — all  that  the  slave  has  being  his  master's. 
Moreover,  she  might  be  sold  or  separated  from  him  at 
any  moment. 

u  6.  It  destroys  the  parental  relation.  This  follows 
inevitably  from  the  foregoing.  When  marriage  is  not 
allowed  to  exist,  the  duty  of  parents  to  instruct  and  pro- 
vide for  their  children  must  cease.  Amid  universal 
concubinage,  parentage  can  scarcely  be  traced  beyond 
the  mother,77  etc.,  etc. 

From  this  passage  it  would  seem  that  the  astounding 
statements  to  which  the  public  are  treated  on  this  sub- 
ject, on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  are  gathered,  not 
from  an  observation  of  facts,  but  from  a  process  of  argu- 
ment. Marriage  is  a  legal  relation,  and  implies  contract- 
ing power  ;  slaves  are  by  law  incapable  of  contract,  and 
consequently  of  marriage  :  therefore  they  live  in  a  state 
of  concubinage,  and  are  degraded  to  the  level  of 
brutes  ! 

Now,  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  State  does 
not  legalize  the  marriage  of  slaves  ;  and  for  the  same 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  209 


reason  that  it  does  not  legalize  the  contracts  of  minors. 
Slaves  are  related  to  the  State  only  through  their  mas- 
ters, and  it  is  not  the  province  of  the  State,  but  of  the 
master,  to  protect  them,  and  to  regulate  their  conduct. 
It  is  obvious,  however,  that  contracts  do  not  depend  for 
their  existence  on  the  law  of  the  State,  for  they  exist 
before  the  law  can  recognize  them,  and  give  them  valid- 
ity. The  slave  who  has  a  will  and  reason  to  understand 
the  meaning  of  words  has  the  essential  qualifications  for 
a  contract,  and  is  as  capable  of  forming  one  as  his  mas- 
ter ;  and  his  contract,  though  destitute  of  legal  force, 
will  have  the  same  moral  force  as  his  master's.  He  is, 
therefore,  equally  capable  of  marriage  with  his  master  ; 
and  his  marriage,  with  his  master's  consent,  though  it 
have  no  legal  validity,  will  be  equally  binding  on  his 
conscience.  The  difference  is  simply  this  :  the  marriage 
of  the  master  is  both  a  civil  and  religious  contract ;  the 
marriage  of  the  slave,  with  his  master's  consent,  is  a  re- 
ligious, but  not  a  civil,  contract.  Is  his  marriage, 
therefore,  null  and  void,  because  it  has  no  legal  force  ? 
When  was  it  ever  heard  in  the  Christian  Church,  that 
marriage  is  only  a  civil  contract  ?  Is  it  not  also,  by  the 
common  consent  of  Christendom,  a  religious  contract  ? 
Nay,  is  it  not  primarily  and  essentially  a  religious  con- 
tract, prescribed  by  God  himself  ?  Have  Christian  States 
done  more,  or  can  they  do  more,  than  guard  the  contract, 
when  made  and  ratified  agreeably  to  Christ's  institution, 
by  annexing  temporal  advantages  to  its  due  observance, 


210      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 


and  temporal  penalties  to  its  infraction?  What  are  we  to 
think  of  men.  claiming  to  be  ministers  of  the  gospel,  who 
publicly  declare  that  marriage,  when  solemnized  according 
to  Christ's  institution,  is  not  valid,  merely  because  it  is 
not  legal  ?  nay,  is  null  and  void,  merely  because  the  law 
of  the  State  does  not  recognize  and  legitimate  it?  These 
men  discover  Antichrist  in  the  Church  of  Rome  be- 
cause, while  she  upholds  the  sanctity  of  marriage,  she 
yet  "  forbids"  it,  from  prudential  reasons,  to  her  priest- 
hood ;  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  without  a  suspicion  of 
Antichrist  in  their  own  creed  and  practice,  they  pro- 
claim it  a  "desecration"  "  to  repeat  its  forms  over" 
slaves,  and  thus  discountenance,  and  virtually  forbid, 
marriage  among  millions  of  their  fellow-countrymen, 
under  the  impious  pretense  that  it  is  not  Christ  but 
Caesar,  not  the  law  of  God  but  the  law  of  the  land, 
which  can  hallow  their  union,  and  restrain  them  from 
"universal  concubinage"?  "Thou  hypocrite!  First 
pull  out  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye,  and  then 
shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  take  out  the  mote  out  of  thy 
brother's  eye !" 

But  the  answer  to  this  objection  admits  of  illustrations 
which  will  possess  an  interest  for  many  of  the  objectors, 
even  if  they  fail  to  carry  conviction.  Time  was,  when 
the  marriages  of  Quakers  in  Great  Britain  were  void  in 
law ;  were  they  then  not  valid  and  binding  on  the  con- 
science, and  were  this  estimable  people  justly  liable  to 
the  charges  which  are  now  brought  against  slaves,  be- 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  211 

cause  their  marriages  were  not  legalized  ?  Take  another 
case.  The  Independents,  under  Cromwell,  took  a  fancy 
to  dispense  with  the  services  of  the  ministers  of  religion, 
and  contract  marriages  before  justices  of  the  peace.  By 
the  laws  of  Great  Britain,  which  ignored  the  Common- 
wealth, those  marriages  were  deemed  illegal  and  void  in 
law ;  and  accordingly,  after  the  Restoration,  a  statute 
was  passed  to  legalize  them.  Did  the  Independents,  after 
the  Restoration,  imagine  that  their  marriages  were  not 
valid  and  binding  on  the  conscience  until  they  were 
legitimated  by  statute  ?  Did  the  Church,  or  Parliament, 
while  denying  their  legality,  question  their  validity  ?  I 
have  read  a  good  many  high-flying  sermons  commemora- 
tive of  u  King  Charles  the  Martyr,"  and  denunciatory 
of  the  "  Rebellion,"  but  I  do  not  remember  ever  to  have 
seen  this  charge  of  concubinage  brought  against  the  Pu- 
ritans, because  their  marriages  during  the  "  troublous 
times"  wanted,  as  their  opponents  believed,  the  sanctions 
of  the  law  of  the  realm,  and,  as  they  themselves  vaunted, 
the  solemnities  of  religion. 

Whether  the  marriage  contract  would  be  better  under- 
stood and  observed  among  slaves  if  it  could  be  legalized, 
is  one  of  those  speculative  questions  which  it  were  useless 
to  discuss.  We  are  bound  to  take  slaves  as  they  are, 
namely,  as  persons  standing  in  a  mediate  relation  to 
society,  and  known  to  us  only  through  their  masters,  by 
and  through  whom  alone  they  are  connected  with  society. 
In  this  respect  they  stand,  as  regards  marriage,  very 


212      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 

nearly  in  the  condition  which  minors  held,  until  modern 
legislation  made  them  capable  of  marriage  without  the 
consent  of  their  parents ;  with  what  consistency  or  jus- 
tice, while  it  still  holds  them  incapable  of  other  contracts 
which  may  prove  infinitely  less  injurious  to  them  than 
marriage,  I  stop  not  to  inquire.  The  treatment  of  such 
cases  is  no  new  thing  in  the  Christian  Church.  It  was 
decided  in  her  infancy  ;  and  the  decision  is  attested  by 
her  ancient  canons,  and  by  the  exposition  which  her 
Basils  and  Augustines  have  left  of  the  grounds  on  which 
those  canons  were  established.  "If  slaves,"  says  St. 
Basil,  as  quoted  by  Bingham,  "marry  without  the  con- 
sent of  their  masters,  or  children  without  the  consent  of 
their  parents,  it  is  not  matrimony,  but  fornication,  till 
they  ratify  it  by  their  consent;"  for  which  be  assigns 
this  reason,  "  that  contracts  made  without  the  consent  of 
those  under  whose  power  they  are,  have  no  validity,  but 
are  null."  With  the  consent  of  their  masters,  however, 
slaves  are  as  competent  to  contract  marriages,  as  free 
persons;  and  the  marriages  which  they  so  contract  are, 
when  duly  solemnized,  as  valid  before  God  and  His 
Church,  and  as  binding  on  the  conscience  as  they  possi- 
bly can  be ;  nor  is  it  in  the  power  of  the  civil  state,  by 
any  law  which  it  has  enacted,  or  may  hereafter  enact, 
either  to  diminish  or  increase,  by  one  iota,  their  validity, 
or  the  strength  of  their  moral  obligation. 

If  the  ancient  Romans,  who  had  no  higher  conception 
of  marriage  than  as  being  a  civil  contract,  sought  to  ex- 


OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  213 

cite  the  semblance  of  virtue  in  their  heathen  slaves,  by 
calling  their  contubernity  jigura  et  imago  matrimonii, 
we  might  surely  expect  better  things  of  professed  minis- 
ters of  the  Gospel,  than  to  cast  contempt  on  the  marriage 
of  Christian  slaves,  and  to  brand  it  as  concubinage,  for 
want  of  its  civil  sanction.  Far  more  seemly  would  it  be, 
as  well  as  more  consonant  to  God's  ordinance,  to  cheer 
and  encourage  masters  in  the  laudable  efforts  which  many 
of  them  make  to  teach  their  slaves  the  nature  and  obliga- 
tions of  the  conjugal  and  parental  relations ;  to  impress 
on  masters  also,  kindly,  but  firmly,  the  awful  responsi- 
bility and,  possible  guilt,  of  being  instrumental  in  sever- 
ing a  union  to  which  they  have  themselves  consented ; 
and  to  inculcate  on  the  slave,  as  opportunity  offers  (and 
there  can  be  no  lawful  opportunity  without  the  master's 
permission),  the  duties  which  the  Gospel  of  Christ  en- 
joins both  on  the  married  and  the  unmarried. 

There  are  other  objections,  some  of  which  will  come 
under  review  in  a  future  chapter,^  and  others  of  which 
I  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  consider.  Indeed,  I  shall 
leave  reason  to  be  satisfied,  if  the  interest  which  an 
author  naturally  feels  in  his  subject  has  not  already 
tempted  me  to  transcend  the  object  which  I  have  pro- 
posed for  myself;  which  is,  not  to  recommend  slavery, 
or  to  express  a  preference  for  the  state  of  society  which 
it  involves,  but  merely  to  show  that  the  form  of  slavery 


*  See  chap.  xvii. 


214      OBJECTIONS  THEORETICAL  AND  PRACTICAL. 


which  is  protected  by  the  laws  in  our  Southern  States, 
considered  distinctly,  in  its  essence,  and  as  recognized 
by  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  whatever  be  its 
incidental  and  concomitant  evils,  is  not  repugnant  to  the 
Divine  law  ;  and  thus  help  to  restore  (if  it  please  God 
to  bless  the  effort),  in  some  measure,  the  harmony  which 
once  bound  together  the  North  and  the  South ;  or  at 
least  to  dissuade  their  sons  from  accustoming  their 
hearts  to  war,  and  turning  their  mighty  energies  on  the 
bowels  of  their  common  country  ! 

Ne  pueri,  ne  tanta  animis  assuescite  bella, 
Neu  patriae  validas  in  viscera  vertite  vires ! 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


THE    PERPETUITY    OF  SLAVERY. 


There  is,  however,  one  objection  which  is  thought  to 
bear,  with  peculiar  force,  against  the  form  of  slavery  that 
exists  in  our  country,  and  which,  from  its  collateral  bear- 
ings, as  well  as  its  intrinsic  importance,  may  properly 
form  the  theme  of  a  separate  chapter ;  and  that  is,  that 
slavery  in  our  Southern  States  is  perpetuated  from  one 
generation  to  another.  Slaves  among  the  Hebrews,  we 
are  told,  were  capable  of  release  on  the  Sabbatical  year, 
and  the  year  of  Jubilee ;  and  slaves  among  the  Moham- 
medans have  a  similar  privilege.  Among  the  Greeks 
and  Komans,  slaves  could  be  liberated  from  their  servile 
condition,  and  when  liberated  could  rise  to  such  positions 
in  society  as  their  virtues  merited,  and  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  freedom  and  happiness  for  their  descendants. 
But  American  slaves  are  cut  off  from  all  advantages  of 
this  sort ;  they  are  subjected  to  the  evils  of  caste,  from 
which  they  have  no  hope  of  escape  for  themselves,  their 
children,  or  their  latest  posterity ;  they  are  doomed  to 
slavery  forever. 


216  THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


This.  I  confess,  has  always  been,  to  mj  mind,  one  of 
the  most  painful  features  of  slavery  in  our  Southern 
States.  In  his  struggle  with  poverty,  and  the  troubles 
and  sorrows  that  attend  it.  a  man  is  naturally  animated 
by  the  hope  of  some  favorable  turn  in  the  wheel  of  for- 
tune, which  may  lift  him  or  his  children,  as  it  were, 
from  the  dust,  and  raise  them  to  comfort  and  affluence. 
This  hope  is  the  light  and  solace  of  his  soul,  and  the 
spring  of  its  energies,  and  nothing  can  more  effectually 
extinguish  it  than  the  certainty  that  both  himself  and 
his  posterity  are  consigned  to  one  hard  lot  forever. 

But  let  us  look  at  the  matter  calmly,  and  we  shall 
see,  I  think,  that  this  sad  feature  is  neither  peculiar  to 
Southern  slavery,  nor  consequent  upon  slavery  at  all. 

It  is  not  peculiar  to  our  Southern  States,  but  was 
found  as  well  among  God's  own  people,  the  ancient 
Israelites. 

To  reconcile  this  statement  with  the  acknowledged 
fact  of  a  periodical  release  from  servitude,  it  should  be 
noted  that  there  were  two  kinds  of  slaves  among  the 
ancient  Hebrews,  the  native,  and  the  foreign,  or  Gentile 
slaves. 

In  the  first  place,  the  Israelites  had  slaves  taken  from 
among  their  own  people.  For,  under  the  law  of  Moses, 
a  man  reduced  to  extreme  poverty  might  sell  himself, 
Lev.  xxv.  39.  A  father  might  sell  his  children  for 
slaves,  Ex.  xxi.  7.  By  an  order  of  their  courts,  thieves, 
who  were  unable  to  restore  what  they  had  stolen,  or  the 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


217 


value  of  it,  to  the  proper  owner,  might  be  sold  in  order 
to  compensate  the  owner  for  his  loss,  Ex.  xxii.  2,  3. 
And  a  creditor,  also,  might  sell  an  insolvent  debtor  for 
the  payment  of  his  debt.  There  were  other  ways  in 
which  native  Israelites  could  be  reduced  to  servitude, 
but  their  bondage,  however  induced,  was  not  perpetual  : 
for,  by  a  humane  provision  of  the  Mosaic  law,  these 
slaves  had  the  option  of  liberty  on  every  seventh  or  sab- 
batical year,  and  on  every  fiftieth  year,  or  the  year  of 
jubilee,  the  liberation  was  peremptory  and  absolute,  in- 
cluding those  wrho  had  refused  the  liberty  tendered  to 
them  on  the  Sabbatical  year,  and  had  voluntarily  bound 
themselves  to  become  slaves  "  forever.'7 

The  other  kind  of  slaves,  among  the  Hebrews,  were 
those  which  they  made  from  the  surrounding  nations. 
For  they  were  permitted  to  buy  the  natives  and  subjects 
of  these  nations,  and  also  such  persons  as  had  emigrated 
from  these  nations,  and  had  settled  in  Judea.  But  the 
condition  of  these  foreign,  or  Gentile  slaves,  was  very 
different  from  that  of  the  native,  or  Hebrew  slaves.  The 
latter  were  not  to  be  ruled  with  rigor,  and  they  were  to 
beset  free  on  the  year  of  Jubilee;  "For,"  saith  God, 
"they  be  my  servants,  which  I  brought  forth  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt/'  But  slaves  of  the  former  kind  had  not 
this  prerogative ;  for  they  might  be  treated  with  rigor. 
"Over  them,"  says  Calmet,  "masters  had  an  entire 
authority ;  they  might  sell  them,  exchange  them,  punish 
them,  judge  them,  and  even  put  them  to  death,  without 
10 


218 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


public  process."  Some  of  them  were  perfect  proselytes 
to  the  Hebrew  faith  ;  others  partially  so,  being  called 
proselytes  of  the  gate ;  both  these  might  purchase  their 
freedom,  or  be  manumitted  by  their  master,  but  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  had  any  claim  to  that  periodical 
release  which  was  the  boon  of  the  Hebrew  slave.  "  The 
year  of  Jubilee,57  says  Bishop  Patrick  (Lev.  xxv.  45), 
"gave  no  servants  of  either  sort  their  liberty." 

Perpetuity  of  bondage,  therefore,  is  not  peculiar  to 
the  slavery  in  our  Southern  States,  but  finds  its  parallel 
in  one  form  of  that  slavery  which  God  permitted  to  exist 
among  His  ancient  people. 

But  there  is  a  further  aggravation  of  our  American 
slavery,  to  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  parallel. 
The  Gentile  slave  owned  by  the  Hebrew,  if  he  bought 
his  liberty,  or  was  manumitted,  and  conformed  entirely 
to  the  Mosaic  religion,  found  himself,  as  respected  his 
civil  and  religious  rights  and  privileges,  on  a  level  with 
the  Hebrews.  The  Greek  or  Roman  slave,  when  en- 
franchised, was  eligible  to  the  honors  of  the  State,  and 
on  a  footing  of  social  and  political  equality  with  its  citi- 
zens ;  and  the  once  despised  slave,  with  no  name  of  his 
own.  might  win  for  his  master's  name,  which  but  for  him 
would  have  been  consigned  to  oblivion,  present  and  fu- 
ture renown;  as  happenel,  we  know,  in  the  case  of 
Terence.  Not  so  with  the  American  slave,  who,  though 
restored  to  liberty,  is  still  his  master's  inferior,  socially 
and  politically.    But  is  this  the  fault  of  slavery?  Man- 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


219 


ifestly  not.  It  is  owing,  in  the  first  place,  to  the  fact 
that  the  descendants  of  Africans  in  any  of  the  United 
States,  'even  when  they  become  free,  are  not,  and  can  not 
be,  a  portion  of  "the  people"  of  the  United  States,  in 
such  sense  as  to  be  eligible  to  political  honors,  or  even  to 
the  rights  of  citizenship.  On  this  point,  Chief  Justice 
Taney  is,  I  suppose,  authority ;  and  if  he  were  not,  the 
reasons  which  he  gives  for  his  opinion,  and  prescriptive 
usage  under  the  Constitution,  put  the  matter  out  of 
doubt.  For,  having  stated  the  question,  Can  a  negro, 
whose  ancestors  were  imported  into  this  country,  and 
sold  as  slaves,  become  a  member  of  the  political  commu- 
nity, formed  and  brought  into  existence  by  the  Constitu- 
tion of  the  United  States,  and  as  such,  be  entitled  to  all 
the  rights,  and  privileges,  and  immunities  guarantied  by 
that  instrument  to  the  citizen?"  the  Chief  Justice  re- 
marks :  "The  words  'people  of  the  United  States,'  and 
'citizens,'  are  synonymous  terms,  and  mean  the  same 
thing.  They  both  describe  the  political  body,  who,  ac- 
cording to  our  republican  institutions,  form  the  sov- 
ereignty, and  who  hold  the  power,  and  conduct  the  gov- 
ernment, through  their  representatives.  They  are  what 
are  familiarly  called  '  the  sovereign  people,'  and  every 
citizen  is  one  of  this  people,  and  a  constituent  member 
of  this  sovereignty.  The  question  before  us  is,  whether 
the  class  of  persons  described  in  the  piea  of  abatement 
[the  same  as  in  the  question  above  quoted]  compose  a 
portion  of  this  people,  and  are  constituent  members  of 


220 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


this  sovereignty  ?  We  think  they  are  not,  and  that  they 
are  not  included,  and  were  not  intended  to  be  included, 
under  the  word  'citizen/  in  the  Constitution,  and  can 
therefore  claim  none  of  the  rights  and  privileges  which 
that  instrument  provides  for,  and  secures  to,  citizens  of 
the  United  States.  On  the  contrary,  they  w^ere  at  that 
time  considered  as  a  subordinate  and  inferior  class  of 
beings,  who  had  been  subjugated  by  the  dominant  race, 
and,  whether  emancipated  or  not,  yet  remained  subject 
to  their  authority,  and  had  no  rights  or  privileges,  but 
such  as  those  who  held  the  power  and  the  government 
might  choose  to  grant  them." 

It  is,  therefore,  no  fault  of  Southern  slavery,  that  its 
subjects,  when  emancipated,  can  not  rise  to  political  dis- 
tinction, nor  to  social  distinction,  so  far  as  it  depends  on 
political.  The  immediate  bar  to  their  social  and  political 
elevation,  and  which  necessarily,  though  indirectly,  oper- 
ates to  repress  their  hope  of  emancipation,  and  to  keep 
them  in  slavery,  is  the  fact,  that  the  people  who  are  held 
in  slavery  are  not  a  portion  of  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  or  of  the  people  for  whom  the  government  of  the 
United  States  was  intended.  For  this  fact,  slavehold- 
ers are  not  responsible. 

But  there  is,  moreover  (as  the  Chief  Justice  inti- 
mates), another  cause  lying  back  of  this;  and  that  is 
the  fact  that,  though  of  the  same  human  kind  with  his 
master  and  his  equal  in  all  the  essentials  of  that  kind, 
in  speech,  reason,  and  will,  the  slave  is  yet  of  a  different 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


221 


race  from  his  master  by  characteristics  which  forbid  the 
two  to  coalesce.  You  say,  perhaps,  that  the  refusal  to 
amalgamate  is  unreasonable,  and  the  consequence  of 
cruel  and  shameful  prejudices  on  the  part  of  the  whites. 
It  may  be  so ;  on  this  point  I  would  leave  every  man  to 
his  own  opinion.  Only  I  would  have  it  observed  that  it 
is  color  and  other  physical  differences  between  the  two 
races  that  create  the  chasm  that  separates  them  :  and 
that  the  sad  feature  of  caste,  which  we  all  agree  in  de- 
ploring, is  neither  peculiar  to  Southern  slavery,  nor  in 
fact  chargeable  upon  slavery  at  all. 

And,  in  view  of  the  relation  which  the  colored  people 
of  this  country  hold  to  the  white,  it  does  appear  to  me 
that  a  strong  argument,  on  grounds  of  humanity  and  ex- 
pediency, may  be  made  in  favor  of  a  limited  and  regu- 
lated slavery,  supposing  such  slavery  to  be,  as  I  have 
endeavored  to  prove,  permissible  on  the  principles  of  uni- 
versal justice  and  to  involve  no  infraction  of  human 
rights.  For,  what  are  we  to  do  with  these  people  ?  I 
mean  what  are  we  to  do  for  them  with  a  view  not  to  our 
own  benefit  but  to  theirs  ?  In  the  Northern  and  Middle 
States  we  have  abolished  slavery,  and  I  have  no  wish  to 
deny  that  the  measure  was  prompted  in  part  by  humane 
motives  and  the  wish  to  benefit  the  colored  population. 
But  has  it  benefitted  them  ?  Are  the  colored  people  now 
more  numerous,  more  loved,  and  respected  than  the/ 
would  have  been  had  no  such  measures  been  adopted  ? 
We  risk  nothing  in  affirming  the  contrary.    We  know 


222  THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


that  since  they  have  been  emancipated  they  have  dwindled 
away;  that  they  are  debarred  from  social  and  political 
equality  with  their  white  brethren ;  that  they  are  isolated 
and  ostracized ;  and  that  in  relieving  them  from  legal 
slavery,  we  have  reduced  them  to  a  social  slavery,  more 
cruel  and  capricious  than  that  which  was  regulated  by 
law.    We  have  raised  ourselves  only  to  depress  them.  I 
should  say  that  some  of  the  Western  States  in  excluding 
the  colored  population  from  their  limits,  had  pursued, 
towards  them,  a  course  more  intensely  selfish,  were  it  not 
that  they  have  merely  dealt  out  to  them  summarily  and 
under  the  form  of  law  the  same  treatment  which  we  in  the 
Northern  and  Eastern  States  have  dealt  out  to  them  slowly 
and  by  force  of  opinion.    I  can  not  see  that  the  Western 
States  are  much  more  to  blame  for  their  laws  than  are 
the  Northern  and  Eastern  States  for  their  opinions.  But 
the  question  recurs,  and  it  is  one  in  the  answer  to  which 
we  have  all,  North  and  South,  East  and  West,  a  common 
interest.    What  are  we  to  do  with  these  people  ?  Will 
you  reenslave  them  in  the  Free  States  ?    This,  even  if 
you  desired  it,  you  can  not  do  justly  (as  justice  is  distin- 
guished from  expediency),  against  their  will ;  and  with  the 
opinions  which  they  have  imbibed  from  us,  they  account 
servitude  a  degradation  to  which  they  will  never  consent. 
Will  you  transport  them  to  Africa  ?    This  again  you 
have  no  right  to  do  against  their  will ;  and  if  you  con- 
sult them,  they  will  tell  you,  almost  to  a  man,  that  they 
love  the  country  in  which  they  were  born,  and  prefer  to 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


223 


stay  at  home.  Will  you  remove  the  prejudices,  if  you 
please  to  call  them  so,  of  the  whites,  and  induce  them  to 
raise  their  colored  brethren  to  their  own  social  and  poli- 
tical level  ?  Try  first  the  force  of  your  breath  to  blow- 
back  the  torrent  of  Niagara !  Every  man  who  is  not  a 
very  Quixote  knows  that  such  efforts,  however  laudable 
the  motives  that  prompt  them,  are  supremely  visionary. 
If,  then,  the  East  can  do  no  better  for  these  colored 
people  than  doom  them  to  social  degradation,  and  if  the 
West  can  give  them  no  more  than  an  inhospitable  repul- 
sion, why  should  either  seek  to  disturb — why  should  not 
both  unite  to  commend — -the  limited  and. regulated  slavery 
under  which  they  live  and  are  happy  at  the  South  ? 

This  state  of  fixed  and  clearly  defined  subordination, 
which  precludes  all  jealousy  and  rivalry  between  the  two 
races  and  enables  them  to  work  together  for  their  mutual 
good,  seems  to  be  that  which  the  providence  of  God  de- 
signs. It  is,  if  I  may  dare  to  say  it,  God's  own  deter- 
mination of  the  great  problem  which  the  statesmen  and 
philanthropists  of  our  country  have  vainly  endeavored  to 
solve  by  their  empirical  schemes.  I  make  no  doubt  that 
the  Africans  are  the  descendants  of  Ham  and  the  Euro- 
peans of  Japhet ;  and  that  both  are,  as  descendants  of 
Noah,  partakers  of  the  same  humanity  and  concluded  in 
the  same  redemption  ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  I  think 
it  undeniable  that,  wherever  the  two  races  are  brought 
in  contact,  the  peculiar  physical  and  mental  peculiarities 
of  the  one,  whether  brought  about  by  the  slow  operation 


224 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


of  natural  causes,  or  by  some  supernatural  interposition 
(like  the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel),  the  record  of 
which  has  not  been  preserved,  fit  and  dispose  it  to  receive 
the  care  and  protection  of  the  other.  It  is  not  for  man, 
indeed,  to  interpret  the  purposes  of  Divine  Providence 
and  to  shape  his  conduct  with  a  view  to  their  fulfillment. 
It  is  a  good  distinction  which  the  theologians  make  be- 
tween the  Revealed  Will  of  God  and  the  will  of  His 
good  pleasure  ;*  the  former  designed  to  train  us  to  obe- 
dience, the  latter  to  form  us  to  habits  of  submission  and 
adoration.  I  can  not,  therefore,  agree  with  those  who 
rest  the  right  to  hold  Africans  in  bondage  on  the  ground 
of  the  prophecy  that  Canaan  should  be  the  servant  of 
Shem  and  Japhet,  any  more  than  those  who  rest  the 
right  of  dominion  on  the  superiority  of  the  white  race. 
The  dictates  of  natural  justice,  the  precepts  of  Rev- 
elation, are  the  rule  of  human  conduct ;  if  we  follow 
this  rule,  we  work  with  our  Maker,  if  we  deviate  from 
it,  we  work  against  Him  ;  and  it  is  His  prerogative  to 
direct  all  human  actions,  whether  just  or  unjust,  whether 
peaceful  or  violent  to  the  accomplishment  of  His  own 
designs.  But  when  He  has  been  graciously  pleased  to 
unfold,  in  some  measure,  His  design,  in  order  that  we 

*  Recte  distinguunt  Thcologi  voluntatem  Dei,  in  voluntatem  signi, 
efc  voluntatem  beneplaciti ;  ac  voluntatem  signi  appellant  prsecopta 
et  prohibition  es,  quibus  Deus  signifieat  quid  a  nobis  agi,  vel  non  agi 
velit.  Volimtatem  beneplaciti  nominant  earn,  qud  Deus  vult  abso- 
lute aliquid  fieri,  quae  semper  impletur,  et  quam  nulla  vis  externa 
impedire  potest. — Bellar.  Contro.  Chris.,  vol.  iii.,  p.  98^ 


THE  PERPETUITY  OF  SLAVERY. 


225 


may  see  its  fulfillment,  and  be  the  more  convinced  that 
the  world  and  all  its  affairs  are  under  His  government ; 
when  we  see  that  in  fact  He  has  overruled  the  violence 
of  the  wicked,  and  is  using  the  willing  cooperation  of 
the  righteous,  for  the  fulfillment  of  His  own  prediction 
that  Ham  should  be  the  servant  of  Japhet ;  we  may  as- 
sume, I  think,  when  justly  devolved  on  us,  the  charge 
and  custody  of  the  African,  and  exact  from  him  that 
reasonable  service  with  which  he  is  justly  bound  to  re- 
quite our  care,  in  the  humble,  reverent,  and  grateful 
conviction — forced  upon  us  by  irresistible  facts — that  in 
so  doing  we  are  working  together  with  God  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  His  wise  purposes. 

10* 


CHAPTER  XV. 


RENDITION   OF    FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 

The  Constitution  of  the  United  States  provides,  that 
persons  held  to  service  in  one  State,  and  escaping  into 
another,  shall  not  be  liberated  in  virtue  of  any  laws  or 
regulations  in  the  State  to  which  they  have  fled,  but 
shall  be  restored  to  the  person  from  whose  service  they 
have  escaped  ;  and  the  Congress  of  the  United  States 
have  enacted  two  laws  declarative  of  this  requirement  of 
the  Constitution,  and  designed  to  give  it  effect.  These 
laws  are  commonly  known  as  the  Fugitive  Slave  Laws. 

Now,  the  constitutional  provision,  as  compared  with 
the  u higher  law,"  or  the  law  of  Nature,  must  be  either 
just  or  unjust.  If  just,  the  laws  founded  on  it  may  be 
nevertheless  unjust,  through  a  failure  to  carry  out  its 
intent ;  but  if  unjust,  the  laws  which  declare*  and  give 
effect  to  it  must  of  necessity  be  unjust  laws.  Before 
we  consider,  therefore,  the  moral  quality  of  these  laws, 
it  is  obviously  proper  to  examine  the  constitutional  pro- 
vision on  which  they  are  founded,  and  compare  it  with 
the  law  of  Nature,  in  order  to  ascertain  its  justice  or 
injustice,  according  to  the  standard  of  this  law. 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


227 


The  dictates  of  natural  law,  by  which  I  propose  to 
test  the  constitutional  provision,  are  those  principles  of 
universal  justice  which  are  assumed  as  the  basis  of  the 
Justinian  Code,  and  indeed  of  all  legal  and  distributive 
justice.  They  are  these  three  :  honeste  vivere^  alterum 
non  Icedere,  suum  cuique  tribuere;  to  live  honestly, 
not  to  hurt  any  man,  and  to  give  every  one  that  which  is 
his  due.  If  the  constitutional  provision  is  agreeable  to 
these  principles  of  eternal  and  immutable  law,  it  is  just ; 
if  contrary  to  them,  it  is  unjust. 

The  words  of  the  Constitution  are  :  "  No  person  held 
to  service  or  labor  in  one  State,  under  the  laws  thereof, 
escaping  into  another,  shall,  in  consequence  of  any  law 
or  regulation  therein,  be  discharged  from  such  service  or 
labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on  claim  of  the  party  to 
whom  such  service  or  labor  may  be  due." 

Now,  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  a  person  may  be  held 
to  service  or  labor  unjustly.  He  may  have  done  nothing, 
either  expressly  or  by  implication,  to  forfeit  his  natural 
liberty,  have  been  seized  by  violence,  and  be  held  to  ser- 
vice without  color  of  law,  and  by  the  mere  arbitrary  and 
tyrannical  will  of  the  individuals  who  seized  him.  The 
man  who  kidnaps  another,  and  holds  him  to  labor  by 
force  and  against  his  natural  right,  violates  all  three  of 
the  principles  of  universal  justice ;  and  had  the  Consti- 
tution sustained  a  claim  which  had  no  other  foundation 
than  lawless  might,  it  had  been  flagrantly  unjust.  But 
the  Constitution  gives  no  countenance  to  acts  of  private 


228 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


and  lawless  violence.  Its  words  are  not,  "  No  person 
held  to  service  or  labor,"  but,  "  No  person  held  to  ser- 
vice or  labor  in  one  State  under  the  laws  thereof.'7 

The  case  provided  for,  therefore,  is  that  of  a  person 
held  to  service  or  labor  under  the  laws  of  one  State, 
and  escaping  into  another  ;  and  the  provision  is  that  the 
fugitive  shall  not,  in  consequence  of  any  law  or  regula- 
tion in  the  latter  State,  be  discharged  from  such  service 
or  labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on  the  claim  of  the 
party  to  which  such  service  is  due.  Is  this  provision 
unjust  in  such  sense  as  to  contradict  the  principles  of 
universal  justice  above  defined  ?  Undoubtedly  it  is.  if 
the  laws  of  the  State,  under  which  the  fugitive  is  held 
to  service,  are  themselves  unjust.  Does  the  Constitution, 
then,  in  providing  for  the  satisfaction  of  claims  to  service 
in  any  one  of  the  United  States,  assume  that  the  laws 
under  which  the  service  is  held  are  just  and  agreeable  to 
the  law  of  Nature,  or  unjust  and  contrary  to  this  law? 
Or  does  it  observe  a  profound  silence  and  a  strict  neu- 
trality on  the  question  ? 

It  is,  indeed,  an  acknowledged  and  well  understood 
principle,  that  each  one  of  the  United  States  is  responsi- 
ble for  its  own  laws,  and  that  the  Constitution  does  not 
transfer  this  responsibility  to  the  Federal  Government, 
but  leaves  it  as  it  found  it,  in  the  several  States  to  which 
it  properly  belongs.  And  hence,  it  is  argued  in  general, 
that  the  United  States  are  in  no  degree  responsible  for 
the  laws  of  the  several  States ;  and  in  particular  that 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES.  229 

the  laws  under  which  persons  are  held  to  service  in  any- 
one State,  belong  to  that  State  exclusively,  and  in  such 
sense,  as  that  neither  the  Federal  Government  nor  any 
other  State  is  at  all  responsible  for  them. 

But  this  principle,  sound  and  highly  important  as  it 
is  in  its  legitimate  application,  can  not,  I  think,  be  ad- 
mitted without  one  limitation ;  a  limitation  wThich  is  as- 
sumed in  the  fundamental  laws  of  every  nation  under 
heaven,  and  which  the  Preamble  of  the  Constitution  of 
the  United  States  expresses  in  words  :  u  We,  the  People 
of  the  United  States,  in  order  to  form  a  more  perfect 
union,  establish  justice,  insure  domestic  tranquillity,  pro- 
vide for  the  common  defense,  promote  the  general  wel- 
fare, and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty  to  ourselves  and 
our  posterity,  do  ordain  and  establish  this  Constitution 
for  the  United  States  of  America."  One  end  of  the 
Constitution,  therefore,  'is  to  establish  justice  ;  not 
justice  according  to  the  laws  of  ancient  Rome,  or  modern 
England  ;  not  justice  according  to  any  human  code,  but 
universal  justice ;  or  justice  according  to  that  eternal 
and  immutable  law  of  Nature,  which  requires  us  to 
live  honestly,  to  hurt  no  man,  and  to  render  to  every  one 
his  due.  This  universal  justice,  the  breath  and  inspira- 
tion of  the  Almighty,  wThen  it  lives  in  the  habits  and 
acts  of  a  people,  is  the  life  and  soul  of  which  domestic 
tranquillity,  the  general  welfare,  and  the  blessings  of 
liberty  are  but  various  forms  and  manifestations.  And 
the  very  end  and  design  of  the  Constitution  is,  not 


230  RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


merely  ''to  form  a  more  perfect  union, '?  but  to  form  a 
union  and  to  establish  justice ;  or  to  form  a  union  which 
would  be  cemented  by  the  bonds  of  universal  justice ; 
and  the  end  proposed  of  necessity  limits  the  means  for  its 
attainment,  and  must  be  kept  in  view  in  order  to  a  just 
appreciation  of  those  means. 

When,  therefore,  the  Constitution  recognizes  the  laws 
of  any  one  State,  and  provides  that  claims  to  service  or 
labor  under  those  lawrs  shall  not  be  reversed  in  any 
other  State,  it  manifestly  supposes  that  the  laws  so  rec- 
ognized and  provided  for  are  not  repugnant  to  the  dic- 
tates of  universal  justice.  For  the  supposition  is  not  to 
be  endured  that  men  designing  to  establish  justice,  insure 
domestic  tranquillity,  promote  public  good,  and  secure 
the  blessings  of  liberty,  should  seek  to  accomplish  this 
end  by  providing  for  the  operation  and  guarding  against 
the  obstruction  of  laws  or  of  rights  and  claims  accruing 
under  them,  which  are  repugnant  to  natural  justice,  and 
consequently  to  the  other  above  enumerated  blessings 
wThich  are  inseparable  from  it. 

It  seems,  therefore,  necessary  to  believe  that  the  case 
provided  for  in  the  Constitution  is  not  that  of  persons  held 
to  service  by  arbitrary  will,  in  opposition  to  law,  nor  of 
persons  held  to  service  under  laws  which  are  themselves 
contrary  to  universal  justice;  but  it  is  the  case  of  per- 
sons held  to  service  under  laws  which  are  not  contrary 
to  universal  justice.  In  effect,  the  case  provided  for  is 
that  of  persons  held  to  service  justly  ;  that  is  to  say, 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


231 


in  virtue  of  some  relation  which  the  law  of  Nature  has 
established,  or  of  some  contract,  express  or  implied,  which 
the  law  of  Nature  binds  them  to  fulfill. 

Let  us  look,  now,  at  the  provision  itself,  which  con- 
sists of  two  parts — the  one  negative,  the  other  affirm- 
ative. 

The  negative  part  of  the  provision  is,  that  the  person 
held  to  service  or  labor  in  one  State,  under  the  laws 
thereof,  and  escaping  into  another,  "  shall  not,  in  con- 
sequence of  any  law  or  regulation  therein,  be  discharged 
from  such  service  or  labor.'5 

In  this  clause,  it  is  supposed  that  laws  and  regulations 
may  exist  in  the  State  into  which  the  fugitive  has  fled, 
which  are  in  conflict  with  the  laws  of  the  State  from 
which  he  has  escaped;  and  it  may  be  objected  that  if  the 
lawrs  under  which  a  person  is  held  to  service  in  one 
State  are  just,  then  the  laws  which  would  work  his  dis- 
charge from  service  in  another  State  must  be  unjust ; 
and  that  consequently  the  Constitution,  by  recognizing 
the  laws  of  both  States,  does  not  in  truth  concern  itself 
with  the  justice  of  either,  but  merely  aims  to  harmonize 
the  operations  of  both,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  a  union  of 
the  States,  without  regard  to  the  justice  or  injustice  of 
their  respective  laws. 

The  objection  is  specious ;  and  I  am  the  more  desirous 
to  fix  attention  on  it,  because  the  answer  to  it  will  put 
in  a  clearer  light  the  point  which  I  am  endeavoring  to 
establish. 


232  RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


I  remark,  then,  that  the  objection  rests  on  a  confusion 
between  universal  justice,  and  legal  justice  ;  and  van- 
ishes the  moment  that  this  distinction  is  apprehended. 

Actions  which  are  enjoined  on  us  by  the  law  of  Na- 
ture, or  by  those  principles  of  this  law  which  I  have 
assumed  as  sufficient  for  the  present  inquiry,  are  intrin- 
sically and  universally  just;  and  the  rectitude  which 
consists  in  an  exact  conformity  to  this  law  or  to  these 
principles,  is  called  universal  justice.  On  the  other 
hand,  actions  which  are  defective  in  this  kind  of  justice, 
or  Contrary  to  that  law  which  requires  it,  are  in  such 
sense  unjust  as  to  be  base  and  dishonest,  immoral  and 
impious. 

Now,  it  is  evident  that  between  the  rectitude  which 
the  law  of  Nature  enjoins,  and  the  wickedness  which  it 
forbids,  are  a  great  number  of  things  which  are  neither 
commanded  nor  forbidden  ;  and  which  for  this  reason  are 
said  to  be  adia^opa,  or  indifferent.  m  And  these  indiffer- 
ent things  are  the  proper  matter  of  human  laws,  because 
they  are  things  in  which  the  Divine  law  leaves  us  at 
liberty ;  which,  if  commanded  or  forbidden  at  all,  are 
commanded  or  forbidden  only  by  human  laws ;  and 
which,  when  commanded  or  forbidden,  we  are  directly 
obliged  to  do,  or  refrain  from  doing,  in  virtue  of  human 
laws.  Every  State  or  Commonwealth  commands  some 
things  of  this  indifferent  nature  to  be  done,  and  forbids 
others,  with  a  view  only  to  present  expediency,  and  on  its 
own  mere  authority.    And  the  justice  that  is  agreeable  to 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


233 


these  human  laws,  which  command  or  forbid  things  that 
are  neither  good  nor  evil,  but  are  simply  indifferent,  and 
are  commanded  or  forbidden  by  the  State  alone,  and  that 
not  for  their  intrinsic  rectitude  or  turpitude,  but  merely 
with  a  view  to  present  expediency  :  I  say,  the  justice  which 
consists  in  conformity  to  these  human  laws,  is  that  which 
is  denominated  legal  justice. 

These  things  premised,  the  answer  to  the  objection  is 
obvious.  For  the  laws  of  the  several  States  may  be,  and 
sometimes  are,  in  conflict  with  one  another  in  respect  to 
matters  of  legal  justice.  Of  these  conflicts  the  Consti- 
tution is  tolerant,  and  leaves  them  to  be  adjusted  by  the 
tribunals  which  it  has  created  for  the  purpose.  A.  posi- 
tion manifestly  consistent  with  the  point  I  am  endeavor- 
ing to  establish  ;  which  is,  that  the  Constitution  neither 
recognizes  nor  tolerates,  but  utterly  abhors,  all  laws  that 
are  repugnant  to  universal  justice ;  or,  in  other  words, 
which  decree  things  that  are  base  and  dishonest,  or  in 
any  way  contrary  to  the  eternal  and  immutable  law  of 
Nature. 

To  apply  the  general  proposition  to  the  case  under 
consideration.  A  person  is  held  to  service,  for  example, 
under  the  laws  of  South  Carolina.  Now  what  I  affirm 
is,  that  the  laws  of  South  Carolina,  under  which  this 
person  is  held  to  service,  are  not,  in  the  eye  of  the  Con- 
stitution, repugnant  to  the  law  of  Nature  or  the  prin- 
ciples of  universal  justice,  because  the  Constitution  itself 
is  founded  upon  this  law  or  upon  these  principles.  The 


234 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


person  so  held  to  service  in  South  Carolina,  escaping 
into  Massachusetts,  might,  we  will  suppose,  unless  the 
Constitution  had  interfered  to  prevent  it,  by  the  laws  and 
regulations  of  this  latter  State,  be  discharged  from  such 
service.  Why  ?  Because  the  laws  and  regulations  of 
Massachusetts  contradict  the  laws  of  South  Carolina  in 
a  matter  of  universal  justice  ?  No  ;  but  because  they 
are  at  variance  with  them  in  a  matter  of  legal  justice  ; 
in  other  words,  because  Massachusetts,  acting  within  the 
limits  allowed  by  the  law  of  Nature,  has  enacted  sundry 
laws  and  regulations  for  the  good  of  her  Commonwealth, 
which  laws  and  regulations  South  Carolina,  keeping 
equally  within  the  same  limits,  and  availing  herself  of 
the  same  liberty  which  the  law  of  Nature  allows,  has 
not  seen  fit  to  adopt,  as  not  deeming  them  conducive  to 
the  welfare  of  her  State.  The  Constitution  tolerates 
both  laws,  because  both  are  consistent  with  universal 
justice,  and  differ  only  in  respect  to  matters  of  legal 
justice ;  or  such  matters  as  are  undetermined  by  the  law 
of  Nature,  and  may  be  ruled,  one  way  or  the  other,  by 
every  State,  with  a  view  to  its  own  notions  of  the  public 
good. 

Let  us  turn  now  to  the  affirmative  part  of  the  propo- 
sition, which  is,  that  said  fugitives  from  service  "  shall 
be  delivered  up  on  claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  ser- 
vice or  labor  may  be  DUE."  Due  by  what  law  ?  By 
the  laws  of  the  State,  from  which  the  person  held  to 
service  has  escaped  ?    Certainly ;  this  is  the  natural 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


235 


implication  of  the  word,  taken  in  connection  with  the  rest 
of  the  sentence.  Due  by  these  laws  only  ?  Yes.  if  by 
the  word  only  you  mean  to  exclude  the  laws  of  the  State 
or  States  into  which  the  person  held  to  service  may  have 
fled :  but,  No,  if  by  the  word  only  you  mean  to  exclude 
the  law  of  Nature  or  the  principles  of  universal  justice. 
Such  a  construction  is  abhorrent  to  reason,  abhorrent  to  the 
spirit  of  the  Constitution  and  to  the  circumstances  under 
which  it  was  created.  For,  suppose  words  to  this  effect 
had  been  inserted,  and  that  instead  of  c  4  To  whom  such  ser- 
vice or  labor  may  be  due,'"  the  clause  were  to  read  thus  : 
u  To  whom  such  service  or  labor,  though  not  morally 
due,  may  be  legally  due,  under  the  laws,  namely,  of  the 
State  to  which  the  claimant  belongs."  Who  can  fail  to 
see  that  such  an  avowal  would  have  been  an  insult  to  the 
State  in  behalf  of  whose  laws  the  provision  was  made, 
by  imputing  to  them  injustice,  and  also  a  virtual  confes- 
sion, on  the  part  of  the  framers  of  the  Constitution,  that 
they  themselves  were  willing  to  connive  at  injustice,  to 
be  accessories  to  it  and  copartners  in  it,  in  derogation  of 
their  own  character,  and  in  direct  contradiction  to  their 
own  solemn  declaration,  that  they  ordained  the  Constitu- 
tion in  order  to  u  establish  justice."  And  if  the 
clause  can  not  bear  the  expression  of  such  an  intent, 
but  repels  it  as  an  abomination,  it  is  no  less  intolerant 
of  the  implication.  Whence  I  argue  that  the  service  or 
labor,  which  is  said  in  the  affirmative  clause  of  the  pro- 
vision to  be  "due"  to  the  claimant,  is  assumed  by  the 


236  RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


Constitution  to  be  clue  to  him,  not  only  under  the  laws 
of  his  own  State,  but  also  under  the  law  of  Nature ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  virtue  of  those  principles  of  universal 
justice  which  bind  men  to  live  honestly,  to  do  no  wrong 
to  others,  to  be  faithful  to  their  compacts,  and  to  fulfill 
all  their  moral  obligations. 

I  shall  be  told,  probably,  that  there  are  other  ways  to 
get  at  the  meaning  of  the  Constitution,  besides  an  exam- 
ination of  its  language ;  that  the  opinions  of  the  framers 
were  adverse  to  slavery  on  moral  grounds ;  that  the  Su- 
preme Court  has  ruled  slavery  to  be  the  creature  of 
local  law ;  and  that  these  facts  show  that  the  provision 
of  the  Constitution  for  restoring  to  the  claimant,  outside 
of  his  own  State,  the  service  which  is  due  to  him  under 
its  laws,  was  made  merely  for  the  union  of  the  States,  and 
without  regard  to  the  essential  justice  or  injustice  of  his 
claim. 

Now,  if  this  were  indeed  the  case ;  if  the  framers  of 
the  Constitution  made  the  provision  under  consideration 
merely  with  a  view  to  the  prosperity  of  the  United 
States,  and  without  regard  to  the  principles  of  universal 
justice,  how  came  they  to  be  so  fastidious  in  their  lan- 
guage ?  Why  so  careful  to  eschew  the  words  slave  and 
slavery ?  If  they  had  regard  only  to  the  public  conveni- 
ence, and  not  also  to  justice  and  moral  rectitude,  they  might 
have  provided,  in  plain  words,  for  the  recovery  of  slaves 
owned  in  one  State,  and  escaping  into  another.  Their 
studied  avoidance  of  these  words,  and  their  guarded  ex- 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


237 


pression,  held  to  service  under  the  laics,  are  proofs,  to 
my  mind,  that  they  had  a  sacred  regard  for  justice,  and 
were  resolved  not  to  promote  the  public  good  in  opposi- 
tion to  its  dictates. 

But  to  come  closer  to  the  objection,  I  submit :  1. 
That  the  opinions  of  the  framers,  as  gathered  outside  of 
the  Constitution,  are  of  no  weight  in  determining  its 
meaning,  unless  they  meet  the  precise  point  for  which 
they  are  adduced;  and,  2.  That  even  if  they  meet  the 
precise  point,  they  ought  not  to  conclude,  in  opposition 
to  the  expressed  design  of  the  Constitution  itself. 

1.  That  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  regarded 
slavery  as  morally  wrong,  if  admitted,  proves  nothing  to 
the  purpose.  For  there  are  manifold  forms  of  slavery, 
some  confessedly  unjust,  and  others  indisputably  just; 
and  therefore  the  opinions  referred  to  are  not  to  the 
point,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  they  were  adverse  to 
that  particular  form  of  slavery  which  consists  in  being 
held  to  service  under  the  laws  of  one  of  the  United 
States.  That  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  condemned 
as  unjust  the  slavery  of  ancient  Rome,  or  of  the  West 
Indies,  or  even  of  the  British  Colonies  before  their  in- 
dependence, is  no  proof  that  they  regarded,  as  unjust,  a 
service  regulated  by  the  laws  of  any  State  that  was  em- 
braced in  the  Federal  Union. 

2.  But  next  let  us  suppose,  for  argument's  sake,  that 
the  framers  of  the  Constitution  did  hold  this  opinion  ; 
in  other  words,  did  regard  as  morally  unjust  that  legal 


238 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


servitude  which  was  then  existing,  and  which  still  exists 
in  some  of  the  United  States  ;  still  I  should  say  that  we 
are  not  to  be  guided  by  this  opinion  in  construing  the 
provision  under  consideration,  but  that  we  are  to  gather 
the  meaning  of  the  provision  from  its  own  words,  as  com- 
pared with  the  declared  intent  of  the  Constitution  itself. 
For  as  the  result  of  the  deliberative  body  can  not  be  at 
all  inferred  from  the  opinions  of  some  few  of  its  mem- 
bers, seeing  these  may  have  been  overruled  by  the  rest ; 
so  neither  can  it  be  inferred  with  certainty,  from  the 
opinions  of  all  expressed  individually  on  other  occasions, 
and  in  other  ways.  For  the  magnitude  of  the  occasion,, 
and  the  profound  consciousness  of  the  unspeakable  re- 
sponsibility devolved  on  them,  may  have  raised  them 
above  themselves,  above  the  age  in  which  they  lived,  and 
restrained  them  from  doing  collectively,  what  they  may 
have  been  willing  to  do  severally ;  and  the  providence 
of  Almighty  God,  watching  over  the  foundations  of  a 
mighty  empire,  may  have  guarded  them  from  the  fatal 
consequences  of  their  own  errors,  and  guided  them,  by 
a  Divine  but  sacred  influence,  to  other  decisions  than 
those  which  were  the  mere  fruit  of  human  wisdom.  It 
is  the  result  by  which  we  are  bound,  and  not  the  process 
by  wThich  it  was  attained.  Be  it  supposed,  then  (though 
I  believe  the  supposition  to  be  false),  that  the  framers 
of  the  Constitution  considered  legal  servitude,  in  all  its 
forms,  to  be  morally  unjust ;  be  it  admitted,  also,  though 
I  do  not  believe  it  to  be  true,  that  they  were  willing  to 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


239 


connive  at  a  gigantic  injustice  for  the  sake  of  profit  or 
lucre,  still  the  Constitution  itself  is  paramount,  and  its 
distinct  recognition  of  legal  servitude  in  the  several 
States  in  which  it  exists,  its  express  provision  for  satisfy- 
ing the  claims  of  those  who.  under  the  laws  of  these 
States,  had  a  right  to  the  service  or  labor  of  others,  when 
viewred  in  the  light  of  its  own  avowed  declaration,  that 
it  was  ordained  to  establish  justice,  oblige  me  to  be- 
lieve that  this  same  legal  servitude,  the  rights  of  which 
are  thus  scrupulously  guarded,  is,  in  the  eye  of  the  Con- 
stitution itself,  morally  right  and  just. 

The  further  objection,  namely,  that  judicial  decisions, 
interpretative  of  the  Constitution,  represent  slavery  as 
existing  in  virtue  of  local  and  positive  law,  does  not,  as 
already  intimated,  touch  the  point  for  which  I  am  con- 
tending. For  I  suppose,  and  have  endeavored  to  prove 
in  the  previous  chapters  of  this  work,  that  the  right  to 
service  or  labor  in  the  slaveholdino;  States,  is  a  right 
founded  on  the  principles  of  universal  justice,  and  one 
which  the  laws  of  those  States  are  designed  to  declare 
and  protect;  just  as  the  right  to  the  service  or  labor  of 
apprentices  in  the  non-slaveholding  States  is  a  right 
founded  on  the  principles  of  universal  justice,  and  one 
which  the  laws  of  these  States  are  designed  to  declare 
and  protect.  To  meet  the  point,  therefore,  it  must  be 
shown,  not  only  that  the  Constitution  regards  the  right 
to  service  in  the  slaveholding  States  as  upheld  by  local 
and  positive  law,  but  also  that  it  regards  this  right  to 


240  RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 

service  as  upheld  by  local  and  positive  law  in  opposition 
to  universal  and  natural  law ;  and  this  is  what  the  peo- 
ple understand,  when  they  hear  statesmen  and  judges 
proclaim  that  slavery  is  the  creature  of  local  and  positive 
law. 

Now,  I  am  bold  to  affirm  that  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  United  States  has  never  adjudged  or  declared  that 
the  right  to  service  or  labor  under  the  Constitution  is 
subject  to  this  limitation.  It  could  not  do  so,  without 
proclaiming  to  the  world  that  the  right  to  the  service  of 
apprentices,  and  of  all  other  persons  bound  to  labor,  is 
upheld  in  the  United  States  by  might  and  violence,  in 
opposition  to  right  and  justice.  The  Supreme  Court 
may  not  have  declared  that  the  right  to  service  is  found- 
ed in  natural  and  universal  justice ;  nor  is  it  called  upon 
to  make  this  declaration,  because  its  proper  function  is, 
not  to  expound  and  administer  the  law  of  Nature  univer- 
sally, but  to  dispense  justice  under  the  Constitution  and 
laws  of  the  United  States.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
to  declare  that  the  right  to  service  under  the  laws  of  any 
one  of  the  United  States,  is  contrary  to  universal  justice, 
would  be  not  only  to  transcend  its  proper  functions  as  a 
minister  of  the  Constitution,  but  it  would  be  also  to  open 
the  way  for  revolution  and  anarchy ;  because  it  would  be 
an  admission,  or  rather,  a  proclamation  to  the  people  of 
the  United  States,  that  the  fundamental  laws  of  their 
nation  are  repugnant  to  the  laws  of  God  and  Nature. 
What  the  Supreme  Court  may  do  in  future,  the  future 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


241 


only  can  reveal ;  but  thus  far  it  has  been  conservative, 
and  not  destructive  of  the  government  from  which  it 
immediately  derives  its  powers ;  and  has  never  even 
insinuated  (would  to  God  the  same  could  be  said  of  all 
the  senators  of  the  United  States,  as  well  as  the  judges 
of  the  Supreme  Court !)  the  existence  of  a  conflict,  or  of 
the  least  disagreement  between  the  Constitution  and  laws 
which  they  are  appointed  and  sworn  to  administer,  and 
the  "higher  law"  of  Him  "through  whom  kings  reign, 
and  princes  decree  justice." 

So  far  has  the  Supreme  Court  been  from  evincing  any 
such  want  of  fealty  to  its  sacred  trust,  that  it  has  said  all 
that  it  well  could  say  within  its  appropriate  sphere,  to 
show  that  the  right  of  service  guarantied  by  the  Consti- 
tution to  the  several  States  is  a  natural  and  universal 
right,  a  right  created  by  the  law  of  Nature ;  in  the  same 
sense  as  are  all  rights  growing  out  of  just  and  honest 
contracts,  the  fulfillment  of  which  is  a  prime  dictate  of 
Nature.  "The  owner  of  the  fugitive,"  says  Chief-Jus- 
tice Story,  uhas  the  same  right  to  seize  and  take  him  in 
a  State  to  which  he  has  fled,  that  he  had  in  the  State 
from  which  he  escaped ;  and  this  right  to  seize  and  re- 
capture is  universally  acknowledged  in  the  slaveholding 
States.  It  is  no  more  than  an  affirmance  of  the  princi- 
ples of  the  Common  Law  applicable  to  the  subject.  The 
Court  have  no  hesitation  in  holding  that,  under  and  in 
virtue  of  the  Constitution,  the  owner  of  the  slave  is 
clothed  with  authority  in  every  State  of  the  Union  to  Fe- 
ll 


242 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


capture  his  slave  wherever  he  can  do  it  without  breach 
of  the  peace  or  illegal  violence."  *  *  *  "The  Con- 
stitution declares  that  the  fugitive  shall  be  delivered  up 
:  on  claim  of  the  party  to  whom  service  or  labor  may  be  due.' 
A  claim,  in  a  just  juridicial  sense,  is  a  demand  of  some 
matter  as  of  right  made  by  one  person  on  another  to  do, 
or  forbear  to  do  some  act  or  thing  as  a  matter  of  duty." 

Again  :  "  The  clause  in  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  relating  to  fugitives,  manifestly  contemplates  the 
existence  of  a  positive  unqualified  right  on  the  part  of 
the  owner  of  the  slave,  which  no  State  law  or  regulation 
can  in  any  way  qualify,  regulate,  control,  or  restrain. 
Any  State  law,  or  regulation,  which  interrupts,  limits, 
delays,  or  postpones  the  rights  of  the  owner  to  the  imme- 
diate command  of  his  service,  or  labor,  operates  pro  tanto 
a  discharge  of  the  slave  therefrom.  The  question  can 
never  be  how  much  he  is  discharged  therefrom,  but 
whether  he  is  discharged  from  any  by  the  natural  or 
necessary  operation  of  the  State  laws  or  regulations. 
The  question  is  one,  not  of  quantity  or  degree,  but  of 
withholding  or  controlling  the  incidents  of  a  positive 
right."  And  once  more:  "The  right  to  seize  and 
retake  fugitive  slaves,  and  the  duty  to  deliver  them  up, 
in  whatever  State  of  the  Union  they  may  be  found,  is 
under  the  Constitution  recognized  as  an  absolute,  positive 
right  and  duty,  pervading  the  whole  Union  with  an  equal 
and  supreme  force,  uncontrolled  and  uncontrollable  by 
State  sovereignty  or  legislation.    The  right  and  duty 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES.  243 

are  coextensive  and  uniform  in  remedy  and  operation 
throughout  the  whole  Union.  The  owner  has  the  same 
security,  and  the  same  remedial  justice,  and  the  same 
exemption  from  State  regulations  and  control,  through 
however  many  States  he  may  pass,  with  the  fugitive  slaves 
in  his  possession,  in  transitu  to  his  domicil."  What 
more  the  Court  could  have  said,  without  overstepping  its 
proper  bounds,  to  show  that  the  right  to  service  or  labor, 
recognized  by  the  Constitution,  is  morally  as  well  as 
legally  just,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  conceive. 

In  the  opinion  that  local  law,  when  said  to  be  the 
foundation  of  slavery,  means  the  law  of  one  place  or 
country,  as  distinguished  from  other  places  or  countries, 
and  not  as  distinguished  from  the  law  of  Nature,  I  am 
confirmed  by  the  fact,  that  the  same  doctrine,  viz.,  that 
slavery  is  the  creature  of  local  law,  is  held  by  the  courts 
of  those  States  in  which  slavery  is  regarded,  not  as  a 
foreign,  but  as  a  domestic  institution.  Many  cases 
have  occurred  in  the  courts  of  our  Southern  States,  in 
which  this  doctrine  has  been  avowed.  In  one,  a  case  of 
more  than  usual  interest,  a  suit  was  brought  for  the  free- 
dom of  a  mulatto  girl,  who  had  been  bequeathed  to  a 
certain  person,  on  condition  that  she  should  be  freed  on 
attaining  her  thirtieth  year.  The  case  turned  on  the 
construction  of  the  will :  and  in  the  lower  court  it  was 
decided  against  the  slave,  but  on  appeal  to  a  higher 
court,  the  case  was  sent  back  for  a  new  trial ;  not  on  the 
ground  of  an  erroneous  construction  of  the  will,  but  on 


244 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


account  of  certain  facts  which  had  "been  incidentally 
proved.  These  facts  were,  that  the  slave  had  resided  with 
the  person  to  whom  she  was  bequeathed  for  a  number 
of  years  in  France,  by  the  laws  of  which  country  slavery 
can  not  be  supported.  The  Court  put  their  ruling  upon 
the  ground,  that  the  relation  of  master  and  slave  could 
only  subsist  by  virtue  of  local  law,  and  that  as  soon  as 
slaves  were  voluntarily  taken  by  their  masters  to  a 
country  whose  laws  did  not  support  slavery,  they  were 
free :  that  there  was  always  a  presumption  in  favor  of 
freedom  ;  and  that  this  was  so  strong,  that  the  Court 
even  went  beyond  the  facts  forming  the  essential  part  of 
the  record.  Xow,  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the  Southern 
Courts,  in  decisions  like  these,  meant  to  convict  the  laws 
of  their  own  States  of  injustice  and  hostility  to  the  law 
of  Xature  ?  This  were  indeed  a  violent  inference.  The 
natural,  if  not  necessary,  inference  is,  that  by  local  law, 
they  meant  the  law  of  their  own  State,  as  distinguished  from 
the  law  of  other  countries  :  and  by  presuming  in  favor  of 
freedom,  they  meant  to  affirm  the  superior  advantage  and 
blessing  of  freedom,  as  compared  with  that  limited  and 
regulated  slavery  which  their  laws  allow ;  both,  however, 
being  assumed  to  be  consonant  to  Natural  law  or  justice. 

If,  indeed,  the  Constitution  mean  less  than  this ;  if  it 
guaranties  to  the  Southern  claimant  the  recovery  of  a 
debt  of  service  which  is  only  legally,  and  not  morally, 
due,  then,  though  I  would  not  sanction  the  violent  lan- 
guage of  the  abolitionists,  yet  I  should  be  constrained  to 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


245 


confess  that  the  constitution  has  falsified  its  own  profession 
of  justice ;  and  that  George  Washington,  Hamilton,  and 
Madison,  Rufus  King,  Roger  Sherman,  and  Benjamin 
Franklin,  in  their  laudable  effort  to  found  a  union  of  the 
States  in  justice,  and  to  secure  for  themselves  and  their 
posterity  the  blessings  of  that  liberty  which  is  inseparable 
from  justice,  had  signally  and  disastrously  failed. 

Assuming,  however,  what  I  have  endeavored  to  prove, 
that  slavery  in  our  Southern  States  is  founded  in  an  im- 
plied contract ;  that,  in  virtue  of  this  contract,  the  ser- 
vice or  labor  of  the  slave  is  a  debt  honestly  due  to  the 
master :  and  that  the  Constitution  provides  for  the 
recovery  of  this  debt  in  States  other  than  that  to  which 
the  claimant  belongs,  I  now  proceed  to  consider  the 
moral  force  of  those  laws  which  have  been  passed  by 
Congress  to  give  effect  to  this  constitutional  provision. 

The  Act  of  1793  declares  that,  when  a  person  held  to 
labor  or  service  in  any  of  the  United  States,  ^  *  under 
the  laws  thereof,  shall  escape  into  any  other  of  the  said 
States,  the  person  to  whom  such  labor  or  service  may  be 
clue,  *  *  is  hereby  empowered  to  seize  or  arrest  such 
fugitive,  and  take  him  before  any  judge  of  Circuit  or 
District  Court  of  the  United  States,  residing  or  being  in 
the  State,  *  *  *  and  on  proof  to  satisfaction  of  such 
judge  *  *  *  that  the  person  so  seized  doth,  under  the 
ktWB  of  the  State  from  which  he  or  she  fled,  owe  service 
or  labor  to  the  person  claiming  him,  it  shall  be  the  duty 
of  such  judge  to  give  a  certificate  thereof  to  such  claim- 


246     '         RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


ant,  which  shall  be  sufficient  warrant  for  removing  the 
said  fugitive  from  labor  to  the  State  from  which  he  or 
she  fled. 

It  further  enacts  that  any  person  who  shall  knowingly 
or  willingly  obstruct  or  hinder  such  claimant  in  so  seiz- 
ing or  arresting  such  fugitive  from  labor,  or  shall  rescue 
him  such  fugitive  from  such  claimant,  *  ^  shall  for 
either  of  said  offenses  be  subject  to  a  fine  of  five  hun- 
dred dollars. 

The  Act  of  1850,  which  supersedes  the  former  and  is 
substantially  the  same,  differing  from  it  in  several  pro- 
visions designed  to  make  the  recovery  more  prompt  and 
certain,  fixes  the  penalty  at  one  thousand  dollars,  and 
imprisonment  not  exceeding  six  months. 

It  appears,  then,  that  these  laws,  carrying  out  the 
letter  and  spirit  of  the  Constitution,  assume  that  the 
service  or  labor  of  the  fugitive  is  due  to  the  lawful 
claimant,  and  that  the  fugitive  has  escaped  in  order  to 
avoid'  the  payment  of  a  lawful  debt ;  that  they  empower 
the  claimant,  in  order  to  the  recovery  of  the  debt,  to  seize 
or  arrest  the  fugitive ;  that  they  forbid  all  persons  to  hin- 
der or  obstruct  the  claimant  in  making  the  seizure  or  ar- 
rest, to  rescue  the  fugitive  after  his  arrest,  or  to  harbor  or 
conceal  him  knowing  him  to  be  a  fugitive  from  labor ; 
and  that  they  subject  to  fine  and  imprisonment  every 
person  who  shall  be  convicted  of  obstructing  the  claimant, 
in  any  of  the  above  ways,  in  the  recovery  of  his  claim. 

It  is  next  to  impossible  for  any  law  to  be  so  framed  as 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


247 


to  work  exact  and  impartial  justice  in  every  case  to 
which  it  may  be  applied.  Be  the  laws  ever  so  good,  we 
shall  sometimes  need  the  rules  of  equity  to  remedy  the 
defects  and  inconveniencies  of  legal  justice.  The  laws 
under  consideration  are,  from  their  very  nature,  pecu- 
liarly liable  to  this  imperfection  ;  and  I  doubt  not  that 
cases  may  arise  under  them,  in  which  the  fugitive  is 
equitably  entitled  to  that  succor  and  sympathy  which  the 
law  awards  to  the  claimant.  But  the  Constitution,  I  be- 
lieve, and  the  laws  founded  on  it,  abhor  injustice,  and 
are  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  comprehensive  benevolence  ; 
and  before  Ave  consider  the  exceptional  cases  referred  to, 
it  may  be  well  to  look  at  the  lawTs  in  their  general 
bearing. 

It  must,  I  think,  be  admitted  as  a  general  rule,  that 
the  claimant  has  done  nothing,  and  intends  to  do  nothing 
to  vitiate  the  virtual  contract  which  gives  him  a  just 
claim  to  the  service  or  labor  of  the  fugitive ;  that  he  has 
not  treated  him  with  merciless  rigor  or  in  any  way  abused 
his  person,  and  that  he  does  not  intend  to  do  so.  This 
is  evidently  the  supposition  of  the  law  which  was  not  in- 
tended to  work  cruelty  and  abuse,  but  simply  to  compel 
the  fugitive  to  render  to  his  master  the  service  or  labor 
which  he  owes  him  ;  and  we  must  surrender  all  faith  in 
human  nature  unless  we  admit  the  supposition,  as  a  gen- 
eral  rule,  to  be  reasonable  and  just. 

Now,  on  this  supposition  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the 
law  obliges  us  to  no  duty  to  which  we  were  not  obliged 


248 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


before  its  enactment.  It  is  not  the  tyrant  that  the  law 
sets  before  us,  seeking  to  wreak  his  cruelty  on  the  vic- 
tim of  his  absolute  power,  but  it  is  simply  one  man  seek- 
ing to  recover,  in  a  lawful  way,  a  debt  of  reasonable 
service  from  another.  For  the  claimant,  by  the  supposi- 
tion, has  fed  and  clothed  his  servant  in  infancy  when  the 
servant  was  unable  to  work,  and  the  service  which  he 
claims  is  justly  his  due.  We  are,  therefore,  obliged  by 
the  principles  of  universal  justice,  to  put  no  obstruction 
in  the  way  of  the  claimant  in  any  suitable  and  reason- 
able efforts  which  he  may  make  to  recover  his  debt ;  not 
to  rescue  the  fugitive  in  case  he  is  taken  by  the  claim- 
ant, nor  to  harbor  or  conceal  him.  This  is  simple  jus- 
tice, and  the  law  does  but  induce  a  new  obligation  on  us 

to  refrain  from  doing  that  which  we  were  obliged  to  re- 
ts o 

frain  from  doing  before  its  enactment.  As  a  general 
rule,  therefore,  it  seems  clear  that  the  requirements  of 
natural  justice,  enhanced  in  their  obligation  by  the  laws 
of  our  country,  forbid  us  to  interfere  between  the  lawful 
claimant  and  the  person  whose  service  he  claims.  In  all 
ordinary  cases,  even  if  our  sympathies  are  with  the 
fugitive  (who,  for  ought  we  know  to  the  contrary,  may 
be  less  deserving  of  them  than  the  claimant ),  it  does  not 
appear  that  we  can  justly  do  more  in  his  favor  than  see 
that  the  checks  which  the  laws  have  interposed  against 
an  unjust  claim  be  faithfully  observed. 

But  suppose  the  fugitive,  whether  man  or  woman,  to 
be  flying  from  the  claimant  in  fear  of  cruel  treatment  or 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES.  249 

abuse,  and  that  the  claimant  aims  to  recover  in  order  to 
inflict  on  him  or  her  such  cruel  treatment  or  abuse. 
This  I  regard  as  an  exceptional  case ;  but  on  the  suppo- 
sition that  it  occurs,  I  admit  that  the  fugitive  has,  on 
the  principles  of  natural  justice,  the  right  to  run  away  ; 
and  that,  if  we  know  or  believe,  on  reasonable  grounds, 
the  facts  that  make  it  exceptional,  we  have  the  same 
natural  right  to  further  his  escape.  Nor  does  Divine 
Revelation,  the  best  exponent  of  natural  justice,  contra- 
dict this  opinion  ;  for  the  precepts  of  the  apostles  and 
the  canons  of  the  Ancient  Church,  which  command  ser- 
vants to  obey  their  masters,  and  forbid  them  to  decline 
their  service,  are  general  rules,  and  not  framed  with  a 
view  to  such  extreme  and  exceptional  cases  as  may  pos- 
sibly arise. 

But  that  we  have  the  same  liberty  in  view  of  the  new 
and  additional  obligation  induced  on  us  by  the  laws  of 
our  country,  is  not  so  clear.  For  the  law  of  the  land 
has  made  specific  provision  against  the  injustice  and 
cruelty  which  we  apprehend  ;  it  has  recognized  the  tri- 
bunals of  the  State  to  which  the  claimant  belongs  as 
vested  with  legitimate  authority  to  restrain  his  power 
and  to  guard  the  rights  of  the  fugitive  ;  and  though  we 
may  think  this  provision  insufficient  for  the  exigencies  of 
the  case,  yet  the  law  is  paramount,  and  our  judgment 
ought  to  yield  to  its  direction.  The  case,  indeed,  must 
be  extremely  aggravated,  and  the  proofs  of  its  aggrava- 
tion indubitably  certain,  before  we  should  be  justified,  in 

11* 


250 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


foro  conscientice.  in  deviating  from  the  course  which 
the  law  prescribes ;  and  even  then  our  justification  would 
be  found  in  the  fact  that  we  had  neither  defied  the  au- 
thority of  the  law  nor  rashly  braved  its  penalties  ;  but 
that,  in  the  exercise  of  a  sound  discretion,  we  had  acted 
in  the  spirit  of  the  law,  though  in  disregard  of  its  letter, 
in  a  case  for  wrhich  it  had  failed  to  provide  ;  and  were, 
therefore,  entitled,  in  reason  and  equity,  to  be  regarded 
as  exempt  from  its  operation. 

From  what  has  been  said,  may  easily  be  inferred  the 
sentiments  I  entertain  of  the  conduct  of  those  persons 
at  the  North  who  encourage  the  slaves  at  the  South  to 
run  away  from  their  masters ;  who  secretly  harbor  them, 
and  furnish  them  with  money  to  facilitate  their  escape, 
and  who,  from  these  and  the  like  stealthy  arts,  are  com- 
monly known  as  "  agents  of  the  underground  railroad." 
That  these  persons  violate  the  law  of  the  land,  is,  in  my 
judgment,  the  least  part  of  their  guilt.  I  believe  them 
to  be  not  only  legally  but  morally  delinquent,  instiga- 
tors and  abettors,  directly,  of  fraud,  and  theft,  and  indi- 
rectly, and  by  consequence,  of  rapine  and  murder ;  fo- 
menters  of  discontent  and  sedition ;  and  I  consider  the 
credit  accorded  to  them  for  philanthropy  and  manhood, 
to  be  the  evidence  of  a  perverted  moral  sentiment,  and 
diseased  state  of  the  public  mind.  However,  I  am 
willing  to  look  at  the  subject  from  their  own  point  of 
view:  and  to  inquire,  inasmuch  as  they  profess  to  be 
reasonable  men  and  Christians,  what  conduct  reason  and 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


251 


religion  demand  of  them  in  reference  to  the  execution  of 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  on  the  supposition  that  their 
theory  of  slavery  is  correct. 

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  does  seem  to  me  that  rea- 
son and  common  sense  should  teach  them  not  to  make 
for  themselves  a  case  which  the  law  does  not  make. 
They  have  read,  perhaps,  in  Rees'  Cyclopedia,  or  in 
some  other  book  of  less  repute,  that  a  slave  is  "  a  person 
in  the  absolute  power  of  a  master  with  regard  to  his  life, 
liberty,  and  fortune  or  they  have  learned,  perhaps, 
at  third  or  fourth  hand,  from  the  worthy  Dr.  Paley, 
that  1  i  slavery  is  an  obligation  to  labor  for  the  benefit  of 
the  master,  without  the  contract  or  consent  of  the  ser- 
vant;" and,  under  the  influence  of  this  foreign  notion, 
they  denounce  the  laws  of  their  country,  and  seek  to 
obstruct  their  execution,  as  if,  forsooth,  these  laws  were 
designed  to  uphold  absolute  power,  and  to  wring  labor 
from  an  oppressed  and  innocent  people,  without  allowing 
them  an  equivalent  in  return !  But  this  is  a  case  of 
their  own  making;  the  laws  of  their  country  do  not 
touch  it  in  name  or  thing.  They  do  not  contain  the 
words  slave  or  slavery,  and  they  do  not  relate  to  the 
thing  which  Rees  and  Paley,  and  other  English  authors, 
with  their  American  imitators,  express  by  these  words. 

*  See  the  article  "Slavery,"  in  Rees,  which  appears  to  have  been 
contributed  by  Clarkson,  and  is  one  of  a  hundred  instances  of  the  way 
in  which  the  emissaries  of  new  sects  zealously  avail  themselves  of  the 
facility,  or  perhaps  the  venality  of  the  editors  of  popular  works  to  influ- 
ence the  public  mind. 


252 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


Dr.  Paley's  "  slavery,"  as  he  himself  explains,  is  limited 
to  those  who  become  "slaves,"  1,  from  crime,  2,  from 
captivity,  and  3,  from  debt. 

Slaves  from  debt  are  unknown  in  this  country;  and 
the  others  we  do  not  call  slaves 3  but  criminals  and  pris- 
oners ;  and  their  rendition,  in  case  they  escape  from 
their  appointed  guardians,  is  provided  for  in  other  parts 
of  the  United  States  Constitution  and  laws  than  those 
now  under  consideration.  And  it  is  enough  to  move  an 
honest  man's  indignation  to  see  Dr.  Wayland  and  others 
far  less  respectable  than  Dr.  Wayland,  apply  Paley's 
definition  to  Southern  laborers,  who,  as  they  know,  are 
neither  criminals,  nor  captives,  nor  prisoners ;  and  then, 
taking  advantage  of  their  own  deception,  stir  up  the  pas- 
sions of  the  Northern  people  against  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  as  if  they  were  designed  to  rivet  the  chains  of 
the  miserable,  and  not,  as  is  the  simple  truth,  to  compel 
delinquent  servants  to  pay  an  honest  debt  of  labor. 

Let  men  refuse  to  be  duped  any  longer  by  the  juggle- 
ry of  words,  and  see  for  themselves  the  just  and  humane 
intent  of  the  law ;  and  if  they  do  not  mildly  and  firmly 
cooperate  with  it,  they  will  at  least  abstain  from  offi- 
ciously putting  obstacles  in  the  way  of  its  legitimate 
execution. 

But  to  come  nearer  to  the  point.  These  men,  we  will 
suppose,  honestly  believe  that  the  claimant  has  only  a 
legal,  and  no  moral,  right  to  the  service  of  the  fugitive ; 
that  the  fugitive  has  never,  by  any  act  of  his  own, 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


253 


express  or  implied,  parted  with  his  natural  right  to  the 
use  of  his  liberty,  but  still  retains  this  right ;  and  that 
the  law  which  commands  the  fugitive  to  be  restored  to 
the  claimant  is  unjust,  as  compared  with  the  principles  of 
universal  justice  or  the  law  of  Nature.  This,  our  oppo- 
nents may  say,  whether  it  be  right  or  wrong,  is  our 
honest  conviction  ;  and,  as  you  promised  to  look  at  the 
matter  from  our  point  of  view,  we  should  like  to  know 
what  course,  in  reference  to  this  law,  you  think  that 
we,  as  reasonable  men  and  Christians,  are  bound  to 
pursue  ? 

To  these  persons  I  answer  that,  if  the  law  required 
them  to  assist,  or  be  in  any  wise  actively  instrumental, 
in  the  recovery  and  restoration  of  the  fugitive,  they 
would  not,  in  my  opinion,  with  their  present  views  of 
the  subject,  be  bound  to  comply  with  it  in  these  par- 
ticulars and  to  this  extent.  In  a  case  like  this  they  are 
not,  in  my  opinion,  obliged  by  their  Christian  profession 
to  render  an  active  obedience  to  the  laws  of  their  coun- 
try ;  but  they  are  to  refuse,  firmly  and  respectfully,  to 
have  any  agency  in  carrying  them  out,  submitting  them- 
selves, at  the  same  time,  cheerfully  and  patiently  to  their 
penalties.  This  is  the  course  which  the  Apostles  them- 
selves,  and  all  good  Christians  after  their  example,  have 
pursued  when  the  law  of  the  land  has  commanded  that 
which  the  law  of  God  has  forbidden ;  they  have  reso- 
lutely obeyed  the  Divine  law,  and  endured  the  penalty  of 
the  human.    Nor  is  this  merely  the  command  of  Rev- 


254  RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


elation,  but  the  dictate  also  of  Nature  and  right  reason; 
as  we  learn  from  the  heathen  Socrates,  who  refused  to 
accede  to  the  entreaties  of  his  friends,  that  he  would 
escape  out  of  prison,  and  resolutely  preferred  to  suffer 
the  death  which  his  judges  had  decreed. 

This  view  of  the  case  applies,  indeed,  to  those  who 
hold  office  under  the  Federal  Government,  and  who  are 
required  by  their  official  duty  to  side  with  the  claimant, 
and  assist  him  in  the  recovery  of  the  fugitive.  Such 
persons,  if  they  can  not  with  a  good  conscience  enforce 
the  law,  and  deliver  up  the  fugitive  to  the  claimant,  are 
obliged,  I  think,  to  refuse  to  do  so  ;  and  either  to  abide 
the  consequences  of  their  refusal,  or  avoid  them  by  the 
resignation  of  their  office.  But  the  law  under  con- 
sideration gives  no  private  citizen  the  opportunity  to 
become  a  martyr  if  he  would.  For  it  requires  of  him 
no  active  obedience  whatever  for  the  recovery  of  the 
fugitive ;  *  its  requirements  for  this  purpose  are  negative ; 
it  requires  him  to  put  no  obstruction  in  the  way  of  the 
claimant,  not  to  harbor  or  conceal  the  fugitive,  but  sim- 
ply to  let  both  parties  alone.  I  confess  myself  utterly 
at  a  loss  to  conceive  on  what  grounds  of  reason  or  re- 
ligion any  man,  who  acknowledges  himself  bound  to  obey 
the  laws  of  his  country,  in  all  cases  in  which  they  do  not 
contradict  the  law  of  God,  should  refuse  to  obey  his 

*  True,  in  case  attempts  are  made  to  thwart  the  law,  its  agents 
may  call  in  the  aid  of  the  posse  comitalus;  not,  however,  to  recover  tho 
fugitive,  but  to  restrain  those  who  factiously  aim  to  defeat  the  law. 


RENDITION  OF  FUGITIVE  SLAVES. 


255 


country,  when  she  merely  commands  him  to  do  nothing ; 
when  she  requires  him  only  not  to  interfere  between  two 
disputants,  and  asserts  her  own  right  to  settle  the  dispute 
in  her  own  way. 

On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  to  me  that,  as  reason  and 
common  sense  should  teach  men  not  to  conjure  up  to 
their  fancy  a  grievance  which  the  law  does  not  impose  ; 
so  reason  and  religion  should  teach  those  who  are  con- 
scientionsly  opposed  to  this  law  to  remember,  that  their 
country  has  a  conscience  as  well  as  they ;  and  that,  how- 
ever they  may  think  themselves  right,  and  their  country 
wrong,  yet  since  she  requires  them  to  do  nothing  con- 
trary to  their  conscience,  they  should  at  least  forbear  to 
do  anything  contrary  to  her  conscience. 


CHAPTER,  XVI. 

THE    AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


That  was  a  sage  piece  of  advice  which  Phaeton  gave 
to  the  youthful  Icarus  when,  having  adjusted  to  his  body 
his  wings  cemented  with  wax,  he  essayed  to  fly  over  the 
iEgean  Sea — Medio  tutissimus  ibis.  The  middle  course 
is  your  safest.  If  you  soar  too  high,  the  sun  will  melt 
the  wax,  and,  losing  your  wings,  you  will  fall  headlong 
into  the  sea ;  if  you  keep  too  near  the  earth,  the  cold 
will  stiffen  the  wax,  and,  unable  to  use  your  wings,  you 
will  be  tossed  about,  the  sport  of  the  winds.  If  you 
would  fly  with  safety,  use  your  wings  in  the  element 
that  Nature  provided  for  them,  and  takp  care  neither  to 
rise  above  nor  to  sink  below  it. 

To  apply  the  vailed  wisdom  of  the  fable  to  the  subject 
before  us.  They  who  own  no  law  but  force,  who  pro- 
claim with  the  ancient  Athenians  their  purpose  to  invade 
and  enslave  any  people  that  in  their  opinion  are  fit  to  be 
made  slaves,  who,  in  scorn  of  justice,  take  advantage  of 
the  weakness  of  their  fellow-men  to  use  them  for  their 
own  base  and  selfish  ends,  sink  beneath  the  just  level  of 
humanity,  deprive  themselves  of  the  light  and  warmth 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


257 


which  Revelation  and  right  reason  afford,  and  are  tossed 
about  in  the  cold  regions  of  selfishness,  the  sport  of 
avarice  and  of  their  other  turbulent  appetites  and  pas- 
sions. They,  on  the  other  hand,  who  soar  on  high,  after 
the  fashion  of  the  French  philosophers  and  the  German 
transcendentalists,  and  attempt  to  adjust  society  on  their 
airy  abstractions  of  liberty  and  equality,  are  predestined 
to  a  miserable  failure  :  no  sooner  do  they  reach  their 
pure  ether  of  bliss  than  suddenly  the  wax  melts,  and 
they  fall  headlong  to  the  earth.  Witness  Fourier  and 
Owen  ;  witness  also  the  Genius  of  Albion,  poising  herself 
on  high  on  the  waxen  wings  of  French  freedom  and 
Scotch  philanthropy — over  the  island  of  Jamaica  ! 

The  middle  course  is  the  safest ;  but  by  a  middle 
course  let  me  not  be  understood  to  mean  a  compromise, 
or  an  expedient  in  which  truth  and  error  are  mutually 
conceded  and  accepted,  in  order  to  oppose  a  temporary 
stay  to  evils,  which  can  only  be  permanently  abated  by 
removing  their  cause.  No  ;  if  with  the  Roman  poet  I 
condemn  extremes,  it  is  for  the  reason  which  he  assigns  : 
viz.,  that  Truth  and  Rectitude  are  only  to  be  found  be- 
tween them,  and  can  not  exist  in  either  direction  beyond 
them.^  For  I  can  not  agree  with  those  wTho  represent 
-  madness  and  mischief  as  the  excesses  of  truth  and  jus- 
tice, or  who,  to  speak  in  the  concrete,  would  have  us 
believe  that  the  insane  schemes  of  the  abolitionists  are 

*  Est  modus  in  rebus,  sunt  certi  deniqv  fines 

Quos  ultraque  citraque  nequit  consl^ture  rectum. 


258 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


the  result  of  sound  premises  rigorously  carried  out  to 
their  logical  consequences.  I  would  have  men  persistently 
and  fearlessly  follow  truth  whithersoever  it  may  lead 
them ;  and  when  they  counsel  madness  and  mischief,  I 
am  more  apt  to  suspect  the  fallacy  of  their  premises  than 
of  the  argument  that  is  raised  on  them.  Moderation  is 
the  path  of  wisdom,  and  though  men  may  be  moderate 
from  indolence  or  habit  and  without  the  ability  to  develop 
logically  the  grounds  of  their  action  or  inaction,  yet  they 
can  not  be  extravagant  without  folly.  All  truth  lies  be- 
tween opposite  errors,  all  virtue  between  opposite  vices ; 
but  is  that  a  reason  why  men  can  not  be  truthful  and 
virtuous,  aye  and  follow  out  every  principle  of  truth 
and  virtue  to  its  farthest  legitimate  consequences,  with- 
out becoming  contaminated  with  error  and  vice  ?  Reli- 
gion, the  doctrine  of  right  reason  and  revelation,  lies 
midway  between  superstition  and  atheism  ;  can  not  a 
man,  then,  be  religious,  so  as  to  think  and  do  all  that 
Reason  and  Revelation  demand,  without  being  either 
superstitious  or  an  atheist?  Temperance  lies  midway 
between  gluttony  and  asceticism  ;  can  not  a  man  be  tem- 
perate without  being  either  a  glutton  or  an  ascetic  ? 
Prudence  in  our  affairs  is  a  mean  between  prodigality 
and  covetousness  ;  does  prudence  then  really  consist  in  a 
mixture  of  these  vices,  and  is  it  not  rather  an  avoidance 
of  both  ?  And  so  with  all  truth  and  all  virtue  ;  nor 
should  I  have  any  fault  to  find  with  any  class  of  fanatics 
for  carrying  out  their  "  one  idea"  to  its  legitimate  con- 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


259 


sequences,  provided  their.  "  one  idea"  were  founded  on 
truth  and  justice.  For  by  no  possible  application  of 
right  reason  can  any  principle  of  truth  and  justice  be 
made  to  exceed  the  limits  of  truth  and  justice. 

But  men  are  governed  more  by  passion  than  by  rea- 
son ;  and  hence  it  happens  in  morals,  as  in  physics,  that 
one  extreme  leads  to  another.  Excessive  heat  prepares 
the  atmosphere  for  a  storm ;  and  when  the  storm  has 
exhausted  its  fury,  it  is  succeeded  by  a  calm  propor- 
tioned to  its  violence.  Superstition  begets  Atheism,  and 
Atheism  in  its  turn  drives  us  back  to  superstition.  And 
the  passions  which  impel  some  beyond  the  limits  of  right 
reason  in  one  direction,  disgust  others,  and  impel  them 
beyond  the  same  limits  in  the  opposite  direction.  Hence 
the  licentiousness  and  free-thinking  of  one  age,  are  a 
reaction  from  the  sanctimony  and  hypocrisy  of  the  age 
preceding ;  the  intemperance  of  one  generation  drives 
the  next  into  a  sort  of  savage  austerity ;  and  hence,  to 
bring  this  tedious  proem  to  a  close,  men  recoil  from  the 
horrors  of  the  African  slave-trade  to  the  ruthless  aboli- 
tion which  proscribes  all  servitude ;  and  again,  disgusted 
with  the  folly  and  insane  violence  of  abolition,  they  learn 
to  revert  with  complacency  and  a  stupefied  conscience  to 
the  meanest  and  most  atrocious  form  of  human  iniquity. 

The  best  way  to  arrest  the  passionate  excitement 
which  impels  men  to  opposite  extremes,  is  to  define  dis- 
tinctly, and  to  impress  on  their  minds,  that  middle  course 
of  truth  and  rectitude  which  reason  prescribes.    For,  to 


260 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


obliterate  the  lines  which  separate  any  virtue  from  the 
vices  that  bound  it  on  either  side,  is,  in  effect,  to  blot 
that  virtue  out  of  existence,  and  to  leave  the  opposite 
vices  to  struggle  for  alternate  dominion. 

And  the  middle  course,  the  course  of  rectitude  and 
safety,  on  the  subject  under  consideration,  is  one,  hap- 
pily, which  we  are  not  to  seek.  It  is  made  to  our 
hands  ;  not  proposed  for  our  consideration  and  future 
adoption  under  the  sanction  of  great  names,  but  already 
clearly  defined,  and  bound  upon  us  by  the  highest  human 
and  divine  authority.  For,  to  guard  effectually  against 
the  seditious  schemes  of  abolition  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  reopening  of  the  African  slave-trade  on  the  other,  we 
have  only  to  adhere  faithfully  and  resolutely  to  the 
Constitution  and  laws  of  our  country.  And  the 
Constitution,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  present  subject,  is 
no  compromise.  From  whatever  extreme  opinions  they 
who  framed  it  may  or  may  not  have  receded,  there  is  no 
mixture  of  truth  and  error  in  the  result  at  which  they* 
arrived.  There,  at  least,  they  have  spoken  with  no 
u  stammering  lips,"  no  strange  tongue.  The  provision 
of  the  Constitution,  in  regard  to  servitude,  compromits 
no  principle  of  truth,  and  contains  no  ingredient  of  error. 
It  is  a  pure  and  unequivocal  enunciation  of  justice  and 
wisdom.  It  meets  the  fact,  the  existing,  undeniable  fact, 
that  a  numerous  class  of  persons  in  our  country  are 
bound  to  service  ;  and  it  provides,  in  certain  emergencies, 
for  coercing  them  into  a  fulfillment  of  their  obligations 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


261 


for  delivering  them  up,  in  case  they  escape  from  one 
State  into  another,  to  the  parties  to  whom  the  service 
may  be  due.  On  the  other  hand,  it  gives  no  sanction  to 
lawless  violence,  and  justifies  no  infraction  of  human 
rights ;  but  prepares  the  way  for  the  National  Legisla- 
ture to  denounce  and  forbid,  as  it  has  in  fact  denounced 
and  forbidden,  the  seizure  and  enslavement  of  men  in 
foreign  lands,  and  their  importation  into  our  country. 
Thus  the  Constitution  has  done  for  us,  what,  in  our  pres- 
ent state  of  excitement  and  bewilderment,  we  could  not 
do  for  ourselves;  it  has  marked  out  for  us  the  course  of 
safety  and  rectitude,  and  has  guarded  us  from  injustice 
and  lawless  violence  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left. 
And  the  Constitution,  and  the  laws  founded  on  it,  are 
the  rule  of  the  national  conscience ;  a  rule  so  consonant 
to  right  reason  and  Revelation,  that  they  who  deviate 
from  it,  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  are 
recreant,  not  only  to  their  country,  but  to  the  law  of 
m  Nature  and  to  the  law  of  Christ. 

If  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  the  United  States 
regard  the  limited  and  lawful  slavery  that  exists  in  our 
Southern  States  as  a  stupendous  sin,  upheld  by  absolute 
power  against  right,  and  tolerated  only  from  necessity,  it 
would  be  impossible  to  vindicate  their  consistency  in  pro- 
tecting slavery  and  denouncing  the  slave-trade,  without 
denying  to  them  that  which  is  worth  much  more  than  con- 
sistency, the  profound  reverence  which  they  profess  to  enter- 
tain for  JUSTICE,  LIBERTY,  and  THE  RIGHTS  OF  MAN.  For 


262 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


slavery,  on  this  theory  of  it,  is  as  really,  though  not  so 
flagrantly,  opposed  to  justice,  liberty,  and  human  rights, 
as  the  slave-trade ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  quite 
probable  that  that  fancied  regard  for  the  public  good 
which  statesmen  are  apt  to  mistake  for  necessity,  as  it  has 
been  invoked  both  in  Great  Britain  "and  in  this  country, 
may  at  any  time  be  invoked  again  in  justification  of  the 
slave-trade,  as  well  as  of  domestic  slavery.  If  the  Con- 
stitution and  the  laws  of  the  United  States  protecting 
slavery  in  those  States  in  which  it  has  been  established, 
and  at  the  same  time  prohibiting  the  slave-trade,  have  no 
deeper  foundation  than  a  baseless  and  temporising  expedi- 
ency, then  they  can  not  be  sustained  among  a  free  and 
high-minded  people  who  have  a  paramount  regard  for 
truth,  honor,  and  justice:  they  will  perish,  as  they  de- 
serve to  perish,  loathed  of  all  good  men,  and  disowned  of 
God.  For  if  slavery,  as  domesticated  among -us,  be  re- 
garded as  a  sin  tolerated  and  protected  by  the  Consti- 
tution merely  for  the  sake  of  the  material  advantages  that  * 
flow  from  it,  what  adequate  security  has  the  South  that 
this  protection  will  not  be  withdrawn?  And,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  the  slave-trade  be  regarded  as  an  evil  of 
the  same  kind,  and  be  interdicted  for  no  higher  reasons, 
what  security  has  the  North  that  the  laws  interdicting  it 
will  not  be  repealed,  and  that  they  themselves  will  not 
join  in  their  repeal,  if,  by  some  turn  of  affairs,  it  should 
seem  to  be  for  their  interest  to  repeal  them?  For  it  is 
a  law  of  natuife  that  action  and  reaction  are  equal ;  and 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE.  263 

when  the  furious  blast  of  the  abolition  agitation  shall  have 
spent  its  force,  it  will  be  but  natural  that  it  should  be 
followed  first  by  the  secret  agitation,  and  next  by  the 
open  advocacy  of  the  slave-trade.  In  this  view  of  the 
subject,  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  our  common  coun- 
try are  baseless  and  mutable,  having  no  ground  of  per- 
manence, no  claim  to  reverence.  Or  rather,  we  have  no 
fundamental  laws,  but  are,  as  we  are  sometimes  re- 
proached with  being,  a  nation  void  of  principle,  and 
ready  to  legislate  in  any  direction  from  cupidity  and  the 
lust  of  dominion.  But  if  the  Constitution  and  laws  of 
our  country  are  really  founded,  as  I  believe  them  to  be, 
on  the  enduring  principles  of  justice,  liberty,  and  human 
rights  ;  if  they  protect  the  limited  slavery  that  is  already 
established  among  us  because  it  is  consistent  with  these 
principles :  and  if  they  denounce  the  African  slave-trade 
because  it  is  a  gross  and  wanton  infraction  of  these  prin- 
ciples, then  indeed  we  may  have  faith  in  their  perma- 
nence ;  for  then  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  our  Union 
are  settled  on  foundations  more  durable  than  the  ever- 
lasting hills;  and  all  who  live  under  them,  North  and 
South,  East  and  West,  may,  as  men,  citizens,  and  Chris- 
tians, unite  as  one  man  in  their  triumphant  vindication 
and  support. 

In  all  that  I  have  advanced  in  defense  of  slavery,  as  it 
is  established  under  the  laws  of  our  Southern  States,. I 
have  regarded  the  slaves  as  men,  made  in  the  image  of 
their  Maker ;  and  I  have  insisted  on  man's  natural  right 


264 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


to  the  use  of  his  liberty,  and  on  the  injustice  of  depriving 
him  of  it  by  violence,  and  without  some  act  or  acts  of  his 
own  that  involve  a  surrender  of  it.  From  this  theory  of 
slavery,  it  is  manifestly  impossible  to  draw  any  valid 
argument  in  favor  of  the  violent  seizure  or  purchase  of 
native  Africans  with  a  view  to  their  transportation,  sale, 
and  enslavement  in  other  countries.  The  two  things  are 
utterly  unlike ;  the  one  being,  as  I  have  endeavored  to 
to  show,  a  fulfil  nent  of  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  the 
other  being,  as  it  plainly  manifest,  an  unmitigated  viola- 
tion of  these  laws.  And  it  is  because  of  their  utter  dis- 
similarity, that  t  3  Constitution  and  laws  of  our  Union 
have  extended  the  shield  of  protection  over  the  one,  and 
fixed  the  ban  of  reprobation  on  the  other :  and  for  the  same 
reason,  our  Southern  brethren,  while  approving  and  up- 
holding their  own  social  institutions,  are  as  free,  in  point 
of  consistency,  as  are  we  at  the  North,  to  condemn  the 
African  slave-trade ;  and  as  much  bound  to  do  so  by  a 
consistent  regard  to  the  sacred  rights  of  humanity  and 
justice. 

The  wisdom  and  justice  of  the  Constitution  are  as 
manifest,  in  my  opinion,  in  regard  to  the  slave-trade, 
as  in  regard  to  the  slavery  which  it  found  already  estab- 
lished. It  discriminates  the  two  by  the  broadest  line  of 
demarcation  With  the  origin  of  slavery  in  the  several 
States  that  had  legalized  it,  it  did  not  meddle;  but, 
accepting  slavery  as  a  fact,  in  the  providence  of  God, 
already  established,  and  acknowledging  the  sacred  obli- 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


265 


gations  of  mutual  protection  and  service  which  it  in- 
volved, it  wisely  and  justly  provided  for  the  fulfillment 
of  those  obligations.  But  the  seizure,  purchase,  and 
importation  of  free  persons  from  abroad,  to  be  reduced 
to  slavery  within  the  limits  of  its  jurisdiction,  was  a 
very  different  matter.  This  wras  confessedly  an  evil,  a 
wrong,  a  violation  of  justice.  The  Constitution,  consist- 
ently with  its  design,  could  not  approve  this  injustice  ; 
nor,  in  fact,  does  it  say  one  word  which  can,  by  any  pos- 
sibility, be  tortured  into  an  approval.  It  recognized  the 
slave-trade  as  an  existing  evil,  but  as  an  evil  which  it 
was  not  in  the  power  of  human  government  immediately 
to  abolish.  Justice  demanded  its  extirpation,  and  wis- 
dom counseled  that,  like  all  deeply-rooted  evils,  wdiich 
are  only  aggravated  by  the  application  of  rash  and  inef- 
fectual remedies,  the  extirpation  should  be  gradual,  in 
order  to  be  certain :  and  hence,  with  united  wrisdom  and 
justice,  the  Constitution  makes  the  following  provision  : 
1 4  The  migration  or  importation  of  such  persons  as  any 
of  the  States  now  existing  shall  think  proper  to  admit, 
shall  not  be  prohibited  by  the  Congress  prior  to  the  year 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  eight ;  but  a  tax  or  duty 
may  be  imposed  on  such  importation,  not  exceeding  ten 
dollars  for  each  person.''  The  permission  to  import 
slaves  under  the  laws  of  any  State,  up  to  a  certain  time, 
is  an  implied,  indeed,  but  an  imperative  prohibition,  of 
such  importation  after  that  time ;  and  on  this  prohibition, 

12 


266 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


contained  in  the  Constitution,  Congress  has  grounded  its 
stringent  laws  in  respect  to  the  slave-trade. 

Thus  the  Constitution  and  the  laws  declarative  of  it, 
are  like  a  two-edged  sword,  which  deals  death  to  injus- 
tice and  impiety  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  Ser- 
vitude, and  the  rights  involved  in  it.  when  it  has  passed 
beyond  human  control,  and  become,  in  the  providence 
of  God,  interwoven  with  the  fabric  of  human  society,  are 
protected  from  the  invasion  of  ruthless  fanatics,  and  the 
intermeddling  of  pragmatical  busy-bodies ;  while  the 
slave-trade,  which  involves  no  social  ties,  which  has  not  a 
shadow  of  foundation  in  justice,  which  is,  in  its  inception, 
its  career  and  its  consummation,  pure  and  unmitigated 
villainy,  is  proscribed,  that  it  may  be,  as  far  as  possible, 
abolished  and  eradicated  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 

But  let  us  look  more  particularly  at  the  laws  respect- 
ing the  slave-trade,  and  the  reasons  for  them. 

The  native  inhabitants  of  Africa  are  in  a  wild  and 
uncultivated  state ;  uncivilized,  unchristianized.  The 
thought  of  waging  a  solemn  war  against  any  of  these 
ignorant  tribes  is  preposterous.  The  nations  of  Europe 
and  the  United  States  may  sometimes  find  it  necessary 
to  resort  to  severe  measures,  in  order  to  compel  their 
observance  of  contracts,  or  to  restrain  them  from  wreak- 
ing their  savage  cruelty  on  the  colonists  and  emigrants 
who  have  settled  on  their  coasts  :  but  in  this  warfare,  if 
such  it  may  be  called,  it  is  no  part  of  the  policy  of  civil- 
ized nations  to  make  or  retain  prisoners,  much  less  to 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


267 


reduce  prisoners  to  a  state  of  servitude.  Their  object 
is  to  protect  the  colonists,  or  to  punish  perfidious 
tribes.  In  the  prosecution  of  this  object,  it  may  occa- 
sionally be  necessary  to  capture  prisoners  for  some  tem- 
porary purpose,  possibly  to  put  them  to  death,  in  order 
to  strike  terror  into  the  native  tribes.  Such  cases,  how- 
ever, are  comparatively  rare.  The  capture  of  prisoners, 
under  national  authority,  is  not  the  way,  in  fact,  in  which 
African  slavery  has  been  originated  and  introduced  into 
Christian  countries ;  nor  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  any 
enlightened  nation  of  the  present  age  would  capture  pris- 
oners for  the  purpose  of  making  them  slaves,  much  less 
proclaim  a  foreign  people,  however  weak  and  ignorant, 
enemies,  for  the  sake  of  making  them  slaves.  Such  a 
course  would  be  in  violation  of  the  law  of  Nations ;  that 
is  to  say,  of  those  principles  of  the  law  of  Nature  by 
which  Christian  and  civilized  nations  have  consented  to 
be  governed. 

If  the  seizure  of  native  Africans  for  slaves  is  to  be 
effected  at  all,  it  must  be  effected  hereafter,  as  it  has 
been  heretofore,  by  individuals,  or  associations  of  indi- 
viduals, acting  on  their  own  responsibility,  independently 
of  the  nation  or  nations  to  which  they  belong,  and,  in 
most  cases,  in  violation  of  their  laws. 

By  what  possible  motives  can  such  seizure  be  justi- 
fied ?  The  Africans,  in  their  own  country,  however 
untutored  and  barbarous,  have  that  right  to  freedom 
which  belongs,  by  nature,  to  all  mankind.    On  what 


268 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


ground  of  justice  can  an  invader,  whatever  pretensions 
he  may  make  to  Christianity  and  civilization,  or  what- 
ever desires  he  may  affect  to  have  for  the  diffusion  of 
these  blessings,  deprive  them  of  this  right  by  violence? 
In  vain  will  he  allege,  in  his  justification,  that  the 
descendants  of  Africans  are  held  in  slavery  in  Christian 
countries,  and  under  Christian  laws.  This  fact  is  in  no 
respect  a  precedent,  and  furnishes  no  shadow  of  excuse 
for  bis  seizure  and  transportation  of  free  and  native 
Africans.  For,  have  they  or  their  parents  lived  on  his 
bounty  ?  Has  be  fed,  and  clothed,  and  sheltered  them, 
and  reared  them  to  man's  estate  ?  Is  he  bound  to  guard 
their  natural  lights  to  life  and  liberty,  to  maintain  them 
in  sickness  and  decrepitude,  and  to  provide  for  their 
offspring  ?  Does  he  stand  in  any  relation  to  them  on 
which  he  can  found  a  just  claim  to  their  service  ?  If  not, 
on  what  fact  can  he  rest  to  justify  himself  in  seizing 
them  and  treating  them  as  slaves  ?  Or,  having  seized 
and  appropriated  them,  on  what  fact  can  he  rest  to  justify 
himself  in  regarding  them  as  his  property,  and  selling 
them  to  others  ?  Certainly  none  ;  the  relation  in  which 
these  free  natives  stand  to  him,  and  the  relation  of  law- 
ful servants  to  their  master,  are  as  far  asunder  as  the 
poles  ;  they  owe  him  no  labor  or  service,  no  gratitude, 
no  affection,  no  debt  of  any  kind.  His  seizure  of  them 
is  an  act  of  sheer  diabolical  violence,  without  the  faintest 
shadow  or  semblance  of  justice  to  mitigate  its  atrocity. 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


269 


It  is  an  act  all  through  and  all  over  abominable,  and  for- 
ever to  be  detested  of  God  and  man. 

An  act  of  singular  and  acknowledged  impiety  and 
infamy,  but  without  an  appropriate  name.  For  by  what 
name  shall  we  designate  it  ?  It  is  not  precisely  theft, 
or  robbery,  or  kidnapping,  or  any  other  crime  :  for  these 
acts,  and  indeed  all  crimes,  in  the  technical  sehae,  are 
offenses  against  municipal  law.  But  these  Africans  are 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  no  civilized  or  Christian  people; 
he  who  seizes  them,  therefore,  breaks  none  of  those  laws 
by  which  his  own  nation  protects  its  citizens  and  inhab- 
itants in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights  and  liberties. 
Nay,  he  is  himself  an  outlaw,  and  rests  his  bodily  safety 
on  the  fact  that  he  is  out  of  the  reach  of  the  laws  of  his 
own  and  of  all  civilized  nations.    He  makes  himself 

AN    ENEMY   OF  THE    HUMAN    KIND,    and   sets   at  Open 

defiance  that  law  which  is  the  basis  of  all  municipal  law, 
the  law  of  Nature  itself.  In  these  respects  he  resembles 
the  PIRATE,  and  differs  from  him  only  in  making  the 
the  land,  instead  of  the  water,  the  scene  of  his  depreda- 
tion. Hence,  although  his  offenses  are  not  really  pir;? cy, 
yet  they  are  justly  declared  and  accounted  piracy,  by 
the  laws  of  Christian  and  civilized  nations  ;  and  he  him- 
self, and  all  who  are  accessory  to  his  offense  before  it  is 
committed,  are  justly  treated  as  pirates,  and  exposed  to 
the  scorn  and  hatred,  not  of  one  nation  only,  but  of  all 
mankind. 

But  some,  perhaps,  disclaiming  and  denouncing  the 


270 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


wanton  seizure  of  Africans  on  their  native  soil,  may  yet 
assert  the  right,  and  even  make  a  virtue  of  buying  them, 
in  order  to  save  them  from  death.  It  is  possible,  indeed, 
that  a  case  may  happen  in  which  the  negro,  to  escape 
from  torture  and  death,  may  consent  to  go  into  servitude, 
under  promise  of  protection  and  humane  treatment.  But 
such  cases,  if  not  wholly  imaginary,  are  at  least  so  rare 
as  not  to  be  worth  taking  into  account.  The  purchases 
effected  by  the  slave-trader,  and  by  which  alone  his 
traffic  can  be  made  to  gratify  his  cupidity,  are  of  a 
widely  different  kind.  He  sets  up  a  market  for  negroes, 
and  buys  them  of  any  one  that  will  decoy  them  to  the 
coast,  and  deliver  them  into  his  possession.  Instead  of 
seizing  them  himself,  he  stimulates  others  to  seize  them, 
and,  for  rum,  or  money,  or  a  few  paltry  trinkets,  he 
avails  himself  of  the  rapacity  and  violence  of  his  agents. 
Or  he  whets  the  avarice  and  cruelty  of  one  tribe  to  make 
a  prey  of  others,  and  buys  captives  of  the  conqueror  ; 
thus  instigating  the  native  tribes  to  mutual  and  fiendish 
wars,  for  the  mere  purpose  of  making  prisoners,  and 
selling  them  to  the  traders. 

The  plea  that  the  captured  are  prisoners  of  war,  and 
sold  and  bought  according  to  the  right  of  war,  is  one  of 
those  infamous  pretexts  with  which  hypocrisy  seeks  to 
varnish  deeds  of  villainy  with  a  show  of  decency.  In 
no  just  war,  much  less  in  an  unjust,  has  the  captor  a 
right  to  the  life  of  the  captive.  The  law  of  Nature 
gives  no  man  a  right  over  his  own  life,  much  less  over 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


271 


the  life  of  another  man ;  it  permits  us,  indeed,  to  take 
the  life  of  an  enemy  when  the  doing  so  becomes  neces- 
sary to  defeat  injustice  and  violence ;  but  when  an  ene- 
my becomes  a  prisoner,  this  necessity  ceases  to  exist ; 
and  to  deprive  him  of  his  life  without  necessity  is  mur- 
der. The  sale  of  a  prisoner,  therefore,  founded  on  this 
pretended  right  of  war,  is  essentially  unjust ;  not  only 
null  and  void,  but  vile  and  abominable,  as  being  an 
offense  not  necessarily  against  municipal  law,  but  neces- 
sarily and  always  against  that  law  of  Nature  which  all 
mankind  are  bound  to  observe  and  to  vindicate.  The 
man,  therefore,  who  buys  a  negro  on  this  pretext,  is  a 
partner  in  guilt  with  him  who  seizes  and  sells  him.  Less 
bold,  perhaps,  but  more  base  and  sneaking  than  the  kid- 
napper, he  is  deservedly  placed  in  the  same  category 
with  him,  and  branded  as  an  enemy  of  the  human  kind  ; 
and  if  tie  does  not  know  the  atrocity  of  his  nefarious 
traffic,  it  is  well  that  the  municipal  law  should  teach  it 
to  him,  by  declaring,  as  the  laws  of  the  United  States 
do  declare,  the  purchase  of  negroes  unlawfully  seized  to 
be  equally  piracy  with  the  seizure  itself. 

To  evade  the  force  of  these  arguments  it  is  sometimes 
contended  that  the  African  negroes  belong  to  an  inferior 
race,  and  that  the  white,  or  superior  race,  has.  on  the 
ground  of  its  superiority,  the  right  to  seize  and  trans- 
port them  into  distant  countries,  and  reduce  them  into 
slavery. 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  understand  this  argument.  Di- 


272 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


vine  Revelation,  in  this,  as  in  other  matters,  giving  dis- 
tinct utterance  to  the  voice  of  Nature,  informs  us  that 
God,  having  created  man,  blessed  him,  and  gave  him 
dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  fields,  over  the  fishes 
of  the  sea,  over  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  over  every  liv- 
ing thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth.  It  is  on  this 
grant  of  our  Maker,  inferred  by  reason,  expressed  by 
Revelation,  that  we  rest  the  right  of  man  to  dominion 
over  the  brute  creation.  The  subject  of  the  grant  is 
man,  mankind,  all  men ;  and  the  matter  of  the  grant  is 
an  absolute  and  universal  dominion  over  all  other  crea- 
tures on  earth.  Man  can  not  be  at  once  the  subject  and 
the  object  of  the  grant ;  no  man,  therefore,  has  an  abso- 
lute right  to  use  other  men,  but  every  man  and  all  men 
have  the  right  to  use  inferior  creatures  for  their  benefit. 

They,  therefore,  who  would  justify  the  seizure  and 
enslavement  of  African  negroes  on  the  ground  of  their 
inferiority,  are  bound  to  explain  their  meaning.  Do 
they  mean  that  the  blacks  are  inferior  to  the  wdiites  in 
kind  ?  that  the  whites  constitute  the  entire  human  kind, 
and  that  the  blacks  are  not  included  in  this  kind? 
If  this  be  their  meaning,  then,  the  consequence  is 
good.  For  man  is  lord  of  the  earth,  and  has  a  ju  t 
title  to  dominion  over  creatures  inferior  to  himself  in 
kind ;  and  by  the  same  right  that  he  subjugates  other 
inferior  creatures  to  his  use,  some  for  food,  others  for 
clothing,  others  for  labor,  he  may  seize  the  negro  and 
doom  him  to  servitude,  or  make  any  other  use  of  him  he 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


273 


sees  to  be  for  his  own  advantage.  But,  though  the  con- 
sequence be  good,  the  premise  is  utterly  false.  For,  let 
men  magnify  the  differences  as  they  will,  between  the 
two  races,  they  are,  after  all,  accidental,  and  not  essen- 
tial. The  color  of  the  skin,  the  quality  of  the  hair,  and 
the  peculiar  anatomical  structure  which  is  supposed  to 
give  aeuteness  to  the  senses  of  the  negro  at  the  expense 
of  his  intellectual  vigor,  do  not  enter  into  the  definition 
of  man.  The  erect  figure,  the  power  of  articulate  speech, 
the  reasonable  soul,  with  its  marvelous  endowments  of 
conscience  and  will,  are  attributes  of  the  black  as  well 
as  the  white  ;  and  the>e  constitute  the  man.  If  they  mean 
that  the  inferiority  is  not  in  kind,  but  in  degree,  then, 
though  the  premise  is  good,  the  consequence  fails  ;  for  both 
being  of  the  same  kind,  have  the  same  natural  rights  to 
life  and  liberty  ;  and  the  superiority  of  bodily  or  mental 
conformation  gives  the  one  race  no  more  right  to  lord  it 
over  the  other,  than  one  man's  strong  habit  of  mind  or 
body  gives  him  a  right  of  dominion  over  his  feeble  neighbor. 

Again,  it  is  argued  by  some  who  admit  the  iniquity 
of  the  slave-trade,  that  it  is  impossible  to  repress  it  ; 
that  its  cruelties  are  greatly  increased  by  its  secret  and 
contraband  character ;  and  that,  therefore,  a  humane 
policy  demands  that  government  should  permit  it. 

There  are  three  ways  in  which  an  evil  may  be  per- 
mitted by  the  municipal  law.^    The  law  may  wholly 

*  See  Bp.  Sanderson's  Sixtli  Prelection,  De  Leg.  Human.  Materia, 
Sect,  18. 


274 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


pretermit  and  pass  it  by,  and  in  this  way  it  must  permit 
many  evils,  it  being  the  singular  prerogative  of  the 
Divine  law  to  prohibit  all  evil.  But  the  slave-trade  is 
too  public  and  audacious  to  be  passed  by  in  silence  ;  a . 
permission  of  this  sort  would,  under  the  circumstances, 
be  tantamount  to  an  approval.  Again,  the  State  may 
define  certain  limits,  beyond  which  an  evil  shall  be 
guilty  and  punishable,  and  within  which  it  shall  be  inno- 
cent and  safe.  But  this  sort  of  permission  can  only  be 
extended  to  evils  which  are  not  essentially  such  ;  by 
which  I  mean  such  as  are  not  forbidden  by  the  Divine 
law,  either  natural  or  positive,  but  are  entirely  within 
the  power  of  the  State,  and  are  the  proper  matter  of 
human  laws.  But  piracy,  or  evils  equivalent  to  it,  are 
not  of  this  sort ;  the  State  can  not  make  them  innocent 
in  any  form  or  degree,  nor  extend  protection  to  their  per- 
petrators and  abettors.  Again,  an  evil,  essentially  such, 
may  be  so  deeply  rooted  that  it  is  impossible  to  eradicate 
it  by  prohibitions  ;  and  then  the  State,  with  a  view  to 
regulate  an  evil  wThich  it  can  not  abolish,  may  tolerate  it 
by  imposing  a  tax  or  fine,  and  making  it  a  source  of 
revenue.  This  is  a  desperate  and  perilous  sort  of  legis- 
lation, one  which  is  common  under  the  worst  govern- 
ments of  the  old  country,  but  which  has  never,  to  my 
knowledge,  been  adopted  in  this  country,  either  by  our 
State  or  Federal  Governments,  unless  the  action  of  the 
Federal  Government,  in  respect  to  the  slave-trade,  be  an 
exception.    For  Congress  did,  in  the  beginning  of  our 


THE  AFRICAN  oL AVE-TRADE. 


275 


national  existence,  in  this  way  permit  the  slave-trade  for 
a  limited  time,  laying  a  tax  on  every  slave  imported.  It 
may,  I  suppose,  without  transcending  its  function  as  a 
minister  of  the  law  of  Nature,  do  the  same  thing  again, 
if  demanded  by  a  manifest  expediency.  But  as  the 
effect  of  the  prohibition  of  the  slave-trade  has  been  to 
guard  the  slavery  established  among  us  before  our  inde- 
pendence, from  accessions  by  violence,  and  thus  to  allow 
its  growth  and  expansion  as  a  just,  peaceful,  and  orderly 
institution ;  so  the  repeal  of  the  prohibition  and  the 
renewal  of  the  former  permission  :  in  a  word,  the  reopen- 
ing of  the  slave  trade  under  the  sanction  of  Congress, 
would  in  no  long  time  change  the  character  of  domestic 
slavery,  and  deprive  it  of  all  color  of  just  support. 
Africans  openly  seized  and  enslaved  by  violence  would 
be  worked  with  cruelty  ;  humane  masters  would  be 
driven  in  self-defense  to  practice  the  rigors  of  the  mer- 
cenary and  unscrupulous  ;  the  horrors  of  the  old  West 
Indian  system  would  be  reenacted  ;  and  the  slavery  in 
our  Southern  States  to  which  its  patrons  now  point  with 
honest  pride,  would  become  all  that  its  worst  enemies 
declare  it  to  be ;  the  creature  of  inhuman  fraud  and  vio- 
lence, and  a  monstrous  excrescence  on  Christian  and 
civilized  society.  In  this  view  of  the  case,  it  is  plain 
that  the  evils  which  would  enure  to  the  Southern  States 
on  the  reopening  of  the  slave  trade  would  be  infinitely 
greater  than  those  which  are  consequent  on  its  secret  and 
contraband  character. 


276 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


I  have  never  yet  seen  an  objection  to  the  laws  of  the 
United  States  respecting  the  slave-trade,  which  was 
entitled,  in  my  humble  opinion,  to  a  moment's  con- 
sideration. 

I  have,  indeed,  seen  it  alleged  that  these  laws  make 
an  unjust  discrimination  against  slave  labor,  inasmuch 
as  they  do  not  leave  it,  like  other  vendibles,  to  the  law 
of  demand  and  supply  alone.  But  this  objection  is 
grounded,  as  it  seems  to  me,  on  a  total  misapprehension; 
for  the  laws  of  the  United  States,  I  believe,  make  no 
such  discrimination,  but,  on  the  contrary,  leave  slave 
labor  to  be  bought  and  sold,  to  be  let  and  hired,  according 
to  the  law  of  supply  and  demand  alone.  The  few  restrict- 
ions (would  to  God  they  were  greater  and  more  numer- 
ous !)  which  exist,  are  merely  designed  to  secure  such 
humane  treatment  for  slaves  as  is  accorded  to  infants,  or 
minors,  who  are  put  out  to  work  by  their  guardians ;  and 
these  proceed  from  the  laws  and  enlightened  public  opin- 
ion of  the  States  in  which  slavery  is  established.  The 
Federal  Government  has  nothing  to  do  with  slave  labor,  as 
an  article  of  trade ;  and  Congress  has  not  passed,  and  can 
not  pass,  a  discriminative  law,  either  for  or  against  it; 
has  not  attempted  to  regulate  or  touch  it,  in  any  way 
whatsoever,  as  an  article  of  trade  or  commerce.  The 
simple  design  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States  respect- 
ing the  slave-trade,  is  to  prohibit  piracy,  and  the  impor- 
tation into  the  ports  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United 
States,  of  persons  piratically  seized.    The  laws  presume 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


277 


that  the  persons  whose  importation  it  forbids  are  not  the 
property  of  those  who  hold  and  seek  to  import  them,  are 
not  persons  to  whose  labor  any  other  man  than  them- 
selves has  a  right;  but  that  they  are  persons  who  have 
been  stolen,  or  kidnapped,  and  forcibly,  illegally,  and 
unjustly,  dragged  from  their  homes;  or  who  have  been 
bought  and  kept  for  sale  by  those  who  have  no  shadow 
of  right  or  title  to  hold  them.  And  the  laws  justly  pre- 
sume this  ;  for  such  is  in  fact  the  case  with  respect  to 
those  persons  whom  it  is  sought  to  import  from  a  foreign 
country  into  any  of  the  United  States,  to  be  sold  as 
slaves.  Prove  that  you  have  a  just  claim  to  the  service 
of  these  persons,  either  by  their  own  express  consent,  or 
by  your  having  nurtured  them  on  the  condition  that  they 
should  requite  your  nurture  by  their  subsequent  labor, 
or  by  your  having  bought  them  of  others  who  had  such 
just  claim;  prove  this,  I  say,  and  then  you  may  affirm, 
with  at  least  a  color  of  truth,  and  without  audacity,  that 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  are  unjust  to  the  South, 
by  discriminating  against  slave-labor. 

It  would  be  easy  to  extend  this  argument,  should  an 
attempt  be  ever  made  to  repeal  the  laws  of  the  United 
States,  which  declare  the  slave-trade  to  be  piracy.  But 
I  anticipate  no  such  attempt.  Slavery,  considered  as  a 
domestic  institution,  is  defensible  on  grounds  of  right  and 
justice  ;  and  I  see  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  South- 
ern States,  while  they  continue  in  the  Union,  will 


278 


THE  AFKICAX  SLAVE-TRADE. 


surrender  this  ground  of  defense ;  as  they  clearly 
would  do,  were  they  to  commit  themselves  to  a  measure 
which  has  no  color  of  justice,  and  nothing  to  recom- 
mend it  but  a  base  cupidity,  clothing  itself  in  the  garb 
of  a  hypocritical  philanthropy.  There  may  be  men  at 
the  South  who  adopt,  with  an  application  of  their  own, 
the  logic  common  at  the  North;  who  admit  that  the 
slave-trade  is  an  evil,  but  think  that  it  may  be  justified 
by  what  they  fancy  to  be  the  necessity  of  their  position, 
and  who  persuade  themselves  that  they  may,  by  this 
means,  become  instruments  in  the  hands  of  Providence 
for  civilizing  and  christianizing  the  benighted  Africans  : 
forgetting  that  Providence  uses  the  vile  as  well  as  the 
good  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes,  and  that 
they  are  but  vile  instruments  in  His  hands  whensoever, 
and  under  what  pretext  soever,  they  give  their  sanction 
tc  acts  of  injustice  and  oppression.  These  men,  indeed, 
may  agitate  the  repeal  of  the  laws  which  declare  the 
slave-trade  to  be  piracy,  but  I  can  not  believe  that  they 
express  the  settled  sense  and  determination  of  the  South, 
nor  that  the  considerate  men  of  the  South  will  thus  pro- 
nounce their  own  condemnation  in  the  face  of  Christen- 
dom and  at  the  bar  of  Eternal  Justice.  On  the  con- 
trary, I  believe  that  the  South  will  unite  with  the  North, 
and  with  nearly  the  same  unanimity,  in  the  belief  that 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  making  the  slave-trade 
piracy  are,  equally  with  the  laws  which  require  fugitives 


THE  AFRICAN  SLAVE-TRADE. 


279 


from  service  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  parties  to  whom 
the  service  is  due,  declarative  of  the  law  of  Nature,  and 
consequently,  for  the  matter  of  them,  bound  on  the  con- 
sciences of  citizens  by  more  awful  sanctions  than  any 
which  the  municipal  authority  can  impose. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


THE    ARGUMENT   FROM  SCRIPTURE. 

Slavery  is  a  word  of  large  extent.  Prisoners  and 
captives  of  war,  criminals  deprived  of  their  liberty  by 
process  of  law.  persons  piratically  seized  and  reduced  to 
bondage  by  violence,  the  serfs  and  villeins  of  other  times 
and  places,  and  servants  for  life  in  our  own  country — 
all  come  under  the  general  denomination  of  slaves. 

In  this  country  we  have  come  very  naturally  to  appro- 
priate the  word  slavery  to  that  form  of  servitude  which 
exists  among  ourselves.  To  know  what  the  word  slavery 
means  in  our  use  of  it,  wre  must  first  inquire  what  this 
form  of  servitude  is  ;  not  what  it  is  vaguely  and  in  its 
accidents  and  abuses,  but  what  it  is  precisely  and  in  its 
essence.  And  the  definition  must  be  in  accordance  with 
facts  ;  that  is,  it  must  express,  not  what  slavery  has  been 
in  other  times  and  places,  nor  what  it  may  be  or  might 
have  been,  but  what  it  actually  is  in  our  own  country 
and  at  the  present  time. 

I  have  defined  a  slave  to  be  a  person  who  is  related 
to  society  through  another  person,  called  a  master,  to 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


281 


zvhom  he  owes  reasonable  service  for  life,  and  from 
whom  he  is  entitled  to  receive  support  and  protection. 
This  definition  I  believe  to  be  in  accordance  with  facts  ; 
in  other  words,  I  believe  that  those  persons  called  slaves 
in  our  Southern  States,  are  persons  bora  on  the  soil  and 
under  such  circumstances  (circumstances  not  of  our 
choosing  but  of  God's  ordering)  that  a  debt  of  service  is 
the  very  condition  of  their  life.  For  we  are  not  a  nation  of 
pirates  and  freebooters  ;  we  do  not  fit  out  vessels  against 
an  ignorant  and  unoffending  people,  to  seize  them  and 
import  them  into  our  country,  and  reduce  them  to  bond- 
age. We  have  never  done  this;  our  mother  country  has 
never  done  it ;  no  nation  in  modern  Europe  has  done  it. 
The  work  has  been  done  by  combinations  of  lawless  men. 
And  although  Great  Britain  may  have  been  remiss  and 
tardy  in  restraining  such  violence,  yet  we,  in  this  respect, 
have  no  ground  of  self-reproach.  For,  from  the  very 
beginning  of  our  Confederacy,  we  took  means  to  arrest 
this  evil,  and,  as  soon  as  practicable,  enacted  stringent 
laws,  with  a  view  to  its  suppression.  More  than  fifty 
years — nearly  two  generations — have  passed  since  these 
laws  were  in  force.  However  much,  therefore,  we  may 
lament  and  condemn  the  way  in  which  slavery  origin- 
ated in  our  country,  or  the  accessions  (comparatively 
very  small)  which  have  since  been  made  to  it  in  tha 
same  way,  yet  Ave  are  not  responsible  for  either;  we 
gave  no  sanction  to  the  former,  and  have  done  all  that 
we  could  do  to  prevent  the  latter.    We  are,  therefore, 


282 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


entitled  to  throw  out  of  the  account  both  the  origin  of 
slavery,  and  the  few  and  accidental  accessions  it  may 
receive  from  acts  of  violence  which  our  laws  prohibit ; 
and  to  declare  the  slaves  of  our  country  to  be,  what  in 
truth  and  fact  they  are,  a  class  of  persons  born  and 
grown  on  our  soil,  under  an  obligation  of  service  which 
the  laws  of  God  and  man  require  them  to  fulfill, 

And,  as  we  are  not  a  nation  of  freebooters  and  pirates, 
so  neither  are  we  a  barbarous  and  unchristian  nation, 
permitting  our  people  to  exercise  an  absolute  dominion 
over  their  subordinates  and  dependents.  The  laws  of 
ancient  Rome,  which  permitted  a  master  to  mutilate  his 
slaves  or  put  them  to  death  by  scores  and  hundreds  at  a 
time,  for  venial  or,  perhaps,  only  suspected  offenses,  are 
no  criterion  by  which  to  judge  of  slavery  in  our  South- 
ern States.  The  power  of  masters  is  restrained  among 
us  both  by  law  and  by  public  opinion,  within  narrower, 
and  but  for  the  scandalous  abuse  of  the  right  of  trans- 
fer I  would  say,  within  reasonable  limits  :  and  hence  we 
are  entitled  to  regard  the  slaves  that  exist  in  our  coun- 
try, not  as  persons  who  are  under  the  absolute  power  of 
their  masters,  but  as  persons  who  are  subject  to  such 
coercion  as  is  necessary  to  exact,  from  them  the  service 
or  labor  they  owe  in  return  for  their  food  and  shelter. 

In  bringing  the  question  to  the  arbitrament  of  Scrip- 
ture, it  is  proper  to  distinguish  that  form  of  slavery  for 
which  we  hold  ourselves  responsible,  as,  from  all  other 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


283 


forms,  so,  particularly,  from  that  unjust  deprivation  of 
liberty  which  is  effected  by  lawless  violence. 

When  St.  Paul  enjoins  servants  to  obey  their  mas- 
ters in  all  things,  he  uses  a  word  for  servants  (SovXoC)^ 
which  comprises  several  sorts  of  persons  restrained  of 
liberty,  and  his  precept  is,  consequently,  to  be  taken  in 
a  sense  suited  to  the  condition  of  that  class  of  servants 
to  which  it  may  be  applied.  On  prisoners  and  captives 
held  by  lawless  violence,  or  subject  to  absolute  power, 
he  enjoins  obedience  as  an  alleviation  of  their  unhappy 
lot,  which  would  be  aggravated  by  resistance,  and  ren- 
dered more  tolerable  by  patience  and  submission.  On 
those  who  are  bound  to  service,  either  for  a  term  of  time 
or  for  life,  the  precept  must  be  understood  to  enjoin  obe- 
dience according  to  the  nature  and  condition  of  the  ser- 
vice to  which  they  are  bound.  To  slaves  of  the  former 
class,  i.  e.,  to  prisoners  or  captives  who  have  been  forci- 
bly and  unjustly  seized  and  compelled  to  labor,  at  the  oar 
for  example,  or  in  the  mines,  he  would  say,  Obey  your 
masters  in  all  things,  as  becomes  your  sad  condition,  and 
make  your  chains  as  easy  as  you  can,  by  your  compli- 
ance and  submission.  To  slaves  of  the  latter  class,  i.  e., 
to  persons  who  are  justly  bound  to  service,  either  for  a 
term  of  time  or  for  life,  he  wTould  be  understood  to  say  : 
Obey  your  masters  in  all  things  according  to  the  contract, 
express  or  implied,  by  which  you  are  bound ;  or  to  use 
Bishop  Fleetwood's  paraphrase:  "Behave  yourselves  to 
your  masters  as  diligently  and  faithfully  as  you  have 


284  THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


promised  them  to  do  :  or  by  the  custom  of  the  place  (in 
which  you  live)  are  presumed  to  have  promised  them"* 

Now.  if  the  slavery  which  exists  in  our  country  were 
upheld  in  violation  of  right  and  justice,  although  we 
might,  after  the  example  of  the  Apostles,  inculcate  on 
the  slave  the  duty  of  patience  and  submission,  yet  we 
should  be  constrained  to  confess  that  the  relation  in  which 
he  stood  was  unnatural,  and  that  the  authority  to  which 
he  was  subjected  was  a  usurpation.  But,  as  I  offer  no 
apology  for  this  kind  of  slavery,  and  have  no  need  to  press 
into  my  support  those  precepts  which  require  of  the 
slave  what,  indeed,  is  required  of  every  man,  patience 
and  submission  to  the  hardships  of  his  lot,  so  I  am  not 
solicitous  to  repel  the  inferences  which  may  be  drawn 
from  these  precepts,  in  this  sense  of  them,  to  show  the 
injustice  and  impiety  of  slavery  and  slaveholders. 

In  appealing  to  the  Scriptures,  therefore,  the  question 
on  which  I  would  insist  is,  whether  that  form  of  slavery 
which  I  have  defined,  and  which  is  known  to  exist  in  our 
country,  be,  or  be  not  forbidden  in  the  Scriptures  ?  If 
it  be,  then  all  our  reasonings  in  its  defense  are  delusive, 
and  must  go  for  nothing  ;  if  it  be  not,  then  we  are  at 
liberty  to  uphold  it :  to  regard  the  relation  of  master  and 
slave,  as  it  exists  among  us,  as  a  lawful  relation ;  and  to 
consider  it  as  fairly  coming  under  those  apostolical  pre- 
cepts which  enjoin  masters  to  be  gentle  and  forbearing, 
and  which  enjoin  servants  to  "  obey  their  masters  in  all 

*  Works:  Fol.  Ed.,  p.  311. 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


285 


things;"  not  in  that  sense  which  requires  of  them 
patience  and  submission  under  usurped  authority,  but  in 
the  other  sense,  which  requires  them  to  be  diligent  and 
faithful  in  a  service  which  they  are  bound  to  perform. 

Now,  it  is  readily  admitted  that  the  form  of  slavery 
for  which  the  American  people  are  (a  large  portion  of 
them  directly)  responsible,  contains  some  features  that 
are  exceedingly  repulsive  to  those  who  are  accustomed  to 
no  other  restraints  of  personal  liberty  than  such  as  are 
imposed  by  the  municipal  law  of  the  country  in  which 
tbey  live.  It  gives  the  master,  not  indeed  an  absolute, 
but  a  large  discretionary  power  over  his  servants ;  vests 
him  with  a  right  to  their  labor  for  life,  and  allows  him  to 
transfer  this  right  to  others ;  to  invest  any  purchaser  he 
may  please  with  the  same  power  over  the  bodies  of  his 
servants  which  he  possesses  himself.  This  certainly  is  a 
power  liable*  to  fearful  abuses.  It  may  seem  to  us  ante- 
cedently probable  that  our  blessed  Lord,  who  came  to 
reform  the  world,  would  never  allow  His  followers  to  be 
clothed  with  such  power ;  would  forbid  them,  under  all 
circumstances,  to  hold,  or  claim  to  hold  a  right  to  the 
service  or  labor  of  other  men  for  life,  and  to  the  use  of 
their  natural  liberty :  or  at  least,  if  He  suffered  them  to 
claim  and  hold  this  right,  that  He  would  not  permit  them 
to  transfer  it  to  a  stranger  for  money.  But  we  are  in  no 
sort  judges  beforehand  of  what  it  was  fit  for  our  Lord  to 
do.  It  may,  for  aught  we  know,  have  seemed  good  to 
Him  that  some  of  His  followers  should  be  entrusted  with 


286 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


this  large  power  for  their  more  effectual  probation ;  for 
the  development,  possibly,  of  virtues  which  could  not 
otherwise  be  manifested,  and  for  a  demonstration  to  the 
world  of  the  efficacy  of  His  gospel  in  restraining  and 
regulating  an  authority  which,  before  His  time,  had  been 
abused  beyond  measure,  and  almost  beyond  belief.  We 
are  totally  incompetent  to  judge  beforehand  what  regula- 
tions it  was  proper  for  Him  to  make  on  this  subject. 
Our  inquiry  is,  or  ought  to  be,  simply  into  the  fads  of 
the  case.  Has  our  Lord  in  fact  interdicted  this  sort  of 
power  and  authority  to  His  followers?  Have  His  apos- 
tles done  so?  Did  His  Church  do  so  in  the  age  succeed- 
ing the  apostles,  when  their  instructions  were  remem- 
bered, and  best  understood  ? 

Now,  the  fact  is,  that  we  have  no  prohibition  of  this 
sort,  either  from  our  Lord,  or  from  His  apostles,  or 
from  the  ancient  Church.  Certainly  there  *was  no  want 
of  occasion  or  opportunity  for  such  prohibition.  The 
purchase  and  sale  of  the  right  to  the  use  of  men's  labor 
and  liberty,  or  property  in  men,  as  it  is  commonly, 
though  vaguely  called,  had  been  permitted  among  the 
Hebrews,  and  was  a  matter  cf  every  day  practice  among 
the  Greeks  and  Romans ;  it  could  not  possibly  have  es- 
caped the  observation  of  our  Lord  and  His  apostles,  nor 
could  its  fearful  abuses  have  been  unknown  to  them. 
And  yet  the  fact  is,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  Scrip- 
tures of  the  New  Testament  which  either  expressly,  or 
by  implication,  forbids  it. 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


287 


But  the  prohibition,  though  neither  expressed  or  im- 
plied in  the  letter  of  the  New  Testament,  is  found  by 
some  in  its  spirit.  There  were  evils;  it  is  said,  which 
Christ,  for  wise  reasons,  did  not  specifically  and  directly 
forbid,  but  left  to  be  gradually  restrained,  and  finally 
abolished  by  the  silent  and  indirect  influence  of  His  gos- 
pel, or  of  those  general  principles  which  He  has  enunci- 
ated in  His  gospel.  Such  evils  were  polygamy,  war,  and 
slavery. 

I  shall  not  stop  to  question  the  legitimacy  of  the 
theory  here  implied.  I  shall  admit,  for  argument's  sake, 
that  our  Blessed  Lord,  while  proclaiming  all  needful 
truth  of  a  general  nature,  reserved  some  doctrine,  of  a 
more  specific  kind,  which  the  world  was  not  then  in  a 
temper  to  receive,  and  entrusted  it  to  His  apostles  and 
their  successors,  to  be  afterwards  unfolded  and  applied,  in 
the  shape  of  positive  or  negative  precept,  as  men  would 
be  able  to  bear  it.  To  be  sure,  this  is  commonly  thought 
to  be  a  very  Papistical  tenet :  but  the  odium  attached  to 
the  avowal  of  it  will  be  considerably  lightened  when  it  is 
shared  in  common  with  Protestants  of  the  Independent 
persuasion.  But  I  must  be  permitted  to  question  the 
applicability  of  the  theory  to  the  case  in  hand.  I  do 
not  believe  that  our  Lord  reserved  any  doctrine  to  be 
authoritatively  developed  by  Protestants  in  Women's 
Rights,  Moral  Reform,  Temperance,  or  Anti-Slavery 
Societies.  Whatever  I  may  think  of  the  developments 
of  Rome  and  Trent  (and  they  are  not  here  in  question). 


288 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


I  must  be  allowed  to  distrust  those  that  come  from  Prov- 
idence, Rhode  Island,  or  from  Oberlin,  in  whatever  State 
or  Territory  Oberlin  may  be. 

Let  us  look  at  the  pretended  parallels. 

1.  And  first,  it  has  become  common  to  class  polygamy 
raid  slavery  together  ;  and  to  argue  that,  as  polygamy 
was  anciently  permitted  by  God,  and  afterwards  abro- 
gated, so  slavery,  though  permitted  under  previous  dis- 
pensations, was  meant  to  expire  under  the  Christian 
dispensation. 

But  where  is  the  parallel  ?  The  marriage  of  one  man 
to  one  woman,  so  that  "they  twain"  should  be  u  one 
flesh,"  was  instituted  at  the  beginning  by  God's  positive 
law.  Under  the  patriarchal  and  Jewish  dispensations, 
the  author  of  the  law  saw  fit  to  dispense  with  its  rigid 
observance.  When  Christ  came  into  the  world,  He,  in 
the  name  of  His  Father,  annulled  the  temporary  relaxa- 
tion, and  reaffirmed  the  original  law.  By  the  original 
law,  thus  reaffirmed,  divorce  (save  for  the  one  cause) 
and  polygamy  are  forbidden.  The  apostles  provided 
for  giving  effect  to  this  law,  as  promptly  and  stringently 
as  could  be,  consistently  with  ties  and  obligations  formed 
previously  to  the  reenactment  of  the  law.  The  extinc- 
tion of  polygamy,  therefore,  which  rapidly  followed,  was 
not  at  all  consequent  on  the  indirect  influence  of  the 
gospel,  but  was  diretly  consequent  on  the  repeal  of  the 
relaxation  and  the  reaffirmation  of  the  original  law. 

But  where  is  the  original  lawr  which  was  dispensed  in 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


289 


order  to  the  introduction  of  slavery?  Where  is  the 
record  of  the  dispensation  ?  Where  is  the  enactment  or 
reenactment  of  any  divine  law  prohibiting  slavery  ? 
There  is  only  one  point  of  resemblance  between  the  two 
cases  ;  and  that  is,  that  polygamy  and  slavery  were  both 
permitted  under  the  patriarchal  and  Mosaic  dispensa- 
tions. In  all  other  respects  the  parallel  fails  ;  and  the 
discontinuance  of  polygamy,  in  virtue  of  its  express 
abrogation  by  the  divine  law,  presents  not  a  shadow  of 
reason  for  expecting  a  discontinuance  of  slavery,  as  more 
agreeable  to  the  gospel,  without  such  abrogation. 

2.  The  case  of  war  is  more  in  point.  Christianity, 
by  its  indirect  influence,  i.  e.,  by  quickening  the  prin- 
ciples of  justice  and  benevolence,  and  binding  men  more 
closely  in  the  bonds  of  a  common  humanity,  has  done 
much  towards  the  prevention  of  unjust  Avars,  and  to 
mitigate  the  horrors  of  all  wars.  Admit  the  parallel, 
and  what  does  it  prove  ?  Why,  only  this  :  that  Chris- 
tianity has  done  much  to  abrogate  unjust  slavery,  and  to 
lessen  the  evils  of  all  slavery.  But  if  the  spirit  of  the 
gospel  were  to  prevail  universally,  there  would  be  no 
war ;  and  hence,  it  is  argued,  there  would  be  no  slavery. 
But  this  by  no  means 'follows,  for  it  is  just  here  that  the 
parallel  fails.  For,  why  would  wars  cease  ?  Because 
there  would  be  no  injuries,  and  therefore  no  need  even 
of  a  just  war  to  redress  them.  But  slavery,  or  that 
form  of  it  which  we  are  defending,  is  founded  in  the 
wants  of  human  nature,  or  at  least  of  human  society ;  it 

18 


290  THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


is  not  designed  to  defend  us  from  violence,  or  to  repel 
wrongs,  but  to  diversify  labor  in  ways  consistent  with 
innocence  and  justice,  to  coerce  the  vagrant  and  indolent 
to  needful  industry,  to  subsist  the  poor,  to  enable  those  who 
are  unfit  for  bodily  labor  to  devote  their  time  and  talents 
to  the  development  of  other  sources  of  social  wealth,  and 
thus  to  bind  together  the  head,  and  feet,  and  all  the 
members  of  the  political  body  in  mutual  concord.  So 
that  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  if  it  universally  prevailed, 
though  it  should  exterminate  war,  would  but  purify 
servitude. 

3.  Dismissing  the  alleged  parallels,  let  us  glance  at 
the  application  of  the  argument  to  the  case,  for  the  illus- 
tration of  which  the  parallels  are  adduced.  The  argu- 
ment is  that  though  the  gospel  does  not  directly  forbid 
slavery,  yet  it  provides  for  its  extirpation  by  indirect  in- 
fluence ;  and  the  reasons  assigned  for  this  conclusion  are 
such  as  follow. 

In  the  first  place  it  is  contended  that  the  Gospel  pro- 
claims general  principles^  the  strict  and  faithful  observ- 
ance of  which  would  be  incompatible  with  the  existence 
of  slavery ;  as,  for  example,  the  gospel  requires  every 
man  to  love  his  neighbor  as  himself,  and  to  do  to  others 
as  he  would  have  others  to  do  to  him. 

Now,  observe,  we  start  with  the  admission  that  the 
gospel  does  not  forbid  the  relation  of  master  and  slave, 
but,  as  respects  the  letter,  permits  it.  Here,  then,  we 
are  precipitated  upon  this  extraordinary  conclusion,  viz., 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


291 


that  a  man  can  not  obey,  in  the  fullness  of  their  spirit, 
the  precepts  of  the  Divine  Lawgiver,  without  renouncing 
and  subverting  the  very  relation  which  those  precepts 
are  intended  to  regulate.  That  the  precepts  of  love  and 
equity  enjoined  on  us  by  our  Blessed  Lord,  have  no  such 
tendency  as  is  supposed  to  impair  and  ultimately  subvert 
the  relation  of  master  and  slave,  will  be  apparent  if  we 
take  the  precepts  with  those  limitations  which  common 
sense  requires,  and  which  we  give  them  when  we  apply 
them  to  every  other  relation  of  life.  I  am  to  love  my 
neighbor,  not  in  the  same  measure  (which  is  impossible) 
but  with  the  same  sincerity  that  I  love  myself ;  and  I 
am  to  do  to  others,  not  all  that  I  might  selfishly  and 
lawlessly  wish,  but  all  that  I  could  reasonably  desire 
them,  consistently  with  duty,  to  do  to  me,  were  I  in 
their  place  and  they  in  mine.  I  can  see  that  the  master, 
guided  by  these  precepts,  would  have  strong  motives  to 
the  humane  and  generous  treatment  of  his  slaves ;  but  I 
can  not  see  that  the  spirit  of  the  precepts,  in  any  reason- 
able construction  of  them,  is  inconsistent  with  the  perpe- 
tuity of  the  relation. 

Another  reason  for  the  opinion  that  the  gospel  is  in- 
directly adverse  to  slavery  is,  that,  as  the  gospel  diffuses 
light  and  knowledge,  and  slavery  requires  the  soul  to  be 
kept  in  darkness,  the  two  can  not  permanently  coexist ; 
and  as  the  gospel  is  to  triumph,  slavery  must  succumb 
and  perish. 

Pray,  of  what  gospel  is  this  said  ?     The  gospel  of 


292 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


Christ  and  His  apostles,  or  the  gospel  of  my  Lord 
Brougham  and  his  schoolmasters  ?  That  the  dissemina- 
tion of  "  Useful  Knowledge,"  as  it  is  called,  which  sup- 
poses the  art  of  reading  to  be  the  first  step  of  human 
advancement,  which  multiplies  books  and  tracts  to  save 
men  from  thinking  and  to  nurse  them  in  learned  idleness,5* 
or  to  fill  their  heads  with  false  notions  of  human  rights 
and  fallacious  theories  of  human  society ;  filling  their 
hearts,  also,  with  discontent,  envy,  and  hatred,  and  un- 
fitting them,  head  and  heart,  for  any  humble  and  subor- 
dinate station,  in  which  God's  providence  may  have 
placed  them  ;  that  this  sort  of  light  may  lead  to  the 
extinction  of  slavery  if  permitted  to  penetrate  it  is  like 
enough.  But  this  sort  of  light  is  so  far  from  being  an 
indirect  influence  of  Christianity,  that  it  does  not  pro- 
ceed from  it  at  all,  and,  indeed,  is  as  unlike  it  as  is  night 
to  day.  The  light  which  Christ  imparts  is  the  knowledge 
of  salvation  ;  and  for  the  propagation  of  this  knowledge 
He  has  appointed  His  own  means  and  His  own  agents  ; 
and  the  art  of  reading  (however  useful  in  its  place)  is 
not  the  means  which  He  has  appointed,  nor  is  the  school- 

*  "  By  this  meaDS,"  viz.,  "  the  great  number  of  books  and  papers 
of  amusement,  which,  of  one  kind  or  another,  daily  come  in  one's 
way,"  "  time  even  in  solitude  is  happily  got  rid  of,  without  the  pain 
of  attention:  neither  is  any  part  of  it  more  put  to  the  account  of 
idleness,  one  can  scarce  forbear  saying,  is  spent  with  less  thought  than 
a  great  part  of  that  which  is  spent  in  reading"  So  wrote  the  au- 
thor of  the  Analogy  (Preface  to  Sermons  at  the  Rolls)  more  than 
a  hundred  years  ago,  and  before  the  age  of  light  literature  had 
commenced. 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


293 


master,  although  an  important  functionary  in  his  way, 
the  agent  whom  He  has  commissioned. 

The  knowledge  which  He  requires  in  order  to  salva- 
tion is  not  abstruse  or  hard  to  be  learned  ;  it  is  diffused, 
indeed,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but  may  be  thence  col- 
lected, and  summed  up  in  brief  rules  of  Faith,  Devotion, 
and  Charity,  easy  to  be  apprehended  by  the  feeblest 
capacity.  This  knowledge,  or  the  knowledge  of  these 
rules  and  rudiments,  has  from  the  beginning  been  taught 
orally  to  multitudes  who  were  never  able  to  learn  it  in 
any  other  way  ;  and  it  is  to  this  day  imparted  orally  to 
all  of  us  before  we  learn  our  letters,  or  are  able  to  read 
the  Bible.  Bene  arguit,  qui  bene  distinguit ;  and  I 
should  suppose  that  the  mere  distinction  between  the 
knowledge  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  the  knowledge 
of  this  world  would  be  sufficient  answer  to  the  objection. 
For  it  can  not,  without  absurdity,  be  believed  that  the 
light  of  the  gospel,  which  teaches  masters  to  be  mild 
and  gentle,  and  servants  to  be  diligent  and  faithful,  can 
indirectly,  and  in  process  of  time,  abolish  a  relation 
which  it  directly,  now  and  always,  cements. 

Another  reason  for  the  opinion  I  am  combating  is, 
that  the  gospel  forbids  cruelty,  oppression,  and  impurity, 
and  all  the  other  evils  which  are  the  concomitants  of 
slavery,  and  make  it  the  "  sum  of  human  villainies,'7  and 
that,  therefore,  it  must  tend  indirectly  to  its  extirpation. 

I  answer  that,  if  these  evils  are  inseparable  from 
slavery,  then  we  have  a  right  to  expect  that  slavery 


294  THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


would  have  been  directly  forbidden  in  the  gospel ;  and 
since  it  is  not  so  forbidden,  we  have  the  right  to  infer 
that  these  evils  are  separable  from  it ;  and  if  separable, 
then  their  restraint  and  inhibition  can  only  tend  to  strip 
slavery  of  its  abuses,  and  thus  to  reform  the  institution, 
and  not  to  subvert  it. 

But  the  crowning  argument  remains  ;  viz.,  that,  after 
the  establishment  of  Christianity,  and  under  its  benign 
influence,  slavery  became  gradually  extinct. 

This  reasoning,  I  apprehend,  is  no  better  than  the 
post  hoc,  propter  hoc  logic,  which  is  sometimes  ma- 
liciously charged  on  the  medical  profession.  The  drug 
is  administered,  aftd  the  patient  recovers  ;  ergo  the  drug 
has  cured  him  !  The  truth  is,  in  my  opinion,  that 
Christianity  had  no  more  to  do  with  the  decay  of  slavery 
in  the  Roman  empire,  than  it  had  with  its  extirpation  in 
our  Northern  States.  In  both  cases  slavery  was  aban- 
doned because  it  did  not  pay.  In  the  New  England  and 
Middle  States,  where  the  produce  of  the  earth  is  slowly 
yielded  and  hardly  obtained,  and  where  the  cold  climate 
braces  and  disposes  the  white  for  work,  while  it  enervates 
and  incapacitates  the  negro,  it  cost  the  master  more  to 
feed  and  rear  his  slaves  than  their  labor  was  worth  :  and 
hence  they  who  owned  negro  slaves  at  the  North  sold 
them  to  the  South,  where  their  labor  would  be  worth 
more  than  their  keeping  ;  not  refusing  to  accept  (why 
should  they?)  whatever  credit  they  could  get  for  phi- 
lanthropy, and  not  grudging  to  send  with  or  after  each 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


295 


bill  of  sale,  a  lecture  or  short  tract  on  the  sin  of  hold- 
ing property  in  man.  So  in  the  Roman  empire.  While 
the  rage  for  conquest  prevailed,  the  bulk  of  the  people 
were  employed  in  wars  abroad,  and  left  their  work 
at  home  to  be  done  by  slaves  ;  and  as  their  habits  were 
frugal,  and  their  slaves  were  valued  only  for  their  labor, 
they  could  much  better  afford  to  keep  them  than  to 
relinquish  their  plunder  in  foreign  countries.  But  when 
the  rage  for  conquest  had  ceased,  the  bulk  of  the  people, 
deprived  of  warlike  employment.  wrere  compelled  to  turn 
their  attention  to  agriculture  and  mechanical  pursuits ; 
and  as  luxury  had  now  increased,  and  the  rich  and  opu- 
lent affected  more  than  ever  the  elegancies  and  refine- 
ments of  life,  they  put  their  slaves  to  such  sorts  of  work 
as  required  not  merely  muscle  but  skill  and  training ; 
hence  slave-labor  became  more  expensive,  and  free  labor 
cheaper ;  and  when  matters  came  to  that  pass,  that  it 
cost  more  to  rear  and  train  the  slave  for  his  work  than 
his  work  was  worth,  then  slavery  did  not  pay  ;  and  when 
slavery  ceased  to  pay,  it  died  out,  the  gospel  contribut- 
ing nothing,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  its  decadence. 

The  upshot  of  the  matter  is,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that 
Christianity  neither  enjoins  nor  forbids  slavery,  but  leaves 
men  entirely  free,  so  that  they  restrain  themselves  within 
the  bounds  of  justice  and  rectitude,  either  to  discourage 
and  abolish  it,  or  to  establish  and  uphold  it,  as  the 
public  good  may  require. 

The  plan  of  my  work  does  not  require  me  to  do  more 


296  THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


than  establish  this  negative  conclusion.  A  strong  affirm- 
ative argument,  indeed,  might  easily  be  made  to-  show 
that  the  Scriptures,  both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment, expressly  recognize  and  sanction  slavery ;  but  this 
argument  has  been  so  often  and  so  luminously  stated,  and, 
indeed,  the  fact  is  so  apparent  on  the  very  face  of  the 
Scriptures,  that  I  deem  it  quite  superfluous  to  swell  my 
pages  with  references  and  quotations  designed  to  estab- 
lish it.^  Besides,  the  aim  of  my  argument  has  been  to 
show  that  that  form  of  servitude  which  exists  under  the 
laws  of  some  of  our  States,  and  under  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  is  consistent  with  natural  justice ; 
and  if  the  argument  is  sound,  slavery  must  stand  unless 
the  Scriptures  forbid  it.  That  "  the  New  Testament 
contains  no  precept  prohibitory  of  slavery"  is  expressly 
affirmed  by  the  ablest  of  the  New  England  abolitionists ; 
and  what  they  insist  on  is.  that  the  prohibition,  though 
not  given  in  any  precept,  is  yet  contained  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  New  Testament,  of  course  as  developed  and 
applied  by  themselves.  Their  arguments  are  misty  and 
confused,  and  it  is  about  as  hard  to  seize  and  explain 
them,  as  it  would  be  to  bottle  and  analyze  the  dense  fog 
that  sometimes  hangs  over  their  coast.  But,  as  far  as  I 
could  catch  their  meaning,  I  have  given  and  answered  it; 

*  For  a  synopsis  of  the  scriptural  argument  the  reader  is  referred 
to  "  Slaveholding  not  Sinful,"  by  Samuel  S.  How,  D.D.,  of  New 
"Brunswick,  and  for  sale  by  R.  &  K  Brinkerhoof,  103  Fulton  Street, 
New  York. 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


297 


and  the  result  is,  I  think,  that  the  gospel,  neither  directly 
nor  indirectly,  neither  by  its  precepts  nor  principles, 
makes  slavery  a  sin ;  in  short,  that  it  contains  not  a  seed 
or  germ  to  serve  them  for  their  new  Protestant  "  devel- 
opment of  Christian  doctrine." 

Before  I  leave  this  topic,  I  wish  to  guard  the  reader 
against  a  mistake  into  which  he  may  be  led  by  an  equiv- 
ocation of  words.  The  apostles  admitted  into  the  com- 
munion of  the  Christian  Church,  the  "bond,"  as  well  as 
the  free.  From  the  apostles'  time,  to  the  accession  of 
Constantine  in  the  fourth  century,  not  to  go  later,  it  is 
matter  of  undoubted  history,  that  slaves,  by  which  word 
I  mean  persons  that  were  owned  by  others  under  the 
laws  of  the  Empire,  that  were  kept  for  labor  and  were 
liable  to  be  bought  and  sold,  formed  a  numerous  class  in 
the  Christian  Church;  they  were  "  called,"  in  common 
with  others,  from  among  the  Gentiles,  and  remained, 
according  to  the  ap.ostolic  precedent,  "in  the  vocation 
wherein  they  were  called."  One  of  the  Apostolic  Can- 
ons (the  eighty-second  in  Beveridge's  collection,  and 
seventy-third  in  Johnson's)  decla/es :  "We  do  not  per- 
mit slaves  to  be  ordained  to  the  clergy,  without  consent 
of  their  masters,  and  to  the  provocation  of  their  owners ; 
for  this  would  be  to  the  subversion  of  families ;  but  if  a 
slave  do  appear  worthy  of  being  ordained  even  priest  or 
bishop,  and  their  owners  give  way  to  it,  by  making  them 
free,  and  dismissing  them  from  their  houses,  let  it  be 

13* 


298 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


done."^  Bingham,  in  adverting  to  this  canon,  remarks 
that  "the  servants  referred  to  were  originally  tied  by 
birth  or  purchase  to  their  patrons'  or  masters'  service  ;" 
and  assigns  as  a  reason  for  the  canon  that  "no  man  was 
to  be  defrauded  of  his  right  under  pretense  of  ordina- 
tion.rf  The  same  author,  as  above  quoted, J  tells  us: 
"The  same  power  and  right  which  parents  had  over 
their  children,  masters  had  over  their  slaves  :  and  for 
this  reason  no  slave  could  marry  without  the  consent  of 
his  master."  In  the  eleventh  book  of  his  Antiquities, 
which  treats  of  the  rites  and  customs  observed  in  the 
administration  of  baptism,  he  relates,  "that  in  the  exam- 
ination of  the  several  qualifications  of  those  that  offered 
themselves  to  baptism,  one  part  of  the  inquiry  was, 
'  whether  they  were  slaves,  or  freemen  V  If  they  were 
slaves  to  a  heathen,  they  were  only  taught  their  obliga- 
tions to  please  their  master,  that  the  word  of  God  might 
not  be  blasphemed ;  and  the  master  had  no  further  con- 
cern in  their  baptism,  as  being  himself  an  infidel ;  but  if 
the  master  were  a  Christian,  then  the  testimony  of  the 
master  was  first  to  be  required  concerning  the  life  and 
conversation  of  his  slave,  before  he  could  be  admitted  to 
the  privilege  of  baptism.  If  he  gave  a  laudable  account 
of  him,  he  was  received ;  if  otherwise,  he  was  rejected, 
till  he  approved  himself  to  his  master. "§    From  all 

*  Johnson's  translation,  Vade  Mecum,  vol.  ii.,  p.  36. 

f  Vol.  i.  p.  487,  Pitman's  Edition.   {  Vide  Supra,  chap,  xiii.,  p.  212. 

§  Vol  iii.,  p.  488. 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


299 


which  it  appears  incontrovertibly  that  slavery,  in  the 
best  days  of  the  Christian  Church,  was  not  accounted  to 
be  a  sin  or  disgrace.  Neither  was  the  slave,  as  such, 
regarded  as  an  object  of  commiseration.  The  horrible 
phantasm  of  u  property  in  man"  did  not  scare  the  plain 
piety  of  these  early  Christians,  any  more  than  it  per- 
plexed the  plain  sense  of  their  heathen  neighbors.  Slaves 
were  respected  according  to  their  condition  in  life,  and 
their  behaviour  in  that  condition.  Some  of  them  were 
very  ignorant,  and  had  a  hard  lot ;  and  others  of  them 
were  intelligent  and  prosperous.  Onesimus,  the  abscond- 
ing slave  whom  St.  Paul  sent  back  to  his  master,  is  said, 
by  some  of  the  ancients,  to  have  earned  his  freedom  by 
his  good  conduct,  and  to  have  been  made  Bishop  of 
Colosse.  St.  Luke,  the  Evangelist,  is  believed  by  Gro- 
tius,  and  others,  to  have  been  a  slave  in  the  family  of 
the  Lucilli,  and  to  have  taken  from  them  his  diminutive 
name  of  Luke.  However  this  be,  I  believe  I  am  right 
in  saying  that  slaves,  as  such,  i.  e.,  persons  who  were 
owned,  and  liable  to  be  sold  under  the  laws  of  the  Em- 
pire, were  not  regarded  as  objects  of  ignominy  or  com- 
passion. 

And  yet  we  are  sometimes  told  that  the  sympathies 
and  charities  of  the  Primitive  Church  were  often  excited 
in  behalf  of  persons  in  slavery,  and  that  large  contribu- 
tions were  made  by  the  benevolent  to  purchase  their 
freedom.  In  particular,  the  thrilling  letter  of  St.  Cy- 
prian, Bishop  of  Carthage,  to  the  Numidian  bishops, 


800 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


deploring  the  miseries  of  slavery,  and  sending  a  hundred 
thousand  sesterces  (equal  to  between  three  and  four 
thousand  dollars),  contributed  by  the  churches  under  his 
charge,  to  ransom  some  unhappy  slaves  in  Numidia  out 
of  the  house  of  bondage,  is  quoted,  with  marvelous 
effect,  to  show  the  horrors  of  slavery,  and  the  sentiments 
of  compassion  with  which  it  was  regarded  in  the  Primi- 
tive Church.  How  reconcile  this  with  our  previous 
statement,  that  slavery,  as  such,  was  not  an  object  of 
commiseration,  and  with  the  natural  inference  from  the 
statement,  that  the  Christians  of  that  day  were  not  com- 
monly called  upon  to  contribute  money  to  enable  slaves 
to  change  their  state  or  condition  in  life  ? 

"  We,  Christians,7'  says  St.  Cyprian,  u  are  all  incor- 
porated together  as  one  body ;  and  not  only  the  motives 
of  humanity,  but  those  of  our  holy  religion  ought  to  ex- 
cite and  quicken  our  endeavors  for  redeeming  our  breth- 
ren from  their  slavery."  He  observes,  moreover,  that 
t:as  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ,  have  put 
on  Christ;77  and  that  for  this  reason  we  ought  to  behold 
Christ  in  the  persons  of  slaves,  who  are  our  brethren, 
and  redeem  Him  [in  their  persons]  from  His  slavery, 
who  redeemeth  us  from  the  death  to  w  hich  we  were  ob- 
noxious ;  *  *  *  that  he  who  redeemed  us  by  Hi3  cross 
and  passion,  may  Himself  be  redeemed  with  our  money.77 
What,  then,  would  the  venerable  Bishop  of  Carthage 
say,  were  he  now  alive,  to  the  pious  abolitionist  who 
should  quote  his  language  to  excite  the  commiseration  of 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


301 


Christians,  for  the  hard  lot  of  our  Southern  slaves? 
Why,  he  would  rebuke  him,  and  hold  him  up  to  the 
scorn  of  men  as  an  impudent  falsifier !  The  letter  to  the 
Numidian  bishops  has  no  relation  to  slaves,  in  the  com- 
mon sense  of  the  word.  Under  the  negligent  adminis- 
tration of  Gallus,  says  Dr.  Marshall,  the  barbarous 
nations  bordering  on  the  confines  of  the  Roman  domin- 
ions in  Africa,  made  frequent  incursions  upon  their 
neighbors  in  the  Roman  territory,  and  carried  off  many 
captives ;  on  whose  behalf  the  bishops,  in  those  parts, 
had  written  to  our  author  [St.  Cyprian]  for  contributions 
to  assist  in  redeeming  them ;  and  received  from  him  this 
letter  in  answer.'7 

That  the  reader  may  see  how  easy  it  is  to  cheat  with 
ambiguous  words,  and  with  quotations  wrested  from  their 
context,  I  annex  the  first  paragraph  of  this  noble  letter 
from  Marshall's  Cyprian,  Vol.  II.  p.  176. 

u  Cyprian  to  his  brethren  Januarius,  Maximus,  Pro- 
culus,  Victor,  Modianus,  Nemesianus,  Nampulus,  and 
Honoratus,  sendeth  greeting. 

"I  read  over,  my  dearest  brethren,  the  letter  wdiich 
you  sent  me,  concerning  the  captivity  of  our  brothers 
and  sisters,  with  a  compassion  and  concern  equal  to  what 
you  wrote  it  with ;  for  who  can  withhold  his  tears  from 
flowing  out  upon  such  dreadful  calamities?  Or  who 
would  not  consider  the  misfortune  of  his  brethren  as,  in 
some  measure,  his  own?  Especially,  when  he  shall  re- 
flect upon  what  the  apostle  St.  Paul  hath  said  upon  this 


302 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE. 


subject ;  £  Whether  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members 
suffer  with  it ;  or  one  member  rejoice,  all  the  members 
rejoice  with  it.5  And  again ;  '  Who  is  weak,  and  I  am 
not  weak?'  We,  therefore,  should  look  upon  the  cap- 
tivity of  our  brethren  as  a  state  of  bondage  to  ourselves ; 
since  we  are  all  incorporated  together  as  one  body ;  and 
not  only  the  motives  of  humanity,  but  those  of  our  holy 
religion,  ought  to  excite  and  quicken  our  endeavors  for 
redeeming  our  brethren  from  slavery :  for  the  apostle  St. 
Paul,  having  in  another  place  put  the  question ;  4  know  ye 
not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelleth  in  you  V  if  the  rules  of  charity  did  not  oblige 
us  to  assist  our  brethren  in  such  extremity,  yet  we  ought  to 
consider  here,  that  they  are  the  temples  of  God,  which  thus 
are  taken  captive ;  that  therefore  we  should  not,  by  our 
neglect  and  indolence,  suffer  them  to  continue  long  under 
their  confinement ;  but  should  rather  labor  with  all  our 
industry  and  application  to  gain  the  favor  of  Christ  our 
Judge,  Lord,  and  God,  by  our  good  offices  towards  them. 
The  same  apostle  St.  Paul  hath  told  us  that,  1  as  many  of 
us  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ.' 
Wherefore  we  should  behold  Christ  in  the  persons  of  our 
captive  brethren,  and  redeem  Him  from  His  slavery,  who 
redeemeth  us  from  the  death  to  which  we  were  obnoxious ; 
that  He  who  hath  taken  us  out  of  the  jaws  of  the  devil, 
and  dwelleth  and  abide  th  in  us,  may  (Himself). be  taken 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  barbarians ;  and  that  He  who 
redeemed  us  by  His  cross  and  passion,  may  Himself  be 


THE  ARGUMENT  FROM  SCRIPTURE.  303 

redeemed  with  our  money ;  who,  perhaps,  hath  permitted 
this  misfortune  to  befall  our  brethren,  that  He  thence 
might  try  the  power  of  our  faith,  and  whether  we  will  do 
in  the  case  of  others,  what  we  should  desire  to  have  done 
for  ourselves,  if  we  were  captives  in  the  hands  of  these 
barbarians.  For  who,  with  any  sense  about  him  of  hu- 
manity and  mutual  benevolence,  would  not,  if  he  be  a 
father,  imagine  those  his  children,  who  are  there  in 
slavery  ?  Or  if  he  be  a  husband,  would  not  entertain 
those  sentiments  of  tenderness  and  concern  for  the  honor 
of  his  marriage-bed,  which  he  could  not  but  entertain,  if 
his  own  wife  were  there?" 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


CONCLUSION. 

Having  now  brought  my  argument  to  a  close.  I  beg 
to  direct  the  reader's  attention  to  a  brief  review  of  the 
positions  which  I  have  endeavored  to  establish,  and  to 
the  course  of  action  which  they  naturally  suggest  in 
reference  to  the  present  state  of  our  country. 

Reverting  to  the  point  from  which  we  started,  the  era 
of  the  great  men  who  inaugurated  our  independence,  we 
find  our  people  united  in  the  same  religion.  Our  social 
relations  were  not  derived  from  heathen  prescription, 
nor  modeled  on  Utopian  theories,  but  were  those  which 
we  had  inherited  from  Christian  ancestors.  Our  govern- 
ment made  no  provision  for  the  uniform  inculcation  of 
the  fundamental  principles  of  religion  on  which  it  was 
founded,  but  threw  itself  entirely  on  the  good  sense  of 
the  people  :  and  while  undertaking  to  administer  their 
political  affairs,  left  to  them  the  whole  responsibility  of 
maintaining  the  principles  on  which  its  whole  machinery, 
the  civilization  which  it  had  adopted,  the  social  order  and 
relations  which  it  protected — in  a  word,  its  very  life  and 
being  depended  for  support. 


CONCLUSION. 


305 


Thus  we  set  out  on  our  career  as  a  civilized  and  Chris- 
tian people,  according  to  the  highest  standard  of  civiliza- 
tion to  which  mankind  had  then  arrived,  and  with  such 
principles  of  religion  as  afforded  a  broad  and  ample 
foundation  for  a  healthy  Christian  society.  After  the 
lapse  of  more  than  half  a  century  one  of  the  social  rela- 
tions, protected  by  government,  wTas  assailed  as  barbarous 
and  anti- Christian;  and  the  Constitution,  for  the  protec- 
tion which  it  afforded  to  this  relation  was  also  denounced 
as  barbarous  and  anti- Christian,  and  as  needing  to  be 
reformed  to  a  higher  civilization  and  a  purer  religion. 
Government  had  provided  no  means  for  its  own  security, 
either  moral  or  physical,  either  preventive  or  remedial, 
against  assaults  of  this  nature  :  it  permitted  an  unlimited 
freedom  of  speech  and  of  the  press,  and  authorized  no 
means  of  instruction  for  their  guidance ;  it  made  it  the 
duty  of  no  man  or  of  any  order  of  men  to  define  and 
inculcate  those  fundamental  principles  of  morality  and 
religion  on  which  all  human  society  rests  for  support ;  it 
gave  full  swing  to  assailants  and  agitators,  and  men  who 
in  any  previous  age  and  under  almost  any  other  govern- 
ment on  earth  would  have  been  compelled  to  choose  be- 
tween a  bridle  for  their  lips  and  a  halter  for  their  necks, 
were  suffered  to  go  on  from  month  to  month,  and  from 
year  to  year,  and  denounce  the  Constitution  under  which 
they  lived  as  "  a  covenant  with  death  and  an  agreement 
with  hell."  By  their  eloquent  but  superficial  harangues 
the  agitators  captivated  the  people ;  the  politicians  were 


306 


CONCLUSION. 


not  slow  to  use  the  public  opinion  which  the  agitators 
created  ;  they  joined  and  outstripped  them  in  sophistical 
appeals  to  the  people  in  behalf  of  that  universal  equality 
and  those  natural  rights  which  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence proclaimed,  and  of  which  they  thought,  or 
affected  to  think,  that  the  slavery  in  our  Southern  States 
was  a  violation.  Nay,  they  went  farther,  and  raised 
their  voice  in  the  halls  of  legislation  to  arraign  the 
Constitution  itself  for  inconsistency  with  that  "  Higher 
Law,''  of  which  they  knew,  or  ought  to  have  known, 
that  it  is,  on  the  very  point  on  which  they  have  arraigned 
it,  a  true  and  infallible  exponent.  To  protect  itself 
against  assaults  of  this  nature,  government  confided 
wholly  to  the  intelligence  of  the  people  and  their  ability 
to  comprehend  and  apply  the  fundamental  principles  on 
which  the  relation  that  was  assailed,  in  common  with  the 
other  relations  of  human  society,  rest  for  support.  And 
the  question  was  and  is,  for  it  is  still  undecided,  whether 
the  confidence  is  mispiaced :  whether  the  people  will  con- 
tinue to  chase  the  phantoms  held  up  to  them  by  station- 
ary pulpiteers  and  itinerant  demagogues,  or  whether 
they  will  justify  the  wisdom  of  their  fathers  and  reject 
the  fallacies  and  sophistries  by  which  they  are  taught  to 
use  the  Declaration  of  Independence  for  the  subversion 
of  their  government,  and  the  Gospel  of  Christ  for  the 
division  of  His  Church. 

The  effect  of  these  repeated  and  long-continued  on- 
slaughts on  slavery  has  been  to  excite  the  passions  of 


CONCLUSION. 


307 


the  South,  and  to  extort  from  them  more  of  denunciation 
than  argument;  although  the  latter  has  not  been  wanting. 
And  this  is  perfectly  natural.  By  the  very  constitution 
of  our  nature  we  are  led  to  believe  in  the  truth  and  jus- 
tice of  the  religious  and  social  institutions  which  are  the 
foundation  of  our  dearest  hopes  and  interests,  before  we 
are  able  to  develop  the  logical  grounds  of  our  belief. 
Hard,  indeed,  would  be  the  lot  of  Christians,  if  they  had 
no  firm  and  solid  ground  for  their  faith  until  they  had 
learned  from  the  schools  to  refute  the  sophistries  of 
Hume,  and  to  estimate,  at  their  true  value,  the  sneers 
of  Gibbon  or  the  sarcasm  of  Voltaire.  The  rich  never 
think  of  looking  beyond  their  title-deeds  to  justify  the 
tenure  of  houses  and  lands  which  they  have  bought  with 
their  money,  or  inherited  from  their  fathers;  and  not 
one  in  ten  thousand  of  them  is  able  to  explain  the  origin 
of  property,  nor  to  give  a  logical  answer  to  those  who 
from  the  right  of  the  people  to  make  their  own  laws 
would  infer  their  right  to  adjust  property  on  a  new  basis. 
An  agrarian  party  at  the  North,  if  numerous  and  suc- 
cessful, would  provoke  from  the  rich  among  us  more 
imprecations  than  syllogisms.  So  at  the  South.  Men 
who  have  been  born  in  a  society  of  which  slavery  is  an 
element ;  who  have  come  peaceably  and  honorably  into 
the  possession  of  slaves,  and  are  assured  of  their  attach- 
ment ;  who  are  accustomed  to  the  idea  of  property  in 
servile  labor,  and  esteem  it  no  degradation,  but  build 
upon  it  their  hopes  of  worldly  prosperity :  these  men,  I 


308 


CONCLUSION. 


say,,  believe  in  the  essential  justice  of  their  system  of 
society,  and  of  their  title  to  property  under  the  laws  of 
the  States  in  which  they  live,  before  they  learn  logically 
to  explain  and  develop  the  grounds  of  their  belief.  It 
is  idle  to  say  that  Mr.  Calhoun  has  revolutionized  their 
sentiments  and  taught  them  a  doctrine  which  they  never 
entertained  before.  The  change  of  opinion  which  has 
undoubtedly  taken  place  in  the  South  on  this  subject, 
has  been  the  consequence  of  the  transition  of  slavery 
from  its  violent  original  to  its  settled  condition  in  society. 
Nature  itself  has  made  the  change,  and  neither  Mr.  Cal- 
houn nor  any  other  man  could  do  more  than  direct 
attention  to  the  facts  consequent  on  the  change,  and  give 
logical  form  and  expression  to  the  conviction  which  those 
facts  had  before  implicitly  wrought  in  the  mind  of 
Southern  society.  It  ought,  therefore,  to  be  no  matter 
of  surprise  that  our  Southern  brethren,  when  the  very 
foundations  of  their  social  structure  were  attacked  on 
grounds  of  morality  and  religion,  were  more  prompt  to 
resent  the  attacks  than  to  refute  them. 

As  long  as  the  anti-slavery  element  depended  for  its 
practical  development  on  the  Abolitionists,  it  could  do 
no  harm  to  the  government.  For  the  Abolitionists 
were  honest  and  straightforward ;  they  believed  slavery 
to  be  a  sin  and  disgrace,  and  turned  their  batteries  at 
once  on  the  Constitution  which  protected  it.  By  this 
extravagance  they  disgusted  the  more  sedate  opponents 
of  slavery,  who  joined  in  sneering  at  them  as  men  of 


CONCLUSION. 


309 


"one  idea/'  and  thus  (for  the  apostles  themselves  were 
men  of  u  one  idea'7)  strengthened  their  moral  influence, 
while  they  discountenanced  their  political  measures.  But 
when  the  politician  thrust  his  sickle  into  the  Abolition 
harvest,  and  a  party  was  organized  which  had  for  one  of 
its  objects  to  oppose  and  restrain  slavery  only  by  consti- 
tutional and  conservative  methods,  a  fair  opportunity 
was  presented  for  testing  the  sense  of  the  people.  The 
contest  was  waged  with  u  polygamy  and  slavery,  twin 
relics  of  barbarism,"  for  a  motto;  and  the  result  showed 
that  the  anti-slavery  feeling,  far  from  being  limited  to 
the  Abolitionists,  was  predominant  in  the  Northern  mind. 
What  ends  anti-slavery  sentiment,  working  only  in  a  con- 
stitutional way,  could  have  accomplished,  it  is  needless 
to  inquire  ;  since  the  South,  rather  than  await  the  exper- 
iment, have  resorted  to  secession  and  revolution.  And 
the  question  now  is.  how  to  reinstate  ourselves  in  the 
condition  in  which  we  were  before  the  moral  and  social 
character  of  slavery  was  introduced  into  our  party  pol- 
itics. 

I  concur,  in  general,  with  those  who  think  that  the 
best  way  to  recover  our  former  harmony-(if,  indeed,  the 
recovery  be  possible),  is  to  copy  the  example  of  our 
fathers ;  to  guard  the  government  which  they  established 
from  all  influences  which  tend  to  warp  it  from  its  orig- 
inal design,  and  to  seek  to  transmit  to  our  children  the 
same  heritage,  pure  and  undefiled,  which  we  have  re- 
ceived from  them. 


310 


CONCLUSION. 


There  are  two  ways,  however,  in  which  this  laudable 
aim  may  be  pursued.  The  one  is,  to  plant  ourselves  on 
the  principles  on  which  our  fathers  stood,  and  to  apply 
them,  in  the  exercise  of  a  sound  discretion,  to  the  solu- 
tion of  new  problems ;  and  the  other  is,  to  take  some 
opinion  which  they  entertained  on  some  measure  which 
they  adopted,  and  to  carry  out  the  opinion  and  to 
imitate  the  measure  without  due  regard  to  the  principles 
by  which  they  were  governed,  or  the  new  circumstances 
by  which  we  are  surrounded. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  founders  of  our  gov- 
ernment were,  on  political  and  economical  grounds, 
opposed  to  slavery,  and  that  they  wished  to  get  rid  of  it. 
But  their  opinions'  and  wishes  were  controlled  by  prin- 
ciples from  which  they  never  swerved.  Their  love  of 
justice  was  stronger  than  their  aversion  to  slavery ;  and 
it  taught  them  to  do  no  violence  to  the  bond  which  tied 
the  slave  to  his  master,  nor  to  seek  to  deprive  the  mas- 
ter of  his  right  to  the  slave's  labor.  Their  love  of 
union  was  stronger  than  their  aversion  to  slavery ;  for 
it  led  them  to  adopt  a  Constitution  which  protected 
slavery  in  States  which  had  no  intention  to  abolish  it. 
They  indeed  prohibited  slavery  in  the  Northwestern 
territory  ;  but  no  one  State  opposed  the  prohibition ;  the 
South  concurred  in  the  measure  with  the  North ;  and 
the  only  dissenting  vote  was  from  a  representative  of 
New  York.  In  carrying  out  their  very  laudable  opin- 
ions and  wishes  in  this  respect,  they  did  no  violence  to 


CONCLUSION. 


311 


the  great  principles  which  governed  them — the  love  of 
justice,  and  the  love  of  union. 

After  the  lapse  of  seventy  years,  the  settlement  of 
another  territory  is«i>rought  in  question.  We  at  the  North 
desire,  very  naturally,  that  this  territory  also  should  be 
dedicated  to  freedom.  And  in  favor  of  this  measure 
we  have  the  example  of  our  fathers  in  a  similar  case,  and 
their  opinions  of  the  deleterious  influence  of  slavery. 
Let  us  revere  their  example,  and  cherish  their  opinions. 
But  let  us  remember  also  that  our  circumstances  are  dif- 
ferent from  those  in  which  they  were  placed.  The  ter- 
ritory is  farther  South.  The  Slave  States,  instead  of 
concurring  with  us,  oppose  the  measure  which  we  desire 
to  carry.  And  the  Slave  States  are  more  populous  now 
than  they  were  then  ;  the  population  of  some  of  them 
having  nearly  reached  that  point  of  density,^  where  the 
maintenance  of  the  slave  is  of  more  value  than  his  labor, 
and  where,  consequently,  slavery  dies  a  natural  death ; 
the  owner  himself  being  glad  to  be  relieved  of  his  bur- 
then. In  proportion  as  this  point  is  approached,  the 
value  of  slave  labor  depreciates;  and  the. density  of  pop- 
ulation is  increased  in  proportion  as  its  expansion  is  pre- 
vented. In  view,  then,  of  our  altered  circumstances,  let 
us  be  governed  by  the  great  principles  on  which  our 

*  The  result  of  Professor  Tucker's  careful  and  elaborate  investiga- 
tion is,  that  the  depreciation  in  the  value  of  slave  labor  begins  when 
the  population  reaches  the  number  of  fifty  persons  to  the  square 
mile.  See  Progress  of  the  United 'States  in  Population  and  Wealth, 
chapter  xiii.    By  George  Tucker. 


312 


CONCLUSION. 


fathers  acted — love  of  Justice,  love  of  Union.  Let  us 
love  free  territory  much,  justice  and  union  more. 

Our  fathers  foresaw  the  evils  which  threatened  the 
Union,  and  they  have  marked  out  tjje  course  by  which 
they  hoped  to  avoid  them.  That  course  contemplates 
two  fixed  and  uncompromising  principles  of  action  :  1, 
the  toleration  of  domestic  slavery  on  grounds  both  of 
justice  and  expe:  ency :  and  2,  the  resolute  prohibition 
and,  as  far  as  possible,  annihilation  of  the  slave-trade. 
Can  we  do  better  than  adhere  to  the  policy  which  their 
wisdom  prescribed?  If  the  Union  is  dissolved  and  a 
Southern  confederacy  formed,  the  slave-trade  will  prob- 
ably be  reopened.  Will  that  be  any  comfort  to  the 
North?  If  we  can  maintain  the  Union,  and  uphold 
its  laws  against  the  slave-trade,  at  the  expense  of  letting 
domestic  slavery  alone,  and  suffering  it  to  be  governed 
by  the  laws  of  population  and  labor,  is  it  not  better  for 
us  to  do  so  ?  Do  not  the  wisdom  and  example  of  our 
fathers  compel  us  to  tolerate  the  less  evil,  for  the  sake 
of  avoiding  the  greater  ? 

Before  we  adopt  measures  to  circumscribe  slavery,  and 
thus  to  accelerate  its  extinction,  and  bring  it  about  at  an 
earlier  period  than  is  prescribed  to  it  by  the  natural  laws 
of  population  and  labor,  ought  we  not  to  be  prepared 
with  some  feasible  and  effective  plan  for  extending  to  free 
colored  people  that  moral,  religious,  and  physical  protec- 
tion to  which,  while  we  exclude  them  from  citizenship 
and  from  social  and  political  equality,  they  are  by  the 


CONCLUSION. 


313 


law  of  Nature  entitled  at  our  hands  ?  Even  under 
our  present  system  of  servitude,  with  all  its  abuses,  the 
colored  people  that  live  in  it  are,  as  a  general  rule,  cared 
for  in  respect  both  to  their  spiritual  and  temporal  neces- 
sities. If  we  take  measures  which  tend,  even  remotely, 
to  deprive  them  of  this  protection)  and  accompany  them 
with  no  provision  for  admitting  them  to  social  and  po- 
litical equality  with  ourselves,  we  expose  them  to  temp- 
tations to  vagrancy,  intemperance  and  vice,  which  expe- 
rience shows  that  they  will  not  resist.  We  shall  leave 
them,  as  we  have  left  the  original  inhabitants  of  our 
land,  to  dwindle  away  and  die  out  for  want  of  the 
stimulants  and  motives  which  human  nature  demands  to 
excite  it  to  the  pursuit  of  industry,  intelligence,  and 
virtue.  A  truly  philanthropic  heart,  really  concerned 
for  the  welfare  of  this  unhappy  portion  of  mankind,  can 
derive  no  comfort  from  this  prospect. 

In  the  pursuit  of  a  higher  civilization  and  a  purer 
religion  than  our  fathers  have  bequeathed  to  us,  a  relent- 
less war  has  been  raged  against  one  relation  of  society. 
Suppose  the  assailants  succeed,  and  either  abolish  slavery, 
or,  by  breaking  up  the  Union,  relieve  themselves  of  the 
obligation  which  now  presses  on  them  to  enlighten  the 
consciences,  and  reform  the  lives  of  the  benighted  South. 
What  next  ?  Their  mission  is  to  raise  the  individual 
above  the  State,  and  to  convince  him  that  government  is 
instituted,  not  for  the  common  good  of  society,  and  the 

harmonious  development  of  its  manifold  and  diversified 

14 


314 


CONCLUSION. 


interests.  *but  for  his  elevation  and  improvement ;  and 
their  mission  will  be  unfulfilled  unless  every  individual 
man  and  woman  is  made  the  equal  of  every  other  in  all 
the  advantages  which  government,  on  their  theory  of  it, 
-is  designed  to  confer.  Not  only  must  slaves  have  equal 
civil  rights  with  their  masters,  but  women  must  have  an 
equal  share  in  government  with  men,  and  the  poor  an 
equal  share  of  property  with  the  rich.  Here  is  the 
point  of  antagonism  between  the  genius  of  modern  civili- 
zation and  the  law  of  Nature  and  of  Christ.  Nature 
teaches  that  government  is  instituted  for  the  common 
good,  and  for  the  individual  in  subordination  to  the  com- 
mon good,  and  the  history  of  all  orderly  society,  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  illustrates  and  confirms  her 
teaching  ;  and  Christianity,  both  in  fact  and  by  precept, 
binds  each  member  of  society  to  every  other,  and  makes 
all  subject  to  the  head ;  while  the  genius  of  modern 
civilization  builds  the  State  on  the  idea  of  the  individual 
and  tends  to  exalt  and  to  benefit  him  at  the  expense  of 
the  State.  Revolutionary  France  is  a  type  of  its  ex- 
treme development  where  it  is  not  tempered  and  re- 
strained by  the  prescriptions  of  reason  and  the  authority 
of  revelation  ;  and  without  these  divine  restraints,  all 
the  measures  of  pretended  reform  and  progress,  which 
it  inaugurates,  are  essentially  anti-Christian;  none  the 
less  so  because  Satan,  in  order  to  accomplish  them,  trans- 
forms himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  To  what  extent 
they  foreshadow  the  great  Anti-Christ,  which  is  to 


CONCLUSION. 


315 


concentrate  all  the  elements  of  infidelity  in  one  terrific 
power  of  destruction,  might  be  worth  considering,  if  men 
were  in  a  temper  to  consider  so  serious  a  subject. 

The  views  which  I  have  advocated,  in  respect  to 
slavery,  can  only  affect  our  intercourse  with  our  breth- 
ren at  the  South,  and  our  estimate  of  their  condition. 
They  can  not,  by  any  possibility,  even  if  they  were  gen- 
erally adopted,  lead  to  the  reinstatement  of  slavery  at  the 
North  ;  but  they  will  dispose  us  to  feel  and  to  act  more 
kindly  towards  those  to  whose  care  Providence  has 
intrusted  the  large  portion  of  our  fellow-countrymen  and 
fellow-christians,  who  now  live  in  that  state  of  servitude 
which  nothing  but  our  own  pride  .  and  folly  makes  dis- 
reputable in  our  sight.  They  will  not  only  regain  for 
us  the  now  alienated  affections  of  our  Southern  brethren, 
but  they  will  restore  to  the  bosoms  of  their  families  that 
"  domestic  tranquillity,"  that  mutual  good- will  and  con- 
fidence, of  which  the  present  opinions  at  the  North  have, 
in  a  measure,  deprived  them.  By  allaying  the  jealousy, 
and  -healing  the  wounded  pride  of  the  master,  they  will 
promote  the  comfort,  and  secure  the  mild  treatment  of  the 
slave,  and  remove  the  impediments  which,  in  some  places 
and  to  some  extent,  have  impeded  his  liberation.  They 
furnish,  moreover,  a  solid  ground  for  the  inculcation  of 
the  mutual  obligations  and  duties,  which  grow  out  of  one 
of  the  most  important  relations  in  human  society.  I  do 
not  urge  these  considerations  as  proofs  of  the  theory  of 
slavery,  which  I  have  advocated,  but  as  reasons  which 


316 


CONCLUSION. 


should  secure  for  it,  if  it  be  not  erroneous,  a  hold  upon 
our  affections.  If  others  take  delight  in  maintaining  the 
opposite  theory,  and  spreading  before  the  public  dis- 
torted facts  and  exaggerated  statements  to  sustain  it,  I 
must  leave  them  to  pursue  the  bent  of  their  own  minds. 
But,  for  my  own  part,  to  accommodate  to  my  use  the 
familiar  words  of  an  ancient  philosopher  on  another  sub- 
ject,* if  I  err  in  this  opinion,  viz.,  that  the  slavery, 
which  exists  under  our  laws,  is  founded  in  justice,  and 
not  in  violence — I  gladly  err  ;  nor  do  I  wish,  while  our 
Union  lasts,  to  be  robbed  of  an  error,  which  fills  me  with 
kindly  and  benevolent  regard  toward  all  its  members ; 
and  if— -which  God  in  His  mercy  forbid  ! — our  Union 
should  perish,  I  would  still  rejoice  in  an  error,  which 
has  saved  me  from  the  guilt  of  having  promoted  its  dis- 
solution, and  which  will  continue  to  make  all  who  accept 
it  at  the  North  of  one  heart,  even  after  they  shall  have 
ceased  to  be  of  one  country,  with  the  South. 

Adieu,  dear  reader,  and  may  you  ever  be  as  fit  and 
prepared  to  receive,  as  the  writer  is  disposed  and  desirous 
to  invoke  on  you  and  yours,  the  peace  and  benediction  of 
Almighty  God  ! 

*  Quod  si  in  hoc  erro,  quod  anitnos  hominum  immortales  esse  cre- 
dam,  libenter  erro ;  nec  mihi  hune  errorem,  quo  delector,  dum  vivo, 
extorqueri  volo :  sin  mortuus,  ut  quidam  minuti  philosophi  censent, 
nihil  sentiam,  non  vereor,  ne  hunc  errorem  meum  mortui  philosophi 
irrideant. — Be  Senectute. 


APPENDIX. 


A. 

Appended  is  the  original  of  the  passage  from  Pliny,  quoted  m 
the  ninth  chapter,  and  accidentally  omitted  in  its  proper  place : 
it  forms  the  proem  to  his  seventh  book. 

Mundus,  et  in  eo  terras,  gentes,  maria,  insignes  insulae,  urbes  ad 
hunc  modum  se  habent.  Animantium  in  eodem  natura  nnllius 
prope  partis  con  tern  platione  minor  est,  siquidem  omnia  exequi  hu- 
manus  animus  queat.  Principium  jure  tribuetur  homini,  cujus  causa 
videtur  cuncta  alia  genuisse  natura,  magna  et  saava  mercede  contra 
tanta  sua  munera ;  ut  non  sit  satis  aestimare,  parens  melior  ho- 
mini, an  tristior  noverca  fuerit.  Ante  omnia  unum  animantium 
cunctorum  alienis  velat  opibus :  caeteris  varie  tegumenta  tribuit, 
testas,  cortices,  coria,  spinas,  villos,  setas,  pilos,  plumam,  pennas, 
squamas,  vellera.  Truncos  etiam  arboresque  cortice,  interduni 
gemino,  a  frigoribus  et  calore  tutata  est.  Hominem  tantum 
nudum  et  in  nuda  humo,  natali  die  abjicit  ad  vagitus  statim  et 
ploratum,  nullumque  tot  animalium  aliud  ad  lacrymas,  et  has  pro- 
tinus  vitae  principio.  At,  Hercule,  risus  praecox  ille  et  celerrimus 
ante  quadrigesimum  diem  nulli  datur.  Ab  hoc  lucis  rudimento, 
quae  ne  feras  quidem  inter  nos  genitas,  vincula  excipiunt,  et  om- 
nium membrorum  nexus :  itaque  infeliciter  natus  jacet  manibus 
pedibusque  devinctis,  flens,  animal  caeteris  imperaturum ;  et  a 
suppliciis  vitam  auspicatur,  unam  tantum  ob  culpam,  qua  natum 
est  Heu  dementiam  ab  iis  initiis  existimantium  ad  superbiam 
se  genitos!  Prima  roboris  spes,  primumque  tempcris  munus 
quadrupedi  similem  facit.  Quando  homini  incessus  ?  quando  vox  ? 
quando  firmum  cibis  os  ?  quandiu  palpitans  vertex,  summae  inter 
cuncta  animalia  imbecillitatis  indicium.  ?  Jam  morbi,  totque  me- 
iclicinae  contra  mala  excogitatae,  et  hae  quoque  subinde  novitati- 


318 


APPENDIX. 


bus  victae.  Caetera  sentire  naturam  suam,  alia  pernicitatem  usur- 
pare,  alia  praepetes  volatus,  alia  nare :  hominem  nihil  scire,  nihil, 
sine  doctrina,  non  fari,  non  mgredi,  non  vesci :  breviterque  non 
aliud  naturae  sponte,  quam  flere.  Itaque  multi  extitere,  qui 
non  nasci  optimum  censerent,  aut  quam  ocjssime  aboleri.  Uni 
animantium  luctus  est  datus,  uni  luxuria,  et  quidem  innumerabi 
libus  modis,  ac  per  singula  membra :  uni  ambitio,  uni  avaritia,  uni 
immensa  vivendi  cupido,  uni  superstitio,  uni  sepulturae  cura,  atque 
etiam  post  se  de  futuro.  Nulli  vita  fragilior,  nulli  rerum  omnium 
libido  major,  nulli  pavor  confusior,  nulli  rabies  acrior.  Denique 
ccetera  animantia  in  suo  genere  probe  degunt:  congregari  vi- 
demus,  et  stare  contra  dissimilia:  leonum  feritas  inter  se  non 
dimicat;  serpen tium  morsus  non  petit  serpentes;  ne  maris  qui- 
dem belluae  ac  pisces,  nisi  in  diversa  genera,  sseviunt.  At,  Hercule, 
homini  plurima  ex  homine  sunt  mala. 


B. 

In  the  Chapter  on  the  "  Eendition  of  Fugitives  from  Labor,"  I 
have  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  people  are  not  required,  by 
the  law  of  1850,  to  assist  in  the  recovery  of  the  fugitive,  but 
merely  to  assist  the  officers  of  justice  to  defeat  any  factious  oppo- 
sition which  may  be  made  to  the  recovery,  the  officer  himself 
being  supposed  to  be  able  to  execute  the  law  in  case  of  the  fugi- 
tive being  the  only  person  to  resist  it.  Such  is  my  construction 
of  the  law ;  but,  that  the  reader  may  judge  of  the  matter  for  him- 
self, I  annex  the  clause  referred  to.  The  point  is  of  no  import- 
ance to  the  main  argument,  which  is  designed  to  establish  the 
principle  of  the  law  rather  than  to  defend  its  particular  provisions: 

An  Act  to  amend  the  Act  respecting  Fugitives,  etc.,  passed  Sept. 
18,  1850. 

"§  5.  *  *  *  *  *  And  the  better  to  enable  the  said  Com- 
missioners, when  thus  appointed,  to  execute  their  duties  faith- 
fully and  efficiently,  in  conformity  with  the  requirements  of  the 


APPENDIX. 


819 


Constitution  of  the  United  States  and  of  this  Act,  they  are  here- 
by authorized  and  empowered,  within  their  counties  respectively, 
to  appoint,  in  writing,  under  their  hands,  any  one  or  more  suit- 
able persons,  from  time  to  time,  to  execute  all  such  warrants  and 
other  process  as  may  be  issued  by  them  in  the  lawful  performance 
of  their  respective  duties ;  with  authority  to  such  Commissioners, 
or  the  persons  to  be  appointed  by  them,  to  execute  process  as 
aforesaid,  to  summon  and  call  to  their  aid  the  bystanders,  or  posse 
comitatus  of  the  proper  county,  when  necessary  to  ensure  a  faith- 
ful observance  of  the  clause  of  the  Constitution  referred  to,  in 
conformity  with  the  provisions  of  this  Act ;  and  all  good  citizens 
are  hereby  commanded  to  aid  and  assist  in  the  prompt  and  effi- 
cient execution  of  this  law,  whenever  their  services  may  be 
required,  as  aforesaid,  for  that  purpose ;  and  said  warrants  shall 
run,  and  be  executed  by  said  officers,  anywhere  in  the  State 
within  which  they  are  issued."  *   *  *. 


THE  END. 


J 


I  £5 


