H m&mttb  h\J      Ella  Smith  Elbert 


XV 


row  nam 

Katharine  Oomaa 


4 


f 


/. 


a*  >x  *>'  *  t--$  1  s  jit*  e.-i  ^ 


AN  ADDRESS 


DELIVERED  AT  THE  INSTALLATION  OF 


REY.  L.  ¥.  BERRY,  D.  D. 


AS  PRESIDENT   OF  THE 


INDIANA  ASBURY  UNIVERSITY. 

f 

JULY   16,  1850, 


BY  GOV.  JOS.  A.  WRIGHT. 


INDIANAPOLIS: 

rRINTED  BY  JOHN  D.  DEFREES. 
1850. 


Greencastle,  July  16,  1850. 
Dear  Sir: — In  pursuance  of  a  resolution  adopted  by  the  joint  Board  of 
Trustees  and  Visitors  of  the  Indiana  Asbury  University,  the  undersigned, 
having  been  appointed  a  committee  for  that  purpose,  respectfully  request 
you  to  furnish  them,  in  behalf  of  the  joint  Board,  a  copy  of  the  excellent 
address  delivered  by  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  President 
Berry. 

Very  respectfully  yours, 

C.  B.  DAVIDSON, 
J.  S.  BAYLESS, 
A.  W.  MORRIS, 
C.  W.  RUTER, 
S.  T.  GILLETT. 

His  Excellency,  Gov.  Wright. 


<  Indianapolis,  July  22,  1850. 

Gentlemen:— Your  kind  note  of  July  16,  in  behalf  of  the  Trustees  and 
Visitors  of  the  Indiana  Asbury  University,  requesting  for  publication  a 
copy  of  the  Address  delivered  by  me  at  the  installation  of  President  Berry, 
has  been  received.  You  will  receive  herewith  the  copy  of  my  remarks  on 
that  occasion. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  A.  WRIGHT. 

Messrs.  C.  B.  Davidson, 
J.  S.  Bayless, 

A.  W.  Morris,    \  Committee. 
C.  M.  Ruter, 
S.  T.  Gillett, 


GOV.  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


President  Berry  and  Fellow  Citizens: 

It  was  the  remark  of  one  to  the  Grecian  Lawgiver, 
"That  a  man  should  either  not  converse  with  those  in 
authority  at  all,  or  say  what  is  agreeable  to  them the 
reply  of  the  wise  man  was,  "Nay,  but  he  should  either 
not  do  it  at  all,  or  say  what  is  useful  to  them."  This  was 
the  appropriate  sentiment,  and  I  desire  on  this  occasion 
to  follow  the  advice. 

It  has  been  well  said,  that  to  educate  a  child,  and 
prepare  him  to  act  well  his  part  in  society,  requires 
as  profound  thought  and  wisdom,  as  it  does  to  govern 
an  empire.  If  this  be  true,  (and  no  one  will  controvert 
it,)  how  great  the  task  and  responsibility  of  the  work 
before  you,  as  President  of  this  noble  institution.  If  to 
you  were  committed  a  vessel  freighted  with  a  nation's 
wealth,  great  would  be  your  responsibility;  but  if  to 
you  were  committed  the  earthly  happiness  and  liberty 
of  a  nation,  how  much  more  would  your  obligation  be 
increased.  But  if  you  were  entrusted  with  the  hopes 
and  fears,  the  joys  and  sorrows,  the  pleasures  and  pains, 
of  the  myriads  of  earth,  for  a  single  day  or  hour,  your 


4  GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


mind  would  reel  and  stagger  in  the  attempt  to  grasp  the 
vast  obligations  resting  upon  you.  What  are  all  these 
combined,  compared  with  the  responsibility  placed  in 
your  hands  this  day,  as  President  of  the  Indiana  As- 
bury  University,  to  whom  is  committed  the  training  and 
improvement  of  the  minds  of  hundreds  of  young  men  of 
the  land,  not  only  for  usefulness  or  mischief  on  earth, 
but  for  happiness  or  misery  for  time  and  eternity. 

It  is  your  duty  to  superintend  and  direct  the  cultiva- 
tion of  the  human  intellect — to  give  direction,  tone, 
character,  and  stability,  to  mind — to  that  mind,  as  in- 
comprehensible as  God,  and  lasting  as  eternity.  In  view 
of  the  circumstances  that  surround  us,  and  in  accordance 
with  my  own  peculiar  notions,  I  propose  to  call  your  at- 
tention, briefly,  to  three  or  four  topics. 

The  tendency  of  our  age  is  to  show  and  attraction ; 
scarcely  a  book,  from  the  Bible,  down  to  the  primer  in 
the  infant's  hands,  makes  its  appearance  with  any  pros- 
pect of  success,  unless  it  is  well  filled  with  devices,  cuts, 
and  engravings.  No  speaker  thinks  of  addressing  any 
of  the  associations  of  the  day,  without  having  around 
him  flags,  ensigns,  colors,  and  mottos.  The  public  taste 
seems  to  require  some  show  and  parade,  before  it  will 
look  into  any  subject  presented  for  examination.  The 
education  of  our  youth,  the  spirit  of  our  associations, 
(for  this  is  emphatically  the  age  of  association,)  are  all 
well  calculated  to  foster  in  the  youthful  mind  a  spirit  of 
show  and  allurement,  and  I  think  it  is  about  time,  that 
from  the  press,  school  house,  and  college,  efforts  should 
be  making  to  exhibit  the  beauty  and  attraction  of  labor. 

I  want  to  see  this  institution,  in  all  its  influences  and 
teachings,  exhibiting  to  the  young  men  of  the  land  the 
great  beauty  and  attraction  of  labor.    I  desire  to  see 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


5 


changed  this  everlasting  thirst  for  professional  life,  that 
seizes  so  many  of  our  young  men — this  aversion  to  man- 
ual labor.  Our  country  is  almost  in  the  situation  de- 
scribed by  a  distinguished  poet  when  he  said  : 

"Trade  wields  the  sword,  and  agriculture  leaves 
Her  half-turned  furrows  ;  other  harvests  fire 
An  avarice  of  renown.'* 

The  curse  that  sentenced  man  to  toil  and  labor  is  his 
greatest  blessing,  for  it  saves  him  from  himself,  his  chief 
foe.  The  enjoyment  and  happiness  of  each  individual 
is  intimately  connected  with  labor  and  exercise.  Could 
we  draw  aside  the  curtain,  and  see  the  condition  of  our 
race,  without  the  relation  that  exists  between  toil  and 
labor  with  our  happiness,  we  would  find  man  arrayed 
against  himself  and  his  neighbor — passion  would  rule, 
and  usurp  the  place  of  reason  - — crime  would  walk 
abroad  in  the  earth.  Wisely  has  the  edict  gone  forth, 
"thou  shalt  labor,"  and  with  this  great  decree  is  asso- 
ciated our  felicity. 

Action — action,  for  good  or  evil,  is  labor.  The  spi- 
rits of  evil,  working  to  drag  man  down  to  their  own 
state  of  wretchedness,  are  never  at  rest.  He  who  would 
be  happy  now  or  hereafter  must  labor — -he  must  not 
grow  weary  in  well  doing.  Let  him  labor  to  sustain 
the  wants  of  himself,  and  of  those  around  him.  The 
time  comes  with  no  man,  when  he  has  a  right  to  say, 
"I  have  enough  of  this  world's  goods;  I  will  now  take 
my  ease."  Look  around  you,  and  see  the  objects  that 
call  for  your  assistance.  Your  true  wealth  consists  in 
doing  good  to  your  fellow  man.  What  if  they  do  say 
of  you,  when  you  die,  "How  much  is  his  estate  worth  ?" 
Remember,  the  spirits  who  will  examine  you  in  your 
passage  to  another  world  will  ask  thee  a  far  more  im- 


6  GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


portant  question — "What  good  deeds  hast  thou  sent 
before  thee?"  Let  him  labor  to  comprehend  his  relation 
and  duties  to  his  Creator !  Let  him  labor  to  understand 
the  beauties  and  harmonies  of  the  visible  heavens !  Let 
him  labor  for  the  increase  of  religion,  virtue,  and  know- 
ledge among  those  with  whom  his  lot  is  cast !  Let  him 
labor  to  clear  the  wilderness  of  the  mind,  that  the  sun- 
light of  truth  may  shine  upon  it ! 

You  cannot  succeed  in  any  business  of  life  without 
labor — you  cannot  be  useful  in  your  day  without  labor — - 
you  cannot  be  eminent  without  labor.  If  you  want  to 
be  a  true  Aero,  worship  at  the  shrine  of  labor.  True 
laborers  are  and  ever  have  been  the  true  philanthropists, 
the  true  conquerors,  the  real  heroes,  of  the  world — 
conquerors,  but  not  desolators — victors,  but  not  oppres- 
sors, their  paths  over  the  earth  are  not  stained  with 
crime.  Whatever  man  has  done,  useful  or  good,  on 
land  or  on  sea,  to  raise  the  human  race  to  a  state  of 
virtue,  prosperity,  and  happiness,  has  been  achieved  by 
labor.  Knowledge,  civilization,  liberty,  the  arts,  agri- 
culture, commerce,  manufactures,  mansions,  cottages, 
cabins,  waving  fields  of  grain,  fruits,  and  flowers — all 
these,  and  the  innumerable  blessings  and  interests  with 
which  they  are  associated,  are,  under  the  favor  of  heav- 
en, the  great  and  wonderful  works  which  the  heroes  of 
labor  have  reared  up  in  their  paths. 

You  must  rely  upon  yourself— you  must  not  look  to 
others  for  help  and  assistance,  if  you  expect  to  be  men. 
Find  something  to  do— stand  not  still  and  idle  during 
the  day— if  nothing  else,  assist  thy  neighbor  who  is  at 
work!  Make  yourself  no  example  of  idleness !— start 
up !— move  on !— and  if  nothing  better  can  be  done, 
throw  pebbles  across  yonder  branch,  and  go  and  throw 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS.  7 


them  back  again.  It  is  better  to  work  for  nothing,  than 
not  to  labor.  If  you  cannot  find  beauty  and  attraction 
in  the  growing  crops,  spreading  meadows,  and  flowers 
of  nature,  go  and  labor,  because  it  is  heaven's  high  de- 
cree; it  is  essential  to  your  health  and  happiness — labor 
and  exercise  are  the  most  successful  physicians. 

The  erroneous  impression  should  be  corrected,  that 
because  labor  has  heretofore,  in  the  main,  been  robbed 
of  its  reward,  so  in  the  future,  the  laborer  will  receive 
nothing  but  famine  and  woe.  Remember  that,  in  this 
country,  knowledge,  and  the  practical  duties  of  life,  are 
teaching  man,  that  he  himself  may  wipe  away  the  sweat 
from  the  brow,  and  exchange  his  rags  for  goodly  apparel ; 
that  with  us,  wealth  and  capital  have  their  appropriate 
bounds. 

I  will  rejoice  when  the  day  shall  arrive,  that  in  all 
our  institutions  of  learning,  there  shall  be  taught  a  sys- 
tem of  manual  labor;  when  all  who  seek  instruction 
shall  be  compelled  to  work  certain  hours  in  each  day; 
when  we  shall  have  associated  with  the  improvement 
of  the  intellect,  a  practical  knowledge  of  agriculture, 
mechanics,  arts,  chemistry,  botany,  geology,  and  all 
those  sciences,  that  are  so  intimately  connected  with 
the  proper  improvement  of  the  soil,  and  the  animal  and 
getable  kingdoms.  Teach  your  child  to  know  the  cha- 
racter of  the  soil  and  its  adaptation  to  the  production 
of  each  article  raised  for  man  or  beast — teach  him  to 
know  the  proper  place  for  each  article  on  his  farm — teach 
him  to  know  how  to  build  a  comfortable  house,  with  all  the 
conveniences  of  life,  as  well  as  to  know  how  to  enjoy 
himself,  when  he  is  thus  situated — teach  him  something 
of  the  beauty  of  nature,  as  it  is  exhibited,  and  the  won- 
derful process  that  is  going  on  each  day  around  him. 


8 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


And,  Mr.  President,  when  the  young  man  asks  you  for 
a  palace  of  true  wealth,  point  him  to  a  bank  of  nature's 
earth — if  for  a  share,  show  him  the  plough-share — if 
for  a  mine,  exhibit  to  him  the  corn  stack  and  potato  pit — 
if  he  seeks  for  a  placer,  present  him  his  own  home  and 
cottage. 

The  character  of  the  education  of  our  children  should 
be  calculated  to  give  activity  to  all  of  the  mental  pow- 
ers. The  mere  application  to  study,  which  has  no  other 
object  in  view,  than  that  of  enriching  the  memory,  is 
not  what  we  require ;  we  want  the  powers  of  the  mind, 
the  powers  of  thought,  brought  into  lively  action;  we 
want  the  unschooled  activity  of  mind,  the  practical  en- 
ergy necessary  to  render  thought  fruitful  and  profitable, 
and  that  nervous  spirit  of  inquiry,  by  which  the  young 
man  will  be  able  to  turn  to  a  practical  account  the  les- 
sons and  experience  of  the  past.  Of  what  practical  use 
is  it,  if  the  youth  of  the  land  are  familiar  with  the  history 
of  the  world,  with  the  stores  of  learning,  with  the  his- 
tory of  our  own  country,  with  every  incident  connected 
with  the  progress  of  our  government  ?  If  the  spirit  of 
these  events  has  escaped  them,  and  they  have  not  the 
essential  vigor  to  turn  to  a  good  account  the  lessons  of 
the  past,  it  will  be  of  but  little  profit.  "Were  it  neces- 
sary to  choose  between  the  whole  experience  which  has 
been  acquired  and  collected  from  the  beginning  of  time, 
the  whole  rich  store  of  human  wisdom,  on  the  one  side, 
and  the  mere  unschooled  activity  of  the  human  mind  on 
the  other,  the  latter  ought,  without  hesitation,  to  be 
preferred.  This  is  the  precious  and  living  germ  which 
we  ought  to  watch  over,  to  foster,  to  guard  from  every 
blight.  This  alone,  if  it  remain  uninjured,  will  repair 
all  losses ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  mere  literary  wealth 
will  not  preserve  one  faculty,  nor  sustain  one  virtue."  , 


s 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


9 


Too  much  attention  is  paid  to  the  cultivation  of  the 
intellectual  man  at  the  expense  of  the  physical.  It  is 
a  great  error  to  send  our  children  to  schools  and  colleges 
so  constantly.  In  a  very  large  majority  of  cases,  I 
doubt  the  propriety  of  sending  our  young  men  to  college, 
until  after  eighteen  years  of  age.  It  would  be  far  prefer- 
able that  the  young  man  should,  previous  to  that  time, 
follow  some  active  employment,  devoting  a  portion  of 
his  time  to  reading  and  study,  but  in  the  main,  occupied 
in  building  up  the  physical  man,  by  active  labor  and  in- 
dustry. Nature  requires  of  each  of  her  children  labor 
and  exercise  to  perfect  the  strength  to  manhood,  to  de- 
velop the  whole  man  in  bodily  strength ;  and  unless  the 
whole  physical  system  is  well  matured,  it  will  be  of  but 
little  use  to  improve  the  intellect.  No  pale,  emaciated 
young  man,  was  ever  benefitted  by  attending  college. 
Let  him  return  to  the  farm,  to  the  field,  the  workshop, 
and  by  prudence  build  up  the  physical  system,  by  labor 
and  exercise — nature's  only  remedy  to  perfect  the  sys- 
tem and  constitution — and  then  let  him  return,  if  you 
please,  at  eighteen,  and  close  his  collegiate  education, 
when  he  not  only  knows  how  properly  to  appreciate  the 
blessings  of  an  education,  but  he  h  as  a  body  capable  of 
enduring  study  and  mental  labor,  and  has,  above  all 
things,  a  mind  that  will  hold  and  retain  all  that  he  learns. 

The  doctrine  of  a  special  Providence  should  be  taught 
in  all  our  institutions.  I  mean  that  system  of  instruc- 
tion that  not  only  teaches  that  an  unseen  eye  watches 
and  guards  all  the  affairs  of  men  and  nations,  but  scans 
minutely  the  falling  sparrow,  the  hairs  of  your  head,  and 
that  spirit  of  reliance  upon  a  special  providence  that 
holds  man  accountable  for  every  act.    If  Cicero  could 

say  in  his  day,  "if  the  Gods  observe  not  what  is  trans- 
2 


10  GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


acted  here  below,  what  would  become  of  religion  and 
holiness,  without  which  human  life  would  be  replete 
with  trouble  and  confusion;" — if  such  instruction  was 
extorted  from  the  heathen  philosopher  in  his  dark  day, 
by  the  evidence  that  surrounded  him,  how  well  does  it 
become  us  in  this  day,  with  the  evidence  around  us,  as 
a  nation  and  as  individuals,  of  a  special  providence,  that 
has  kept  and  preserved  us  thus  far,  to  proclaim  this 
great  truth  in  all  places  and  to  all  men. 

He  who  lives  upon  the  seen  world,  whose  conduct  is 
regulated  by  human  laws,  and  who  looks  not  to  the 
maker  of  heaven  and  earth  for  the  rule  of  right,  is  but 
an  instrument  in  society  to  poison  and  pollute  all  that 
come  within  his  influence;  he  ridicules  all  distinction 
between  vice  and  virtue;  for  how  can  hope  have  any 
influence  upon  such  a  man's  conduct,  who  cares  for  no- 
thing beyond  the  enjoyments  of  this  world,  and  whose 
desires  are  all  centered  in  the  present  hour  ?  But  he 
who  lives  upon  the  unseen  world,  who  acknowledges  in 
all  his  affairs  with  men,  and  in  his  relations  to  his  gov- 
ernment, his  accountability  to  his  Maker,  and  firmly  be- 
lieves in  a  special  Providence,  that  man  alone  has  the 
most  powerful  motive  to  resignation  and  patience,  and 
let  what  will  happen  with  his  nation,  or  with  him  as  an 
individual,  he  still  calmly  says,  it  is  all  right — Jehovah 
reigneth. 

The  young  man  who  leaves  this  Institution  and  takes 
his  place  in  community  as  an  active  member  of  society, 
believing  that  he  who  obtains  his  money  or  property 
unjustly,  will  be  none  the  gainer  thereby,  and  that  he 
himself,  in  the  end,  will  be  none  the  loser,  implicitly  re- 
lying upon  a  superintending  providence,  to  watch  and 
guard  the  affairs  of  earth,  is  a  noble  specimen  of  his 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


11 


race,  and  his  country  has  something  for  him  to  do,  in 
the  discharge  of  which  the  blessings  of  heaven  will  at- 
tend him. 

The  mere  communication  of  information  is  but  a  small 
part  of  your  duty.  It  is  yours  to  train  the  youthful  mind 
to  be  able  to  concentrate  its  whole  powers  upon  any 
question  that  may  be  presented,  to  bring  the  mind  to 
act  vigorously,  by  thought,  reflection,  and  discrimination, 
on  any  subject,  and  that  by  system. 

When  the  young  man  leaves  this  Institution,  you  hand 
him  the  keys  of  the  store-house  of  knowledge,  and  you 
should  qualify  him  to  know  the  road  and  time,  that  he 
can  apply  for  supplies,  to  aid  in  the  journey  of  life. 

I  know  but  one  method  of  exhibiting  the  greatness  of 
the  human  intellect — but  one  road  to  travel  to  show  the 
powers  that  a  kind  Providence  has  given  any  man,  and 
that  is,  to  be  able  at  all  times  to  bring  the  full  powers  of 
the  mind  to  bear  upon  any  question  or  emergency  that 
may  arise.  What  would  you  expect  of  the  man,  sud- 
denly cast  upon  the  waters  of  some  mighty  river,  who 
had  never  performed  the  act  of  swimming — of  one  sur- 
rounded by  dangerous  enemies,  with  weapons  in  his 
hands  that  he  had  never  used  ?  Certainly  nothing  but 
death  and  destruction.  What  will  you  expect  of  the 
young  man  who  daily  walks  within  these  walls,  and  adds 
knowledge  to  knowledge,  and  yet  whose  habits  are  not 
formed  for  life — no  system  for  the  government  of  his 
mind — none  for  the  time  of  study,  reflection,  or  relaxa- 
tion, and  who  has  never  thought  of  the  power  of  con- 
centration ?  If  you  expect  such  a  man  to  succeed,  you 
will  be  disappointed.  I  would  not  for  a  moment  have 
you  believe  that  these  principles  are  for  the  professional 
man  alone;  they  are  just  as  essential  to  the  farmer,  the 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS, 


mechanic,  and  day-laborer.  The  man  who  labors  upon 
his  farm,  or  in  his  shop,  without  a  perfect  system,  is 
passing  through  life  without  knowing  his  duties.  He 
who  ploughs,  sows,  and  works,  without  order,  or  who 
has  not  a  place  for  every  tool,  instrument,  or  book,  will 
travel  the  journey  of  life  to  but  little  profit;  but  when 
you  find  an  individual,  be  his  calling  in  life  what  it  may, 
who  has  a  proper  place  and  time  for  every  duty,  and 
who  exhibits  order  and  regularity  in  all  his  acts,  you 
may  look  still  further  and  higher,  and  you  will  find  the 
mind  and  powers  of  thought  to  have  system,  and  from 
day  to  day,  as  he  lays  up  the  rich  treasures  of  thought, 
he  is  but  gathering  and  garnishing  a  stock  of  ripe  ma- 
terials, that  are  always  at  command;  and  he  well  un- 
derstands the  rule  by  which  he  can  make  a  speedy  ap- 
plication. 

I  give  it  as  my  opinion,  that  no  man  can  be  useful  in 
life,  nor  exhibit  the  powers  of  his  mind,  who  is  not  taught 
in  early  life  to  discipline  his  mind  to  regular  hours  of 
reflection — no  man  can  succeed  unless  he  has  his  regu- 
lar hours  for  study,  for  labor,  for  reading,  and  for  relax- 
ation. Show  me  a  man,  who,  from  his  infancy  to  the 
close  of  his  education,  has  adopted  a  system,  a  perfect 
one,  and  I  will  produce  one,  who,  under  any  circum- 
stances in  life  that  can  possibly  arise,  is  able  to  bring 
the  full  rich  casket  of  knowledge  to  bear  upon  all  the 
various  conflicting  questions  and  emergencies  of  life. 

There  is  an  increasing  spirit  of  anarchy  and  violence 
exhibiting  itself  in  high  places  among  our  public  men, 
that  requires  a  prompt  remedy.  What  is  to  be  expected 
from  the  people  themselves,  in  their  intercourse  with 
each  other,  when  their  public  men  are  engaged  in  using 
language  disgraceful,  and  not  unfrequently  weapons,  in 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


13 


the  very  citadel  of  the  nation's  hope  for  a  model  to  the 
world  ?  I  am  not  sure  but  a  large  portion  of  the  un- 
happy excitement  that  now  prevails,  can  be  traced  to 
the  improper  and  intemperate  use  of  language  and  abuse 
among  our  public  men.  No  question,  from  the  ordinary 
transactions  of  life  to  that  of  difficulties  between  na- 
tions, can  be  happily  and  usefully  settled,  if  the  men 
who  engage  in  it  are  continually  using  violent  and  abus- 
ive language;  order  and  peace  rarely  come  forth  from 
excitement,  confusion,  and  violence;  and  believe  me 
when  I  say,  that  in  our  seminaries  and  higher  institutions 
of  learning — aye,  and  in  our  family  circles — too  much 
pains  are  taken  to  sharpen  the  intellect  and  quicken  the 
sensibilities  of  the  \oung,  whilst  the  duty  of  cultivating 
man's  moral  nature  is  poorly  performed,  or  wholly  neg- 
lected. We  must  cultivate,  improve,  and  elevate  all  of 
the  moral  powers.  We  may  nurture  in  our  young  men 
the  spirit  of  acuteness,  delicacy  of  perception,  sensitive- 
ness of  feeling,  and  habits  of  controversy;  but  with  all 
these  qualities,  if  their  moral  powers  be  neglected,  if 
they  are  not  taught  to  cherish  a  proper  regard  of  what 
is  due  to  their  fellow  man,  in  their  intercourse  with  each 
other,  they  may  be  sent  forth  to  deface  and  corrupt  that 
society  which  they  ought  to  adorn  and  purify. 

We  must  elevate  our  standard  of  language  in  our  in- 
tercourse with  each  other.  May  it  be  yours,  as  Presi- 
dent of  Asbury,  to  teach  the  young  men  who  shall  crowd 
these  walls,  to  realize  and  properly  appreciate  the  bless- 
ings of  speech !  How  high,  how  sacred  the  gift,  that 
our  words  are  the  very  representatives  of  our  thoughts, 
the  messengers  of  love  or  wrath  from  the  soul ;  that  their 
consequences^are  for  good  or  evil,  are  soon  beyond  our 
control.     When  this  blessing  to  man  shall  be  fully 


14 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


realized,  we  shall  have  a  happy  and  peacable  commu- 
nity. May  the  day  be  speedily  hastened,  when  every 
man,  high  or  low,  who  shall  engage  in  personal  abuse 
or  quarrels,  using  disgraceful  language,  or  weapons,  with 
his  neighbors,  shall  by  that  act  alone  forfeit  immediately 
the  confidence  of  his  fellow-citizens !  When  this  shall 
be  done,  we  shall  fully  realize  the  propriety  of  the  trite 
and  true  remark,  "like  people,  like  representatives" 

I  trust  you  will  inculcate  in  the  minds  of  the  young 
men  who  shall  come  hither  for  instruction,  a  burning 
love  for  the  union  of  these  States.  It  is  too  common  an 
occurrence  to  see  our  young  men  in  the  North  and  South 
on  examination  days,  and  at  school  exhibitions,  engaged 
in  rehearsing  the  beauties  of  this,  or  the  evils  of  that 
section  of  the  country,  fostering  in  the  youthful  mind  a 
bigoted  love  for  this  or  that  section  of  the  country,  at 
the  expense  of  the  other.  I  have  no  patience  to  sit 
down  and  hear  men  talk  about  this  or  that  section  of  the 
Union,  or  of  the  peculiar  frame  work  of  society  in  this 
or  that  State,  in  opposition  to  those  of  other  States. 
This  continually  speaking  of  Northern  interest,  Southern 
interest,  Northern  population,  and  Southern  population, 
is  an  evil  that  demands  a  remedy.  This  Union  is  not 
composed  of  a  few  cities  in  the  North  or  South ;  the 
people  of  this  Union  consist  of  something  else  than  iron 
mills  and  wooden  clocks  in  the  North,  or  of  rice  and 
cotton  bales  in  the  South.  We  of  the  West  have  some- 
thing to  say  as  to  who  and  what  compose  this  Union ; 
and  it  is  a  glorious  truth  that  there  is  a  spot  of  earth 
on  this  continent,  known  as  the  West,  in  whch  there  are 
now  more  than  six  millions  of  inhabitants  engaged  in 
all  the  duties  of  active  life — the  great  mass  of  whom 
know  nothing  short  of  this  Union  as  composing  the  Re- 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS.  15 


public,  and  whose  voice  in  the  public  councils,  on  all  the 
great  questions  of  the  day,  have  heretofore  been,  and  I 
trust  will  so  continue  to  be,  conservative.  The  time 
has  now  arrived  when  the  influence  of  the  West,  in  her 
conservative  spirit,  should  be  felt  in  the  settlement  of 
all  our  national  questions.  It  is  high  time  that  she 
should  say  to  the  North  and  to  the  South,  "Thus  far 
shalt  thou  go,  but  no  farther."  From  our  position,  inter- 
course, character  of  pursuits,  variety  of  productions,  our 
numbers,  and  strong  attachment  to  the  Union,  we  will 
necssarily,  in  some  measure,  mingle  with  every  portion 
of  our  great  confederacy.  If  we  are  true  to  ourselves, 
to  our  country,  to  our  high  destiny,  and  to  the  cause  of 
civil  and  religious  liberty,  we  may  be  able,  acting  in  the 
spirit  of  our  fathers,  to  be  mainly  instrumental  in  effect- 
ing amicable  adjustments  of  all  those  agitating  questions 
which,  at  different  times,  will  necessarily  arise  in  a  gov- 
ernment extending  over  such  a  vast  territory,  and  em- 
bracing so  great  a  variety  of  interests.  We  cannot  be- 
long to  the  South — we  cannot  belong  to  the  North:  we 
will  know  neither  in  the  adjustment  of  any  question  that 
threatens  to  disturb  the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  na- 
tion. Our  high  mission  is  that  of  acting  wisely  and 
justly,  in  the  spirit  of  conciliation  and  concession  towards 
all  parts  of  the  nation,  that  thereby  we  may  be  instru- 
mental, at  all  times,  in  preserving  the  peace  and  har- 
mony of  the  Union.  We  cannot  wholly  eradicate  from 
the  hearts  of  our  people  sectional  names  and  partiali- 
ties; they  are  older,  in  portions  of  our  country,  than  the 
Constitution ;  there  were  southern  colonies  and  northern 
colonies  before  its  adoption.  The  sons  of  New  England 
have  borne  and  loved  that  distinctive  name  for  more 
than  one  hundred  and  fifty  years;  in  the  sunny  South, 


16 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


the  name  of  Southron  has  been  equally  cherished  and 
loved.  Shall  not  the  young  and  mighty  West  too  have 
a  distinctive  name,  which  her  sons  may  learn  to  love 
and  honor?   Let  it  be  the  blessed  name  of  Peace  Makers! 

Let  us  not  be  alarmed  at  the  word  compromise.  It  is 
the  richest  word  in  the  English  language,  in  its  adapta- 
tion to  the  business  of  government  or  individuals.  Ul- 
traism  never  yields  or  gives ;  it  knows  no  compromise, 
and  uses  no  words  but  those  of  insolence  and  dictation. 
The  idea  of  no  compromise  is  only  another  name  for 
war.  Every  family,  individual,  and  nation,  must  neces- 
sarily concede  many  things  to  each  other,  which  is  for 
the  mutual  benefit  of  all,  and  here  is  the  true  secret  of 
domestic  peace  and  happiness.  And  why  is  not  the 
same  principle  equally  applicable  to  a  family  of  States 
or  of  nations.  Compromise,  Compromise !  This  great 
principle  was  with  our  fathers  in  1787,  with  us  in  1820 
and  1833,  has  been  the  watchword  of  our  heretofore 
unparallelled  success,  and  is  the  talisman  of  our  future 
peace  and  tranquillity.  Differing  as  we  do  in  soil,  cli- 
mate, and  productions — in  habits,  manners,  and  social 
relations — in  local  and  sectional  interest — we  can  only 
be  one  people  upon  the  principle  of  concession  and  con- 
ciliation. May  it  be  yours  to  cherish  and  sustain  this 
sentiment  in  every  young  mind  that  may  seek  instruction 
within  these  w7alls,  and  may  the  principle  of  concession, 
conciliation,  and  compromise,  be  taught  by  you,  as 
equally  applicable  to  nations,  states,  and  individuals ! 
May  you  renounce  all  sectional  parties — sternly  rebuke 
any  and  every  effort  to  form  a  northern  party !  May 
you  embrace  within  your  instruction  a  love  for  the  whole 
Union,  from  the  lakes  to  the  gulf,  and  from  the  Atlantic 
to  the  Pacific,  and  may  Asbury  be  renowned  in  all  time 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S-  ADDRESS. 


17 


to  come,  as  the  point  from  which  shall  proceed  the 
young  men  who  shall  be  thoroughly  Union  American  in 
all  their  feelings,  who  shall  know  no  section  or  State, 
but  who  will  be  prepared  to  go  into  the  field  before  them, 
breathing  the  spirit  of  the  Poet : 

"Are  we  not  creatures  of  one  hand  divine, 

Formed  in  one  meuld,  to  one  redemption  born, 
Kindred  alike,  where'er  our  skies  may  shine, 

Where'er  our  sight  first  drank  the  vital  morn  1 
Brothers  !  one  bond  around  our  souls  should  twine ; 

And  wo  to  him  by  whom  that  bond  is  torn." 

In  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Trustees,  I  now  hand  you 
the  keys  of  this  Institution,  as  a  token  of  their  confidence 
that  the  trust  reposed  in  you  will  be  faithfully  discharged. 
And  I  charge  you,  as  President  of  this  institution,  to 
impress  upon  the  young  men  the  great  beauty  and  at- 
traction of  labor — the  necessity  of  improving  the  phy- 
sical as  well  as  the  mental  man — -the  importance  of 
making  the  education  of  our  youth  of  that  character 
that  it  will  not  only  enrich  the  memory,  but  awaken  the 
powers  of  thought.  "It  is  not  books  which  we  want  to 
preserve,  it  is  the  mind  of  man — not  the  receptacles  of 
thought,  but  the  faculty  of  thinking."  And  may  you 
not  cease  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  a  special  Providence 
— the  propriety  of  kindness  and  urbanity  in  our  inter- 
course with  one  another — a  love  for  order  and  system — 
and  a  strong  attachment  and  patriotism  for  the  union  of 
these  States. 

President  Berry  !  I  know  your  ability,  anxiety, 
and  zeal  to  discharge  the  important  duties  before  you. 
I  know  your  desire  to  see  the  young  men,  who  shall, 
from  time  to  time,  receive  instruction  here,  become  use- 
ful in  their  day.  You  want  them  to  be  men — mighty 
men.  Permit  me,  in  conclusion,  to  say  to  you,  that  to 
3 


18 


GOVERNOR  WRIGHT'S  ADDRESS. 


accomplish  this  great  work,  teach  this  great  truth  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places,  that  there  is  but  one  man  that 
is  entitled  to  be  distinguished,  but  one  that  has  any 
claim  to  be  called  great.  It  is  he  who  selects  the  right 
with  invincible  determination,  who  stands  calmly  amidst 
the  bufferings,  persecutions,  and  billows,  of  this  world, 
who  withstands  and  contends  against  the  heaviest  ca- 
lamities, who  is  so  balanced  with  true  wisdom  that  he 
floats  without  wavering  in  the  midst  of  all  tempest, 
whose  trust  and  confidence  on  truth,  on  virtue,  on  God, 
is  most  unfaltering. 


WfELLS  BINDERY  INC. 
ALTHAM,  MASS. 
JU.^E  1958 


