i 


<&. 


tltjmnt  *tf 


$m&$$s  Iff       JBLLA  SMITH  ELBERT     '68 


jo 


N<J 


KATHARIHE  E.   COMAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/ourwarforhumanriOOdrin 


OUR  WAR 

FOR 


BEING 

An  Intensely  Human  and  Brilliant  Account  of  the 
World  War  and  Why  and  For  What 

Purpose  America   and    the 
Allies  Are  Fighting 

INCLUDING 

The  Horrors  and  Wonders  of  Modern  Warfare, 

The  New  and  Strange  Devices  that 

Have  Come  into  Use,  etc. 


"Fighting  for  the  Rights  of  Mankind 

and  for  the 

Future  Peace  and  Security  of  the  World" 


By 
FREDERICK  E.  DRINKER, 

The  Well-Known  and  Popular  Writer,  Author  of 
"The  Lusitania,"  etc. 


Illustrated  with  128  genuine  pictures  from  recent  official 

photographs,  also  outline  map  drawings 

made  especially  for  this  volume 


Published  by 

AUSTIN  JENKINS  CO. 

Manufacturing  Publishers  of  High  Grade 

Subscription   Books 

WASHINGTON,   D.   C. 


fiutered  according  to  Aot  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1917,  by  National  Fobubkoni  Okk, 
in  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  o!  Ocngreii,  at  "Washington,  9.  0. 


INTRODUCTION. 

While  the  underlying  causes  of  the  greatest  war  in  all  his- 
tory must  be  traced  far  back  into  the  centuries,  the  one  great 
object  of  the  conflict  which  was  precipitated  by  the  assassina- 
tion of  the  Archduke  Francis  Ferdinand  of  Austria,  in  Bosnia, 
at  the  end  of  June,  1914,  is  the  ultimate  determination  as  to 
whether  Imperialism  as  exemplified  in  the  government  of  Ger- 
many shall  rule  the  world,  or  whether  Democracy  shall  reign. 

Whenever  men  or  nations  disregard  those  principles  which 
society  has  laid  down  for  their  conduct  in  modern  civilized  life, 
and  obligation  and  duty  are  forgotten  in  the  desire  for  self- 
advancement,  conflict  results. 

Since  the  days  of  Athens  and  Sparta  the  world's  greatest 
wars  have  in  the  large  been  conflicts  of  ideals — democracy 
being  arrayed  against  oligarchy — men  fighting  for  individual 
rights  as  against  militarism  and  military  domination. 

In  the  present  war,  which  has  painted  the  green  fields  of 
France  and  Belgium  red  with  blood  and  swept  nations  into  the 
most  significant  and  bitter  struggle  in  all  history,  the  fight  is 
against  the  Imperial  Government  of  Germany,  by  men  and 
nations  who  concede  that  humanity  the  world  over  has  rights 
that  must  be  observed. 

Germany  has  brought  upon  herself  a  threatened  destruc- 
tion by  ruthlessly  trampling  upon  her  neighbors  and  assuming 
that  "might  is  right." 

The  Imperial  Government,  led  by  the  House  of  Hohen- 
zollern  is  suffering  from  an  exaggerated  ego  and  is  become 
paranoic.  Her  trouble  is  psychological.  The  men  who  study 
the  strange  workings  and  twists  of  the  human  mind  which  land 
some  men  in  the  institutions  for  the  criminal  insane,  agree  that 
when  any  man  becomes  obsessed  with  an  idea  and  "rides  a 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

hobby"  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else,  he  loses  his  balance  and 
develops  an  obliquity  of  view  which  makes  him  a  dangerous 
creature. 

Germany  as  a  nation  is  obsessed  with  the  spirit  of  mili- 
tarism and  almost  everything  else  has  been  sacrificed  to  this 
idol.  The  very  first  appearance  of  Germans  in  history  is  as  a 
warlike  peoples.  The  earliest  German  literature  is  composed 
of  folktales  about  war  heroes.  These  stories  tell  of  high  ideals 
and  manly  virtues  of  the  heroes. 

It  is  true  that  there  are  many  scientists,  poets  and  musi- 
cians among  the  Germans,  but  their  warlike  side  must  never  be 
forgotten.  The  entire  race  is  imbued  with  the  military  spirit, 
the  influence  reaching  to  every  phase  of  national  life.  All  that 
is  best  in  the  nation  has  been  raised  to  its  highest  efficiency 
through  military  training,  but  in  the  accomplishment  of  its 
purposes  the  House  of  Hohenzollern,  which  is  responsible  for 
the  development  of  the  national  fighting  arm,  has  neglected 
much  and  produced  millions  of  creatures  who  are  but  human 
machines,  taught  to  obey  orders  without  consideration  as  to 
the  effect  their  acts  might  produce,  whether  right  or  wrong. 

In  their  criticisms  of  the  Prussian  militarism  the  world 
democracies  define  militarism  as  an  arrogant,  or  exclusive,  pro- 
fessional military  spirit  developed  by  training  and  environment 
until  it  becomes  despotic,  and  assumes  superiority  over  rational 
motives  and  deliberations. 

This  attitude  is  reflected  in  the  conduct  of  the  Kaiser,  who, 
as  illustrative  of  the  point,  is  quoted,  at  the  dedication  of  the 
monument  to  Prince  Frederick  Charles  at  Frankfurt-on-the- 
Oder  in  1891,  as  having  said  "We  would  rather  sacrifice  our 
eighteen  army  corps  and  our  42,000,000  inhabitants  on  the  field 
of  battle  than  surrender  a  single  stone  of  what  my  father  and 
Prince  Charles  Frederick  gained." 

His  speeches  are  filled  with  similar  bombastic  and  extrava- 
gant expressions  which  have  been  the  subject  of  international 


THE    NEGRO    AND    THE    WAR 

[From  The  Philadelphia  North  American,  June  1,  1918] 

Recently  at  Camp  Upton  Major  General  Bell  addressed  a  cer- 
tain regiment  of  soldiers,  and  among  other  things  said  to  them  : 

11  This  is  the  best  disciplined  and  best  drilled  and  best  spirited  regiment 
that  has  been  under  my  command  at  this  cantonment.  I  predicted  last  fall  that 
Colonel  Moss  would  have  the  best  regiment  at  Camp  Upton,  and  you  men 
have  made  my  prediction  come  true.  I  would  lead  you  in  battle  against  any 
army  in  the  world  with  every  confidence  in  the  outcome." 

He  was  speaking  to  an  up-standing,  fine-looking  body  of  men. 
Every  face  in  front  of  him  glowed  with  pride  at  his  praise.  A  feel- 
ing fully  justified,  for  every  private  in  his  367th  regiment  and 
most  of  the  officers  are  negroes.  They  call  themselves  4iThe  Buff- 
aloes," and  undoubtedly  when  they  get  in  action  on  the  other 
side,  the  Huns  unfortunate  enough  to  be  pitted  against  them  will 
thereafter  think  of  a  buffalo  as  something  to  be  avoided  at  any  cost. 

This  367th  is  the  only  regiment  in  the  new  national  army  with 
a  name,  regimental  stationery  and  a  regimental  swagger  stick.  It 
is  one  of  the  few  with  a  regimental  song  and  a  regimental  pennant. 
And  a  person  who  thinks  these  are  matters  of  small  consequence 
exhibits  a  lack  of  knowledge  concerning  the  nature  and  needs  of 
men  who  are  going  out  to  fight. 

We  have  heard  that  the  negro  doesn't  make  a  good  soldier  ; 
that  he  is  too  lazy,  too  emotional  or  too  unresponsive  to  discipline 
to  be  counted  upon  as  a  fighting  factor.  The  facts  in  the  case  in- 
dicate exactly  the  opposite.  The  superlative  praise  we  have  quoted 
from  General  Bell,  whose  rank  and  long  experience  as  a  soldier 
lend  added  weight  to  such  words,  is  amply  backed  by  the  record 
of  history.  As  Lieutenant  McKaine,  himself  a  Buffalo,  has  said 
in  an  article  in  the  Outlook — 

"The  traditions  of  the  negro  as  a  soldier  may  be  traced  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  great  Chaka  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile  thousands  of  years  ago  ; 
Hannibal,  the  greatest  of  tacticians,  in  the  war  between  Carthage  and 
Rome  5  L'Ouverture  in  the  Haitian  rebellion  against  the  mighty  Na- 
poleon ;  Attucks  as  the  first  casualty  in  America's  first  battle  against  the 
tyranny  of  George  III  on  Boston  Common  ;  black  sailors  with  Perry  on 
Lake  Erie  ;  Black  Saruscn  at  Brandywine  ;  Peter  Salem  at  Bunker  Hill ; 
Carney  at  Fort  Wagner  ;  the  Twenty-fourth  and  Twenty  fifth  regiments 
of  infantry  and  the  Ninth  and  Tenth  cavalry  at  El  Caney  and  San  Juan 
in  Cuba  and  during  the  insurrection  in  the  Philippines ;  and  the  feat  of  the 
Tenth  cavalry  at  Carrizal  while  with  the  punitive  expedition  in  Mexico." 

And  Colonel  Moss,  of  the  Buffaloes,  a  southerner  by  birth, 
and  one  of  the  best  known  military  authorities  in  the  world  to- 
day, has  said — 

"  If  properly  trained  and  instructed,  the  colored  man  makes  as  good 
a  soldier  as  the  world  has  ever  seen.    The  history  of  the  negro  in  all  of 


our  wars,  including  our  Indian  campaigns,  shows  this.  He  is  by  nature 
of  a  happy  disposition  ;  he  is  responsive  and  tractable  ;  he  is  very  amen- 
able to  discipline;  he  takes  pride  in  his  uniform  ;  he  has  faith  and  con- 
fidence in  his  leader  ;  he  possesses  physical  courage — all  of  which  are  val- 
uable military  assets.  The  secret  of  making  an  efficient  soldier  out  of  the 
colored  man,  lies  in  knowing  the  qualities  he  possesses  that  are  military 
assets,  which  I  have  named,  and  then  appealing  to  and  developing  them — 
this  is,   utilizing  them  to  the  greatest  extent  possible. 

"  Make  the  colored  man  feel  that  you  have  faith  in  him,  and  then 
by  sympathetic  and  conscientious  training  and  instruction,  help  him  to 
fit  himself  in  a  military  way  to  vindicate  that  faith — to  "  make  good." 
Be  strict  with  him,  but  treat  him  fairly  and  justly.  Let  him  know  that 
he  will  always  get  what  is  coming  to  him,  whether  it  be  reward  or  pun 
ishment.  In  other  words,  treat  and  handle  the  colored  man  as  you  would 
any  other  human  being  out  of  whom  you  would  make  a  good  soldier,  out 
of  whom  you  would  get  the  best  there  is  in  him,  and  you  will  have  as 
good  a  soldier  as  history  has  ever  known — a  man  ivho  ivill  drill  well,  shoot 
ivell,  march  well,  obey  well,  fight  tvell — in  short,  a  man  who  will  give  a  gocd 
account  of  himself  in  battle,  and  who  will  conduct  and  behave  himself 
properly  in  camp,  in  garrison,  and  in  other  places.  The  American  negro 
is  going  to  perform  a  part  in  this  war  which  will  far  outshine  any  pre 
vious  service  on  his  part.  Already  he  is  injecting  into  the  new  army  a 
spirit  which,  if  spread  among  all  our  soldiers  in  like  degree,  could 
not  but  greatly  add  to  their  effectiveness.  Of  all  the  men  in  our  fighting 
forces,  he  is  the  one  who  most  effectively  uses  the  power  of  song.  And 
this  is  a  potent  factor." 

As  an  army  officer  recently  remarked — 

"  The  Metropolitan  Opera  Company,  the  Boston  Opera  Company,  the  Chicago 
Opera  Company,  the  Hampton  Quartet,  the  Fisk  Jubilee  Singers— you  think  some  of 
these  groups  can  sing.  Well,  you're  wrong.  They  can't.  You  have  never  heard  any 
singing  unless  you  marched  with  the  Twenty-fourth  across  the  border  after  Villa  in 
the  spring  of  1916." 

For  the  first  time  since  the  war  which  liberated  them  from  slavery  and  gave 
them  citizenship,  they  have  a  chance  on  a  large  scale  to  show  how  much  they 
really  appreciate  freedom.  As  their  people  on  every  side  are  being  encouraged 
and  helped  forward  and  aided  in  freeing  themselves  from  the  conditions  ot  life 
which  make  for  inefficiency  and  immorality,  so  in  turn  these  regiments  now 
have  gone  or  will  go  to  free  the  world  from  intolerable  conditions  which  threaten 
a  worse  slavery  than  that  which  their  fathers  endured.  It  is  truly  a  wonderful 
chance  for  a  people  to  show  appreciation  of  a  great  service  rendered  them. 

Surely  regiments  like  the  Buffaloes  have  it  in  their  power  to  do  something 
more  than  fight  when  they  get  to  France.  They  have  it  in  their  power  to 
refresh  and  renew  in  war-wearied  comrades  of  other  countries  that  spirit  with- 
out which  no  military  organization  can  be  effective. 

We  have  heard  more  than  one  story  of  troops  going  into  action  with  a  song 
on  their  lips.  The  most  thrilling  of  these  stories  is  yet  to  come,  however.  For 
when  our  negro  soldiers  march  forward  to  the  music  of  their  own  voices,  a  new 
note  shall  have  been  sounded.  And  its  echo  will  earry  not  only  to  othei  fight- 
ers near  at  hand,  but  to  non-combatant  millions  far  away,  whose  effectiveness 
is  to  be  measured  largely  by  the  degree  to  which  they  can  be  inspired  with  the 
vision  of  democracy  triumphant. 


(S  B  bD 

g  So 

5  c  g 

2  »» 

£^ 
o 

u 

>> 

0) 

.5?  H  & 

ft  tf  < 

8  £  s 


Private 
Hem  y  Johnson 


Private 
Needham  Roberts 


Of  the  New  York  National  Guards  (now  the  360th),  who  have  been  decorated  by 
the  French  for  routing  24  Germans  and  preventing  the  carrying-  out  of  a  well- 
developed  plan  to  assail  one  of  the  most  important  points  of  resistance  on  the 
American  front.  They  have  been  awarded  the  War  Cross  by  the  French  Genera! 
of  the  division  under  whom  they  are  serving. 


Copyrighted  by  Committee  on  Public  Information. 
COLORED  SOLDIERS  BUILDING  ROADS  "OVER  THERE." 


Copyrighted  by  Committee  on  Public  information. 
COLORED   SOLDIERS   IN   THE   TRENCHES    "OVER    THERE." 

(Note  the  tin  hats.) 


:*# 

%;■:■.:' 

•  '■<:'■:■:'■:'■: 

•sum 


|  From  The  Argus. 

NEWTON  D.  BAKER,  SECRETARY  OF  WAR, 
Personally  inquiring  about  the  welfare  of  the  Colored  American  Soldiers,  who 

are  now  "over  there." 


MAKING  SOLDIERS  SOMEWHERE   IN  AMERICA.     DO  YOU   KNOW  THEM? 


Copyrighted  by  Committee  on  Public  information. 
HOTEL,  BOOKER  T.   WASHINGTON   "OVER   THERE."* 
The  Negro  Soldiers  are  surely  fighting'  for  Democracy.     It  is  coming  to  them 

by  leaps  and  bounds. 


Copyrighted  by  Committee  on  Public  Information. 

COLORED  SOLDIERS  LEAVING  AN  AMERICAN  PORT  FOR  "OVER  THERE." 

(See  them  dancing  on  the  right.) 


>• ">< HM  — —II  >|—  ^» 

l 


The   Late  Major  Walker,    of   the   First   Colored   Battalion, 

I 


District  of  Columbia  National  Guard 


THE  late  Major  James  E.  Walker  was  born  in  Virginia,  Sep- 
tember 7,  1874.  He  was  educated  in  the  public  schools  of 
Washington,  D.  C,  and  was  graduated  from  the  M  Street 
High  School  in  1893,  and  the  Miner  Normal  School  in  1894.  For 
twenty-four  years  he  was  in  the  public  school  service,  and  since 
1899  was  supervising  principal.  In  1896  he  was  made  Lieutenant  in 
the  First  Separate  Battalion  of  the  National  Guard  of  the  District 
of  Columbia.  In  1909  he  w^s  made  Captain  and  in  1912,  through 
competitive  examination,  was  commissioned  Major.  His  command 
was  called  out  to  guard  the  White  House,  and  while  on  this  duty 
Major  Walker's  health  became  impaired.  He  was  sent  to  the  U.  S. 
Hospital  at  Fort  Bayard,  New  Mexico,  for  treatment,  where  he  died 
April  4,  1918. 


I 


II 


f  I 


4— ,1,1 II 

i|i..ihi— u»— 


INTRODUCTION.  vii 

comment  for  many  years.  Other  countries  besides  Germany 
have  maintained  great  armies,  but  their  maintenance  has  been 
but  an  incidental  part  of  the  general  business  of  the  nation  and 
there  was  no  submerging  of  the  spirit  which  seeks  and  demands 
appropriate  public  ideals  in  government  and  action.  So  that 
while  other  elements  have  always  tended  to  produce  friction 
between  neighboring  countries,  it  was  adamant,  stubborn,  mili- 
tary Prussianism  which  asserted  itself  in  the  middle  of  1914  and 
set  the  world  afire. 

What  the  ultimate  cost  in  lives,  money,  morals  and  weak- 
ening of  humanity  as  a  whole  will  sum  up  cannot  be  written  for 
years  to  come.  In  our  own  great  struggle,  which  had  for  its 
object  the  liberation  of  the  negro,  the  scars  which  the  South 
received  have  not  yet  been  eliminated.  Portions  of  the  country 
devastated  by  the  soldiers  still  bear  the  marks  of  the  invasion, 
but  what  was  lost  in  money  and  material  things  was  made  up 
by  the  welding  together  of  the  two  sections  of  the  country.  The 
Union  was  made  a  concrete,  humanitarian  body  of  citizens. 
The  battle  was  for  the  right  and  liberty  triumphed. 

Just  as  America  fought  for  liberty  in  the  stirring  days  of 
1776,  and  her  peoples  fought  one  another  in  the  trying  days  of 
1861-65,  so  America  has  been  drawn  into  the  world's  war  that 
the  principles  of  liberty  for  which  she  has  ever  stood  may  be 
perpetuated  throughout  the  world  and  an  international  peace 
may  be  established,  which  will  for  all  time  end  such  convulsions 
as  have  shaken  the  world  since  August,  1914,  when  the  first 
shots  were  fired  in  fair  Belgium  by  German  invaders. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION    v 

CHAPTER  L 

THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME  _ 

Teutons  Find  in  a  Mubdee  the  Excuse  foe  Wae — Gebmany  Inspieed  by  Am- 
bitions  FOE  WOELD   CONTBOL — THE    STBUGGLE   FOE   COMMEECIAL    SUPEEMACY   A 

Factoe— The   Undeblying   Motives    17 

CHAPTER  II. 

WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

The  Ibon  Hand  of  Peussianism — The  Aebogant  Hohenzollebn  Attitude— 
Secbetaey  Lane  Tells  Why  We  Fight* — Beoken  Pledges — Laws  Violated 
— Peussianism  the  Child  of  Babbaeity — Geemany's  Plans  foe  a  Wobld 
Empibe    * 25 

CHAPTER  III.  . . 

THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

Geemany's  Babbaeity — The  Devastation  of  Belgium — Human  Fiends — Fibe- 
beand  and  toech — rape  and  pillage — the  slacking  of  louvain — wanton 
Destbuction — Official  Peoof   41 

ARTICLE  IV. 

THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

A  Vobacious  Sea  Monstee — The  Ruthless  Desteuctive  Policy  of  Gebmany — 
Staevation  of  Nations  the  Goal — How  the  Submabines  Opebate — Some 
Personal  Expebiences 64 

CHAPTER  V. 

THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

Nets  to  Entangle  the  Sea  Shaeks  of  Wab — "  Chasees  "  ob  "  Skimming 
dish  "  Boats — "  Blimps  "  and  Seaplanes — Hunting  the  Submabine  with 
"  Lance/'  Bomb  and  Gun — A  Sailob's  Descbiption 82 

CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

Aeeoplanes  and  Airships — They  Spy  the  Movements  of  Foeces  on  Land  oe 
Sea — Lead  Disastbous  Bomb  Attacks — Valuable  in  "  Spotting  "  Sub- 
mabines— The  Bombabdment  at  Mes sines  Ridge v.     93 

ix 


xii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
THE  HEROIC  ANZAC. 

FOBCES  THAT  StIBEED  THE  WORLD  IN  THE  GALLIPOLI  CAMPAIGNS — FAMOUS  AS   SAP- 

pees — The  Blasting  of  Messines   Ridge — Two  Yeaes   Tunneling — 30,000 

Geemans  Blown  to  Atoms — 1,000,000  Pounds  of  Explosives  Used — Teoops 

that.  Were  Teanspoeted  11,000  Miles 313 

CHAPTER  XX. 

AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

Pbesident  Wilson's  Famous  Message  to  Congeess — The  Was  Resolution-^ 
Apeil  6,  1917,  Sees  the  United  States  at  Was — Review  of  the  Negotia- 
tions Between  Germany  and  America1 — The  U-Boat  Resteicted  Zone  An- 
nouncement of  Geemany — Peemiee  Lloyd  George  on  America  in  the  Con- 
flict   327 

CHAPTER   XXI. 

UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

Makes  Woeld's  Biggest  Wae  Loan — Seize  Geeman  Ships — Inteigue  Exposed—* 
Geneeal  Peeshing  and  Staff  in  Eueope — The  Navy  on  Duty  in  Noeth  Sea 
— Fiest  United  States  Teoops  Reach  Feance — Geemany's  Attempts  to 
Sink  Teoop  Ships  Thwaeted  by  Navy's  Guns 355 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

A   GERMAN   CRISIS. 

The  Downfall  of  Beth  man  n-Hollweg — The  Ceown  Peince  in  the  Lime  Light 
— Hollweg's  Unique  Caeeeb — Db.  Geoeg  Michaelis  Appointed  Chancellor 
—The  Kaiseb  and  How  He  Gets  His  Immense  Poweb 372 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

Pbesident  Wilson  Puts  Embargo  on  Food  Shipments — Scandinavian  Countries 

Furnishing  Supplies  to  Geemany  Inspiees  Obdee— The  Difficult  Position 

of  Norway,  Denmabk,  Holland  and  Switzerland 380 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR. 

From  Bosnia  to  Flandees — Maene  the  Tubning  Point  of  the  Conflict-- The 
Conquests  of  Sebvia  and  Rumania— The  Fall  of  Bagdad— Russia's  Women 

SOLDIEBS — AMEEICA'S    CONSCBIPTS 3^1 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

CHAPTEE  XXV. 

AMEEICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOE. 

United  States  Soldiers  Inspired  Allied  Troops — Russian  Government  Col- 
lapses— Italian  Army  Fails — Allied  War  Council  Formed — Foch  Com- 
mands Allied  Armies — Pershing  Offers  American  Troops — Under  Fire — 
U-Boat  Bases  Raided  by  British ^. ...... ._, 401 

CHAPTEE  XXVI. 

AMEEICANS  TUEN  WAE'S  TIDE. 

Brilliant  American  Fighting  Stops  Hun  Advance — French  and  British  In- 
spired— Famous  Marines  Lead  in  Picturesque  Attack — Halt  Germans  at 
Chateau-Thierry — Used  Open  Style  Fighting — Thousands  of  Germans 
Slain — United  States  Troops  in  Siberia — New  Conscription  Bill  Passed — 
Allied  Successes  on  All  Fronts,  ,,.,,,,,,.,....«, .417 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME. 

Teutons  Find  in  a  Murdeb  the  Excuse  for  War — Germany  Inspired  by  Am- 
bitions fob  World  Control — The  Struggle  for  Commercial  Supremacy  a 
Factor — The  Underlying  Motives. 

THE  assassination  of  the  Archduke  Francis  Ferdinand,  heir 
apparent  to  the  throne  of  Austria,  together  with  his  wife, 
in  Bosnia,  during  the  last  days  of  June,  1914,  is  com- 
monly regarded  as  the  blow  which  forged  the  chain  that  bound 
the  European  powers  in  bloody  warfare.  The  tragedy  was  the 
signal  for  putting  on  the  world  stage  the  greatest  war  play  of 
all  times. 

When  Austria,  regarding  the  murder  of  the  Archduke  as 
a  National  affront,  precipitated  the  conflict  which  has  con- 
vulsed the  universe,  she  marked  the  way  easy  for  Imperial  Ger- 
many to  put  into  effect  a  long-contemplated  plan  for  territo- 
rial expansion,  and  to  wage  a  warfare  so  insidious,  so  brutal 
and  so  ruthless  in  its  character  as  to  amaze  the  civilized  world. 

Word-pictures  were  drawn,  so  to  speak,  of  a  mighty 
nation  striving  to  burst  iron  bands  that  were  slowly  strangling 
her,  and  her  perfectly  natural  wish  to  find  outlets  for  her 
rapidly  growing  population  and  commerce.  Germany  sought 
to  obtain  "a  place  in  the  sun,"  to  use  one  of  the  Kaiser's  most 
unfortunate  expressions,  and  the  world  soon  found  that  the 
"place"  included  the  territory  embracing  a  few  ports  on  the 
English  channel,  with  control  of  Holland  and  Belgium, 
Poland,  the  Balkan  countries,  a  big  slice  of  Asia  Minor, 
Egypt,  English  and  French  colonies  in  Africa,  not  to  mention 
remote  possibilities. 

Germany's  ambitions  may  have  been  laudable,  but  her 
methods  of  trying  to  satisfy  these  ambitions  were  not  such  as 

H  R— 2  17 


18       THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME. 

to  either  gain  for  her  the  "solar  warmth"  which  she  sought  to 
win,  or  gain  for  her  the  friendship  of  the  nations  of  the  civilized 
world.  The  drama  which  Germany  directed  moved  swiftly  in 
this  wise: 

Austria  claimed  that  Servia,  as  a  Nation,  was  responsible 
for  the  assassination  of  the  Archduke  in  Bosnia.  She  sent  an 
ultimatum  to  Belgrade,  making  demands  which  the  Servians 
could  not  admit.  Thereupon  Austria  declared  war  and  moved 
across  the  Danube  with  her  army. 

THE  FOUR  GROUPS. 

Austria's  attack  threatened  to  disturb  the  balance  of 
power,  because  at  the  time  the  continent  was  divided  into  four 
groups:  The  close  alliance  of  the  central  powers — Germany, 
Austria  and  Italy — referred  to  as  the  Triple  Alliance  or  Drei- 
bund;  the  Triple  Entente,  or  understanding  between  Great 
Britain,  France  and  Russia;  the  smaller  group  whose  neutral- 
ity and  integrity  had  been  guaranteed,  or  at  least  recognized — 
Belgium,  Denmark,  Holland  and  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Luxem- 
bourg, sandwiched  in  between  Germany,  France  and  Belgium, 
together  with  Switzerland.  The  fourth  group  included  the 
Balkan  nations:  Bulgaria,  Servia,  Montenegro,  Greece,  Tur- 
key and  Roumania,  all  drawn  close  to  Russia;  Norway  and 
Sweden,  and  the  Iberian  nations,  Spain  and  Portugal.  The 
increase  in  the  power  of  one  of  these  groups  would  at  any  time 
have  been  sufficient  to  precipitate  a  war,  but  in  the  movement 
of  Austria  against  Servia  there  entered  a  racial  element. 
There  was  a  threatened  drawing  of  another  Slavonic  peoples 
into  the  Teutonic  system.  Besides  this,  the  action  let  loose  the 
flood  of  militarism  which  civilization  had  been  holding  in  check. 

With  this  situation  in  mind,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how 
Germany  could  precipitate  a  world  conflict  by  attempting  to 
keep  open  the  way  to  the  near  East,  and  controlling  the  mar- 
kets as  against  Britain,  France  and  Russia.  Back  of  all  this 
was  the  question  of  commercial  supremacy,  Germany  showing 


THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WOELD  AFLAME.        19 

her  intention  of  keeping  the  way  open  to  the  near  East  and 
dominating  the  markets  as  against  Britain,  France  and  Russia. 
Russia  could  not  stand  by  and  see  one  of  her  Slavonic 
wards  crushed,  and  France,  which  held  the  Russian  national 
debt,  prepared  to  support  her  debtor,  whereupon  Germany, 
threatened  on  both  sides,  struck.  In  doing  so  the  Kaiser  ig- 
nored the  rights  of  the  small  neutral  states,  invaded  Belgium 
and  brought  his  armies  within  threatening  distance  of  Eng- 
land. France  prepared  to  defend  her  country  against  Ger- 
many, and  England,  alarmed  by  the  move  of  Germany  and 
sympathizing  with  Belgium,  struck  back  to  avert  the  disaster 
which  she  felt  must  follow  the  German  movement,  which  had 
been  threatening  for  years. 

REGARDED  EACH  OTHER  WITH  SUSPICION." 
All  attempts  to  maintain  a  balance  of  power  between  the 
European  countries  were  from  time  to  time  jeopardized  by 
various  developments.  The  elements  in  the  continental  group 
struggled  against  each  other,  and  the  Nations,  while  seemingly 
at  rest,  regarded  each  other  with  suspicion.  One  of  the  under- 
lying forces  that  the  world  knew  must  at  some  time  be  felt  was 
of  racial  origin.  The  historical  explanations  of  the  war  would 
involve  the  retelling  of  almost  everything  that  has  happened 
in  Europe  for  more  than  a  century. 

But  it  is  necessary  to  the  long  train  of  evil  consequences 
which  have  followed  the  interference  of  other  powers  in  the 
settlement  of  affairs  between  Russia  and  Turkey  after  the  war 
of  1877,  when  Russia  was  victorious.  Russia  and  Turkey  had 
agreed  upon  a  large  Bulgaria  and  an  enlarged  and  independ- 
ent Servia,  but  at  the  Berlin  Congress,  which  Austria  had  taken 
the  initiative  in  calling,  Austria  showed  that  she  wished  to  have 
as  much  as  possible  of  this  Christian  territory  of  Southeastern 
Europe  kept  under  the  domination  or  nominal  authority  of 
Turkey.  Austria  feared  Russia's  influence  with  the  new  coun- 
tries of  Servia,  Roumania,  Bulgaria  and  Montenegro,  and 


20       THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME. 

therefore  she  desired  to  have  this  territory  remain  Turkish  by 
influence,  to  the  end  that  she  might  some  day  acquire  part  or 
all  of  it  for  herself. 

One  of  the  articles  of  the  agreement  of  Berlin  turned 
Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  over  to  Austria  for  temporary  occu- 
pation and  management.  Austria  was  a  trustee  of  the  country 
which  lies  between  Servia  and  the  Adriatic  sea,  and  while  Aus- 
tria's management  was  efficient,  Servia  looked  forward  to  the 
time  when  a  union  could  be  effected  with  Bosnia,  which  would 
provide  Servia  with  an  outlet  to  the  sea. 

THE  SERVIANS  EMBITTERED. 

But  when  Russia  fell  humiliated  by  the  Japanese  and  the 
Young  Turks  reformed  their  government,  and  there  was  pros- 
pect that  the  Turks  might  demand  the  evacuation  of  Bosnia  by 
Austria,  the  powers  that  had  engaged  in  the  Berlin  treaty  were 
informed  that  Austria  had  decided  to  make  Bosnia  and  Herze- 
govina a  part  of  the  Austro-Hungarian  Empire.  The  Ser- 
vians were  embittered,  because  this  stood  in  the  way  of  their 
attaining  their  ideals,  and  their  country  was  landlocked. 

With  this  bitterness  rankling  in  her  national  breast,  Servia 
joined  forces  with  Bulgaria,  Greece  and  Montenegro  to  drive 
the  Turks  out  of  Europe.  The  larger  powers,  including  Aus- 
tria, tried  to  prevent  the  action,  but  the  heroic  Balkan  struggle 
is  a  matter  of  history.  Servia  was  to  have  secured  as  a  share 
of  the  conquered  territory  a  portion  of  Albania,  on  the  Adri- 
atic. This  would  have  compensated  her  for  the  loss  of  Bosnia, 
but  the  great  powers,  led  by  Austria,  stepped  in,  and  a  plan 
was  devised  of  making  Albania  an  independent  state  or  princi- 
pality, with  a  German  prince  to  rule  over  it. 

The  Servians  were  bitter,  and  both  Servia  and  Greece 
demanded  of  Bulgaria  portions  of  the  territory  acquired  in  the 
war  and  which  had  originally  been  assigned  to  Bulgaria  as  her 
share.  Bulgaria  stood  upon  her  technical  rights  and  precipi- 
tated the  last  Balkan  war,  which  was  really  made  possible,  or 


THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME.       21 

probable,  by  the  Austrian  policy.  When  the  war  was  con- 
cluded Servia  had  acquired  more  territory  to  the  south,  but  she 
remained  a  landlocked  country,  with  Bosnia,  Montenegro  and 
Albania  stretching  between  her  and  the  Adriatic  sea. 

This  was  the  situation  when  the  assassination  of  the  Arch- 
duke Ferdinand  and  his  wife  occurred  in  Bosnia.  The  Arch- 
duke was,  in  effect,  a  joint  ruler  with  the  Emperor  Franz 
Joseph,  who  was  nearly  84  years  of  age,  and  the  entire  world 
realized  that  great  events  were  likely  to  follow  the  killing  of 
the  heir  apparent  to  the  Austro-Hungarian  throne.  The  mur- 
der was  committed  by  a  young  Servian  fanatic,  and  Austria 
determined  to  hold  Servia  responsible  for  the  murder,  and 
therefore  presented  her  now- famous  ultimatum. 

NO  CAUSE  FOR  WAR. 

Students  of  history  hold  that  if  there  had  been  a  proper 
respect  for  the  commendable  desire  of  the  Christian  peoples  in 
European  Turkey  to  throw  off  the  Turkish  yoke  and  become 
self-governing  states,  there  would  have  been  no  cause  for  war, 
so  far  as  relates  to  Servia  and  the  situation  which  precipitated 
the  conflict.  There  would  have  been  developed  a  series  of 
peaceful  and  progressive  countries  of  the  non-military  type  of 
Denmark,  Sweden  and  Holland. 

A  wiser  treatment  of  the  Balkan  problem  might  have 
averted  the  war,  but  it  could  not  have  set  aside  racial  differ- 
ences, nor  could  it  have  ended  the  curse  of  militarism  or  set  at 
rest  the  distrust  and  fear  which  it  promotes. 

The  end  of  European  militarism  might  have  come  about, 
however,  through  a  better  understanding  between  Germany 
and  France.  This  might  have  been  arrived  at  years  ago  if 
Germany  had  opened  the  Alsace-Lorraine  question,  and  had 
rearranged  the  boundary  line  between  the  two  countries  so  that 
the  French-speaking  communities  lost  in  the  Franco-Prussian 
war  be  ceded  back  to  France.  The  cost  of  maintaining  the 
feud  over  Alsace-Lorraine  has  been  a  burden  to  both  France 


22       THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME. 

and  Germany,  and  the  progress  which  Germany  has  made  in 
world  affairs,  despite  the  burden  of  militarism  which  she  has 
carried,  is  one  of  the  marvels  of  the  century.  And  the  situation 
compelled  France  to  maintain  a  defensive  military  organiza- 
tion which  was  as  great  a  burden  to  her  and  barrier  to  world 
peace  as  the  military  burden  of  Germany. 

STRAIN  BETWEEN   GERMANY  AND  RUSSIA. 

Whether  Germany  conspired  to  bring  on  the  war  so  that 
she  could  wage  a  campaign  of  aggression  has  not  yet  been 
made  clear,  but  the  strain  between  Germany  and  Russia  had 
been  growing  for  some  time,  and  the  assassination  of  the  Teu- 
tonic heir,  Francis  Ferdinand,  by  a  ward  of  Russia,  created  an 
occasion  which  gave  Germany  an  opportunity  to  fight,  without 
being  compelled  to  directly  precipitate  the  conflict.  Russia 
could  do  naught  else  but  come  to  the  aid  of  Servia,  and  Ger- 
many by  reason  of  her  alliance  with  Austria  must  aid  the  latter 
country. 

Germany  anticipated  the  entry  of  Italy  into  the  conflict 
as  the  third  member  of  the  Triple  Alliance,  but  Italy  did  not 
regard  Germany's  action  as  defensive  and  declined  to  aid  Aus- 
tria. Germany  had  made  overtures  to  Great  Britain,  but  Eng- 
land had  an  understanding  with  France,  which  was  in  the 
nature  of  a  limited  alliance,  and  Germany  might  have  kept 
England  out  of  the  struggle;  but  Germany  proceeded  with  a 
plan  to  invade  France  by  way  of  Belgium,  which  was  in  viola- 
tion of  international  agreement  establishing  Belgium's  neu- 
trality and  independence.  Germany  had  nothing  to  gain  by 
choosing  the  Belgium  route,  for  the  fact  is  that  even  had  the 
Belgian  government  approved  the  movement,  there  must  have 
been  a  French  counter-movement,  which  would  have  made  Bel- 
gium the  theatre  of  war  just  the  same. 

Pan-Germanism  has  been  described  as  one  of  the  under- 
lying motives  in  the  world  war,  and  Pan- Slavism  has  always 
opposed  Pan-Germanism.     Pan-Germanism  is  described  as  a 


THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WOKLD  AFLAME.       23 

well-defined  policy  or  movement  which  seeks  the  common  wel- 
fare of  the  Germanic  peoples  of  all  Europe  and  the  advance 
of  Teutonic  culture,  while  Pan- Slavism,  represented  by  Rus- 
sia, seeks  in  the  main  the  uniting  of  all  the  Slavonic  folk  for 
common  welfare.  The  contact  between  these  two  has  always 
been  seething,  and  the  racial  differences  made  burdensome  the 
arbitrary  alignment  and  political  geography  arranged  by  the 
Berlin  Congress. 

OUTLETS  TO  THE  WORLD'S  MARKET. 

The  commercial  side,  however,  was  a  big  factor,  for  Ger- 
many sought  world  markets  for  its  products.  In  the  near  East 
are  the  grain  fields  of  Mesopotamia,  and  in  the  far  East  are 
the  vast  markets  of  India  and  China.  The  great  banking  and 
financial  interests  of  Europe  have  been  seeking  the  conquest  of 
Asia  for  nearly  half  a  century.  German  capital  built  railroads 
through  Asia  Minor,  but  English  capital  controls  the  Suez 
Canal.  Russia  welded  the  Balkan  states  until  the  Slavonic 
wedge  from  the  Black  sea  to  the  Adriatic  barred  Germany's 
way  to  the  Orient.  England  threatened  the  Kaiser's  expan- 
sion on  the  sea;  while  Russia,  on  one  side,  with  France  her 
strong  ally,  closed  the  Germans  in  on  opposite  sides.  So  Ger- 
many must  have  outlets  to  the  world  markets. 

The  religious  element  was  also  a  factor  in  the  affairs  of 
Europe,  for  the  territory  has  been  divided  into  four  large  reli- 
gious groups  for  centuries.  Moslems  counted  several  millions 
of  Turks,  Bosnians  and  Albanians  in  Europe,  the  Prot- 
estants among  the  Germans,  English,  Swiss  and  Hungarians 
number  about  100,000,000,  while  the  Roman  Catholics  in  all 
the  Latin  countries,  Southern  Germany,  Croatia,  Albania, 
Bohemia,  and  in  Russian  Austria  and  Russian  Poland  are 
about  180,000,000.  The  Greek  Catholics  in  Russia,  the  Balkan 
countries  and  a  few  provinces  in  the  Austrian  Empire  number 
more  than  110,000,000. 

The  differences  in  religion  have  precipitated  many  Euro- 


24       THE  FLASH  THAT  SET  THE  WORLD  AFLAME. 

pean  struggles,  but  for  more  than  a  century  the  countries  have 
been  forced  to  assume  an  attitude  of  tolerance,  so  that  churches 
other  than  those  established  by  the  State  have  thrived.  But 
just  what  influence  religions  may  have  had  in  the  various  inci- 
dents of  the  war  it  is  difficult  to  determine. 

The  outstanding  fact  is  that  but  for  the  arrogant,  mili- 
taristic policy  of  Imperial  Germany,  the  differences  between 
nations  might  have  been  settled,  and  almost  indescribable 
horrors  of  the  war  would  never  have  been  experienced. 


CHAPTER  II. 

WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

The  Iron  Hand  of  Prtjssianism — The  Arrogant  Hohenzolleen  Attitude — 
Secretary  Lane  Tells  Why  We  Fight — Broken  Pledges — Laws  Violated 
— Prtjssianism  the  Child  of  Barbarity — Germany's  Plans  foe  a  World 
Empire. 

NOT  merely  to  prevent  Germany  from  opening  avenues  of 
commerce  to  the  seas  nor  to  throttle  the  ambitions  of 
the  Kaiser  was  America  drawn  into  the  vortex  of  war 
with  France,  England,  Russia,  Belgium,  Italy  and  other 
nations ;  but  that  the  iron  hand  of  Prussianism,  as  exemplified 
in  the  conduct  of  the  German  Government,  might  be  lifted 
from  the  shoulders  of  men,  and  the  world  given  that  measure 
of  peace  and  security  which  modern  civilization  demands. 

Germany  by  her  ruthless  submarine  warfare  brought  deso- 
lation to  many  American  homes.  She  sank  without  a  pang  of 
conscience  the  great  transatlantic  steamship  Lusitania,  and, 
while  pretending  friendship  for  the  United  States  and  plead- 
ing no  intent  to  disregard  American  rights,  broke  her  own 
pledges  and  repeated  her  overt  acts,  ignoring  international  law 
and  the  rights  of  all  neutrals  at  sea. 

She  began  her  outlawry  by  the  invasion  of  Belgium, 
which  was  followed  by  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  German 
forces  which  clearly  marked  them  descendants  of  the  "wolf 
tribes"  of  feudal  days,  fighting  with  the  motto  before  them  of, 
"To  the  victor  belong  the  spoils." 

But  all  of  Germany's  diabolical  acts  involving  the  peace 
and  security  of  America  and  American  citizens  might  have 
been  the  subject  of  international  adjudication  but  for  the  arro- 
gance of  the  ruling  forces  of  the  Teutons.  In  a  broad  sense, 
Prussianism  is  credited  with  responsibility  for  the  devastating 
war  and  for  the  policy  which  drew  America  into  the  conflict. 

The  country,  led  by  President  Woodrow  Wilson,  who 

25 


26  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

temporized  to  an  extent  that  for  a  time  made  him  the  subject 
of  bitter  criticism,  found  that  war  was  being  forced  upon  it  by 
an  autocratic  and  ambitious  German  Government — that  of  the 
Hohenzollern  dynasty — which  possessed  an  insane  ambition  to 
dominate  the  earth,  leaving  to  America  no  alternative  but  to 
borrow  the  piratical  terrorism  of  Imperialistic  Germany,  with 
temporary  abandonment  of  its  own  constitutional  free  govern- 
ment, and  join  the  Allies  to  defend  it. 

In  the  sense  which  Prussianism  or  militarism  is  here  used 
it  denotes  a  mental  attitude  or  view.  It  is  a  condition  of  mind 
which  is  partisan,  exaggerated  and  egotistical,  and  is  developed 
by  environment  and  training.  Just  as  the  professional  spirit 
in  any  other  occupation  leads  to  an  exhibition  of  exaggerated 
importance,  the  despotic  doctrine  of  militarism  assumes  supe- 
riority over  rational  motives  and  deliberations.  Everything 
must  be  sacrificed  to  perpetuate  and  maintain  the  honor  and 
prestige  of  the  military. 

WHAT  MILITARISM  IS. 

What  that  militarism  is  and  what  it  has  done  to  America, 
and  to  the  whole  world,  is  best  summed  up  in  the  words  of 
Secretary  Lane,  of  the  Department  of  the  Interior,  at  Wash- 
ington, who  in  an  address  before  the  Home  Club  of  the  De- 
partment on  June  4,  1917,  just  when  America  was  beginning 
to  send  forces  to  Europe,  said: 

"America  is  at  war  in  self-defense  and  because  she  could 
not  keep  out ;  she  is  at  war  to  save  herself  with  the  rest  of  the 
world  from  the  nation  that  has  linked  itself  with  the  Turk  and 
adopted  the  methods  of  Mahomet,  setting  itself  to  make  the 
world  bow  before  policies  backed  by  the  organized  and  scien- 
tific military  system. 

"Why  are  we  fighting  Germany?  The  brief  answer  is 
that  ours  is  a  war  of  self-defense.  We  did  not  wish  to  fight 
Germany.  She  made  the  attack  upon  us;  not  on  our  shores, 
but  on  our  ships,  our  lives,  our  rights,  our  future.     For  two 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  27 

years  and  more  we  held  to  a  neutrality  that  made  us  apologists 
for  things  which  outraged  man's  common  sense  of  fair  play 
and  humanity. 

"At  each  new  offense — the  invasion  of  Belgium,  the  kill- 
ing of  civilian  Belgians,  the  attacks  on  Scarborough  and  other 
defenseless  towns,  the  laying  of  mines  in  neutral  waters,  the 
fencing  off  of  the  seas — and  on  and  on  through  the  months, 
we  said: 

"  'This  is  war — archaic,  uncivilized  war,  but  war.  All 
rules  have  been  thrown  away ;  all  nobility ;  man  has  come  down 
to  the  primitive  brute.  And  while  we  cannot  justify,  we  can- 
not intervene.    It  is  not  our  war.' 

IN  WAR  TO  DEFEND  RIGHTS. 

"Then  why  are  we  in?  Because  we  could  not  keep  out. 
The  invasion  of  Belgium,  which  opened  the  war,  led  to  the 
invasion  of  the  United  States  by  slow,  steady,  logical  steps. 
Our  sympathies  evolved  into  a  conviction  of  self-interest.  Our 
love  of  fair  play  ripened  into  alarm  at  our  own  peril. 

"We  talked  in  the  language  and  in  the  spirit  of  good  faith 
and  sincerity,  as  honest  men  should  talk,  until  we  discovered 
that  our  talk  was  construed  as  cowardice.  And  Mexico  was 
called  upon  to  cow  us. 

"We  talked  as  men  would  talk  who  cared  alone  for  peace 
and  the  advancement  of  their  own  material  interests,  until  we 
discovered  that  we  were  thought  to  be  a  nation  of  mere  money- 
makers, devoid  of  all  character — until,  indeed,  we  were  told 
that  we  could  not  walk  the  highways  of  the  world  without  per- 
mission of  a  Prussian  soldier,  that  our  ships  might  not  sail 
without  wearing  a  striped  uniform  of  humiliation  upon  a  nar- 
row path  of  national  subservience. 

"We  talked  as  men  talk  who  hope  for  honest  agreement, 
not  for  war,  until  we  found  that  the  treaty  torn  to  pieces  at 
Liege  was  but  the  symbol  of  a  policy  that  made  agreements 
worthless  against  a  purpose  that  knew  no  word  but  success. 


28  WHY  AMEKICA  ENTEKED  THE  WAR. 

"And  so  we  came  into  this  war  for  ourselves.  It  is  a  war 
to  save  America,  to  preserve  self-respect,  to  justify  our  right 
to  live  as  we  have  lived,  not  as  some  one  else  wishes  us  to  live. 
In  the  name  of  freedom  we  challenge  with  ships  and  men, 
money  and  an  undaunted  spirit,  that  word  Verboten'  which 
Germany  has  written  upon  the  sea  and  upon  the  land. 

"For  America  is  not  the  name  of  so  much  territory.  It  is 
a  living  spirit,  born  in  travail,  grown  in  the  rough  school  of 
bitter  experiences,  a  living  spirit  which  has  purpose  and  pride 
and  conscience,  knows  why  it  wishes  to  live  and  to  what  end, 
knows  how  it  comes  to  be  respected  of  the  world,  and  hopes  to 
retain  that  respect  by  living  on  with  the  light  of  Lincoln's  love 
of  man  as  its  old  and  new  testaments. 

AMERICA  MUST  LIVE. 

"It  is  more  precious  that  this  America  should  live  than 
that  we  Americans  should  live.  And  this  America  as  we  now 
see  has  been  challenged  from  the  first  of  this  war  by  the  strong 
arm  of  a  power  that  has  no  sympathy  with  our  purpose,  and 
will  not  hesitate  to  destroy  us  if  the  law  that  we  respect,  the 
rights  that  are  to  us  sacred,  or  the  spirit  that  we  have,  stand 
across  her  set  will  to  make  this  world  bow  before  her  policies, 
backed  by  her  organized  and  scientific  military  system.  The 
world  of  Christ — a  neglected  but  not  a  rejected  Christ — has 
come  again  face  to  face  with  the  world  of  Mahomet,  who  willed 
to  win  by  force. 

"With  this  background  of  history  and  in  this  sense,  then, 
we  fight  Germany: 

"Because  of  Belgium — invaded,  outraged,  enslaved,  im- 
poverished Belgium.  We  cannot  forget  Liege,  Louvain  and 
Cardinal  Mercier.  Translated  into  terms  of  American  history 
these  names  stand  for  Bunker  Hill,  Lexington  and  Patrick 
Henry. 

"Because  of  France — invaded,  desecrated  France,  a  mil- 
lion of  whose  heroic  sons  have  died  to  save  the  land  of  Lafay- 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  29 

ette.  Glorious,  golden  France,  the  preserver  of  the  arts,  the 
land  of  noble  spirit.  The  first  land  to  follow  our  lead  into 
republican  liberty. 

"Because  of  England — from  whom  came  the  laws,  tradi- 
tions, standards  of  life  and  inherent  love  of  liberty  which  we 
call  Anglo-Saxon  civilization.  We  defeated  her  once  upon  the 
land  and  once  upon  sea.  But  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Africa 
and  Canada  are  free  because  of  what  we  did.  And  they  are 
with  us  in  the  fight  for  the  freedom  of  the  seas. 

"Because  of  Russia — new  Russia.  She  must  not  be  over- 
whelmed now.  Not  now,  surely,  when  she  is  just  born  into 
freedom.  Her  peasants  must  have  their  chance;  they  must  go 
to  school  to  Washington,  to  Jefferson  and  to  Lincoln,  until 
they  know  their  way  about  in  this  new,  strange  world,  of  gov- 
ernment by  the  popular  will ;  and 

"Because  of  other  peoples,  with  their  rising  hope  that  the 
world  may  be  freed  from  government  by  the  soldier. 

GERMANY'S  CRIMES  AGAINST  US. 

"We  are  fighting  Germany  because  she  sought  to  terrorize 
us  and  then  to  fool  us.  We  could  not  believe  that  Germany 
would  do  what  she  said  she  would  do  upon  the  seas. 

"We  still  hear  the  piteous  cries  of  children  coming  up  out 
of  the  sea  where  the  Lusitania  went  down.  And  Germany  has 
never  asked  forgiveness  of  the  world. 

"We  saw  the  Sussex  sunk,  crowded  with  the  sons  and 
daughters  of  neutral  nations. 

"We  saw  ship  after  ship  sent  to  the  bottom — ships  of 
mercy  bound  out  of  America  for  the  Belgian  starving;  ships 
carrying  the  Red  Cross  and  laden  with  the  wounded  of  all 
nations ;  ships  carrying  food  and  clothing  to  friendly,  harmless, 
terrorized  peoples ;  ships  flying  the  Stars  and  Stripes — sent  to 
the  bottom  hundreds  of  miles  from  shore,  manned  by  Ameri- 
can seamen,  murdered  against  all  law,  without  warning. 

"We  believed  Germany's  promise  that  she  would  respect 


30  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

the  neutral  flag  and  the  rights  of  neutrals,  and  we  held  our 
anger  and  outrage  in  check.  But  now  we  see  that  she  was  hold- 
ing us  off  with  fair  promises  until  she  could  build  her  huge  fleet 
of  submarines.  For  when  spring  came  she  blew  her  promise 
into  the  air,  just  as  at  the  beginning  she  had  torn  up  that 
'scrap  of  paper.'  Then  we  saw  clearly  that  there  was  but  one 
law  for  Germany,  her  will  to  rule. 

"We  are  fighting  Germany  because  she  violated  our  con- 
fidence. Paid  German  spies  filled  our  cities.  Officials  of  her 
Government,  received  as  the  guests  of  this  nation,  lived  with 
us  to  bribe  and  terrorize,  defying  our  law  and  the  law  of 
nations. 

"We  are  fighting  Germany  because  while  we  were  yet  her 
friends — the  only  great  power  that  still  held  hands  off — she 
sent  the  Zimmermann  note  calling  to  her  aid  Mexico,  our 
southern  neighbor,  and  hoping  to  lure  Japan,  our  western 
neighbor,  into  war  against  this  nation  of  peace. 

GOVERNMENT  THAT  HAS  NO  CONSCIENCE. 

"The  nation  that  would  do  these  things  proclaims  the  gos- 
pel that  government  has  no  conscience.  And  this  doctrine  can- 
not live,  or  else  democracy  must  die!  For  the  nations  of  the 
world  must  keep  faith.  There  can  be  no  living  for  us  in  a  world 
where  the  State  has  no  conscience,  no  reverence  for  the  things 
of  the  spirit,  no  respect  for  international  law,  no  mercy  for 
those  who  fall  before  its  force.  What  an  unordered  world! 
Anarchy !    The  anarchy  of  the  rival  wolf  packs ! 

"We  are  fighting  Germany  because  in  this  war  feudalism 
is  making  its  last  stand  against  oncoming  democracy.  We  see 
it  now.  This  is  a  war  against  an  old  spirit,  an  ancient,  out- 
worn spirit.  It  is  a  war  against  feudalism — the  right  of  the 
castle  on  the  hill  to  rule  the  village  below.  It  is  a  war  of  democ- 
racy— the  right  of  all  to  be  their  own  masters.  Let  Germany 
be  feudal  if  she  will!  But  she  must  not  spread  her  system  over 
a  world  that  has  outgrown  it.     Feudalism  plus  science,  thir- 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  31 

teenth  century  plus  twentieth;  this  is  the  religion  of  the  mis- 
taken Germany  that  has  linked  itself  with  the  Turk ;  that  has, 
too,  adopted  the  method  of  Mahomet:  'The  State  has  no  con- 
science/ 'the  State  can  do  no  wrong.'  With  the  spirit  of  the 
fanatic,  she  believes  this  gospel  and  that  it  is  her  duty  to  spread 
it  by  force. 

"With  poison  gas  that  makes  living  a  hell,  with  submarines 
that  sneak  through  the  seas  to  slyly  murder  non-combatants, 
with  dirigibles  that  bombard  men  and  women  while  they  sleep, 
with  a  perfected  system  of  terrorization  that  the  modern  world 
first  heard  of  when  German  troops  entered  China,  German 
feudalism  is  making  war  upon  mankind. 

LIVE  IN  HAUNTED  TERROR. 

"Let  this  old  spirit  of  evil  have  its  way  and  no  man  will 
live  in  America  without  paying  toll  to  it,  in  manhood  and  in 
money.  This  spirit  might  demand  Canada  from  a  defeated, 
navyless  England,  and  then  our  dream  of  peace  on  the  north 
would  be  at  an  end.  We  would  live,  as  France  has  lived  for 
forty  years,  in  haunting  terror. 

"America  speaks  for  the  world  in  fighting  Germany. 
Mark  on  a  map  those  countries  which  are  Germany's  allies, 
and  you  will  mark  but  four,  running  from  the  Baltic  through 
Austria  and  Bulgaria  to  Turkey.  All  the  other  nations,  the 
whole  glove  around,  are  in  arms  against  her  or  are  unable  to 
move.    There  is  deep  meaning  in  this. 

"We  fight  with  the  world  for  an  honest  world,  in  which 
nations  keep  their  word;  for  a  world  in  which  nations  do  not 
live  by  swagger  or  by  threat;  for  a  world  in  which  men  think 
of  the  ways  in  which  they  can  conquer  the  common  cruelties  of 
nature  instead  of  inventing  more  horrible  cruelties  to  inflict 
upon  the  spirit  and  body  of  man ;  for  a  world  in  which  the  am- 
bition or  the  philosophy  of  a  few  shall  not  make  miserable  all 
mankind;  for  a  world  in  which  the  man  is  held  more  precious 
than  the  machine,  the  system  or  the  State." 


32  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

In  his  denunciations  of  the  Imperial  German  Govern- 
ment President  Wilson  and  his  advisers  have  indicted  the 
House  of  Hohenzollern,  of  which  Emperor  Wilhelm  is  the 
head,  and  which  has  developed  the  unbending  military  spirit 
which  has  resulted  in  Germany  being  counted  an  outcast  among 
the  nations  of  the  world. 

America,  it  must  be  noted,  has  no  antipathy  for  the  Ger- 
mans as  a  race,  but  modern  civilization  opposes  that  form  of 
Government  which  has  permitted  the  cruel  characteristics  of 
the  "wolf  tribes"  of  feudal  times  to  be  carried  down  through 
the  generations,  and  capitalized  by  the  Imperial  powers  to 
bring  terror  to  the  hearts  of  all  who  do  not  bow  to  the  iron  hand 
of  the  Kaiser  and  his  ilk. 

GERMANY  A  WARLIKE  RACE. 

The  thing  from  which  this  Prussianism — this  militarism — 
grew  is  easily  traceable  down  the  German  ages.  The  very 
first  appearance  of  the  Germans  in  history  is  as  a  warlike 
race.  The  earliest  German  literature  is  composed  of  folk  tales 
about  war  heroes — their  ideals  and  manly  virtues.  And  this 
ideal  in  one  form  or  another,  under  varying  circumstances  and 
conditions,  persisted  throughout  the  centuries. 

It  is  not  merely  that  military  service  has  been  compulsory 
in  Germany,  but  that  almost  everything  else  has  been  subju- 
gated to  the  development  of  the  army.  While  Germany  has 
given  to  the  world  a  generous  quota  of  scientists,  industrial 
geniuses,  musicians  and  poets,  the  whole  race  is  imbued  with 
the  warlike  spirit  and  its  influence  is  manifest  in  every  phase 
of  national  life.  Practically  all  that  is  best  in  the  nation  in  the 
way  of  efficiency  has  been  inspired  or  may  be  traced  to  the 
military  discipline  to  which  the  people  have  been  subjected  for 
years.  They  have  been  created  human  machines,  trained  to 
obey  orders  and  to  perform  the  services  to  which  they  are  as- 
signed without  protest  and  without  question. 

The  history  of  Germany  began  with  Henry,  the  Fowler, 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  33 

about  A.  D.  929,  who  was  essentially  the  first  sovereign.  He 
developed  the  system  of  margraves  or  wardens  to  guard  the 
frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  fortified  his  towns  and  required 
every  ninth  man  to  take  up  arms  for  his  country.  Robbers 
were  forced  to  become  soldiers  or  be  hanged,  and  as  lawlessness 
was  rampant  there  was  no  dearth  of  material  to  fill  up  the 
ranks  of  the  army. 

The  margraves,  or  military  leaders  under  them,  grew  in 
importance  and  influence  until  the  offices  tended  to  become 
hereditary.  Gradually  the  country  was  divided  into  princi- 
palities, each  of  which  maintained  a  force  of  arms.  This  lim- 
ited form  of  military  rule  maintained  for  several  centuries  of 
troublesome  times,  or  until  about  1412,  when  Emperor  Sigis- 
mund  appointed  Burgrave  Frederick,  of  Nuremberg,  "Stratt- 
halter,"  or  vice-regent. 

BIRTH  OF  THE  MILITARY  SPIRIT. 

This  appointment  marked  the  establishment  of  the  Hohen- 
zollerns  in  Brandenburg,  and,  in  fine,  fixes  the  birth  of  the 
military  spirit  in  Germany. 

Other  princes  of  the  German  Reich  maintained  armies, 
but  the  Hohenzollerns  were  destined  to  imprint  upon  the  na- 
tion the  military  ideal.  In  the  beginning  history  says  that 
Burgrave  Frederick  tried  all  the  arts  of  peace,  but  it  was  only 
with  the  army  of  Franks  and  some  artillery  that  he  was  able 
to  batter  down  the  castles  of  the  robber  lords  and  bring  order 
into  Brandenburg. 

Thomas  Carlyle  gives  a  list  of  twelve  electors  who  strove 
in  turn  to  consolidate  the  power  of  Prussia,  so  that  when  Fed- 
erick  the  Great  became  King  of  Prussia  he  found  much  of  the 
work  done.  Among  the  rulers  of  these  strenuous  days  to  whom 
the  Kaiser  Wilhelm  may  point  as  having  handed  down  to  him 
the  warlike  spirit  are  Kurfuerst  Joachim  I,  of  Brandenburg 
(1529),  who  introduced  Roman  law  and  established  a  supreme 
court  for  all  the  provinces  at  Berlin;  Kurfuerst  Joachim  II, 

H  R— 3 


34  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

of  Brandenburg  (1542),  whom  history  describes  as  an  un- 
scrupulous despot,  fond  o  f  luxury  and  display,  and  who 
changed  his  religion  because  it  was  an  advantage  politically  for 
him  to  do  so;  Margrave  Georg  Frederick  von  Ansbach  (1564) , 
who  caused  the  eyes  of  sixty  peasants  to  be  bored  out  upon 
winning  the  Peasants'  war,  and  Kurfuerst  Frederick  William 
der  Grosse,  of  Brandenburg  (1652),  known  as  the  "Great 
Elector,"  a  fighter,  who  had  two  clearly  defined  aims :  to  build 
up  agriculture  and  maintain  a  big  army. 

For  years  the  Hohenzollerns  and  their  aids  were  fighting 
unfriendly  neighbors  and  quarrelsome  princes,  and  when  after 
the  lapse  of  time  the  Thirty  Years'  War  finally  turned  Ger- 
many into  a  field  of  blood,  the  Great  Elector  emerged  from 
the  strife  with  the  support  of  about  25,000  well  drilled  soldiers, 
and  freed  his  country  from  foreign  foes. 

HELD  EUROPE  AT  HIS  MERCY. 

The  establishment  of  the  power  of  the  Junkers — the  auto- 
crats of  Prussianism — is  credited  to  Frederick  the  Great,  who 
was  the  great  drillmaster  who  organized  the  Prussian  army  on 
lines  of  efficiency  and  economy.  It  is  related  that  Frederick, 
afterward  "The  Great,"  was  taken  from  his  women  teachers 
at  the  age  of  seven  years  and  subjected  to  rigid  military  dis- 
cipline. He  commanded  a  company  of  cadets,  composed  of 
the  sons  of  nobles  who  were  compelled  to  drill  for  him,  and  at 
the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  a  captain  in  the  Potsdam  Guards, 
and  when,  in  1740,  he  became  king,  he  took  the  army  and  held 
all  Europe  at  his  mercy.  His  successor,  Frederick  William 
II,  was  incapable,  and  the  French  revolution  found  Germany 
in  a  state  of  discord. 

When  Frederick  William  III  acceded  to  the  throne  in 
1797  he  started  to  reorganize  the  army.  Frederick  William  I 
had  divided  the  country  into  districts,  or  cantons,  and  here 
began  the  system  of  compulsory  military  training.  All  males 
born  were  enrolled  and  liable  to  service  when  of  age.    The  army 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  35 

was  recruited  by  districts  and  every  district  had  its  regiment, 
though  later  exemptions  were  allowed.  Under  Frederick  Wil- 
liam III,  Scharnhorst,  a  Hanoverian,  was  the  military  reor- 
ganize^ and  he  began  the  work  with  the  slogan  "All  dwellers 
of  the  State  are  born  defenders  of  the  same." 

Instead  of*  depending  for  its  development  on  king,  the 
army  was  directed  by  genius  of  best  men  developed  by  the 
system.  After  the  formation  of  the  German  Empire  in  1871, 
which  placed  the  king  of  Prussia  at  its  head,  the  Constitution 
of  the  German  Empire  made  every  German  a  member  of  the 
active  army  for  seven  years.  Service  with  colors  three  years 
and  with  the  reserve  four.  In  1875  there  were  eighteen  army 
corps,  of  which  twelve  were  Prussian.  The  strength  by  law 
in  1874  was  400,000. 

PEACE   STRENGTH   INCREASED. 

In  1881  the  established  peace  strength  was  increased  by 
thirty-four  battalions  of  infantry,  forty  batteries  of  field  artil- 
lery and  other  forces,  and  in  1886  Bismarck,  recognizing  the 
power  of  Prussianism  and  its  military  influence,  was  com- 
pelled to  dissolve  the  Reichstag,  but  after  the  election  in  1887 
thirty-one  other  battalions  and  twenty-four  batteries  were 
added.  Two  complete  army  corps  were  added  in  1890,  and  in 
1893  the  color  service,  or  length  of  time  when  reservists  were 
subject  to  duty  under  colors  only,  was  decreased  by  two  years, 
bringing  the  peace  strength  up  to  more  than  half  a  million  and 
the  reservists  up  to  4,000,000.  Step  by  step  the  strength  of 
the  military  force  was  increased  until  after  the  adoption  of 
the  law  of  1913,  when  provision  was  made  for  699  battalions  of 
infantry,  633  batteries  of  field  artillery;  44  battalions  of  engi- 
neers ;  55  battalions  of  garrison  artillery ;  31  battalions  of  com- 
munications and  26  battalions  of  train  troops — a  grand  total 
of  870,000  actually  in  service  in  peace  strength. 

The  German  Empire  is  composed  of  twenty-six  states — 
Prussia,  Bavaria,  Wurttemberg,  Baden,  Saxony,  Hesse,  Meek- 


36  WHY  AMEKICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

lenburg-Schwerin,  Mecklenburg- Sterlitz,  Oldenburg,  Bruns- 
wick, Sax-Weimer-Eisnach,  Sax-Coburg-Gotha,  Saxe-Mein- 
ingen,  Saxe-Altenburg,  Waldeck,  Lippe,  Schaumburg-Lippe, 
Reuss  (elder  line),  Reuss  (younger  line),  Anhalt,  Schwarz- 
Rudolsadt,  Schwarzburg-Sonderhausen,  Hamburg,  Bremen, 
Lubeck  and  Reichsland — the  Alsace-Lorraine.  The  area  is 
less  than  that  of  the  State  of  Texas  while  the  population  ac- 
cording to  the  most  recent  statistics  is  about  65,000,000. 

Every  male  person  between  the  ages  of  eighteen  and  forty- 
five  is  liable  for  military  service.  Reservists  under  the  rules 
in  force  when  the  war  started  were  subject  to  two  musters  an- 
nually and  two  periods  of  training  not  to  exceed  eight  weeks 
in  duration. 

EGOTISTICAL  AND  EXAGGERATED  UTTERANCES. 

That  the  present  Emperor  is  imbued  with  the  harsh  mili- 
tary spirit  of  his  ancestors  is  illustrated  by  his  many  egotistical 
and  exaggerated  utterances.  In  dedicating  the  monument  of 
Prince  Frederick  Charles  at  Frankfurt-on-the-Oder  in  1891, 
he  is  quoted  as  having  said : 

"We  would  rather  sacrifice  our  eighteen  army  corps  and 
our  42,000,000  inhabitants  on  the  field  of  battle  than  surrender 
a  single  stone  of  what  my  father  and  Prince  Frederick  gained." 
The  thrills  which  such  expressions  arouse  are  born  of  an  in- 
veterate emotional  habit,  and  are  responsible  for  the  obliquity 
of  view  and  conduct  which  has  made  Germany  an  outcast 
among  civilized  nations. 

But  Germany  was  not  satisfied  with  what  she  had  obtained 
by  her  crusading.  Developments  of  the  war  prove  conclu- 
sively that  the  Kaiser  has  followed  out  the  Hood  and  iron 
politico-economic  methods  of  Bismarck  for  the  development  of 
Prussian  power  and  that  while  at  times  Germany  has  been 
reported  to  be  maneuvering  for  peace,  her  peace  moves  have  in 
reality  been  war  moves,  and  that  a  truce  would  only  give  the 
Imperial  Government  time  in  which  to  further  Prussianize  and 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  37 

prepare  for  a  greater  world  war  the  territory  to  the  southeast 
which  she  has  conquered  under  the  guise  of  a  friendly  alliance. 
It  will  be  recalled  that  President  Wilson  declared  that 
"America  must  fight  until  the  world  is  made  safe  for  democ- 
racy." This  declaration  refers  immediately  to  the  plans  which 
it  has  developed  Germany  had  for  its  conquest.  Based  upon 
reports  received  by  agents  of  the  United  States,  of  England, 
of  France  and  other  countries,  Germany  aimed  to  form  a  con- 
solidation of  an  impregnable  military  and  economic  unit 
stretching  from  the  North  Sea  to  the  Mediterranean,  cutting 
Europe  permanently  in  half,  controlling  the  Dardanelles,  the 
Agean  and  the  Baltic,  and  eventually  forming  the  backbone 
of  a  Prussian  world  empire. 

LEAGUE  AT  WORK  SINCE   1911. 

In  her  southeastern  conquests,  it  is  apparent,  Germany 
followed  almost  in  toto  the  long  established  plan  of  the  Pan- 
German  League,  whose  propaganda  had  been  regarded  outside 
of  Germany  as  the  harmless  activity  of  extremists?  too  radical 
to  be  taken  seriously.  Coupled  with  this  plan,  as  an  instrument 
of  economic  consolidation,  the  German  officials  used  with  only 
slight  modification  the  system  of  customs  union  expansion 
which  aided  Prussia  in  former  years  to  extend  her  domination 
over  the  other  German  States  now  making  up  the  empire. 

As  early  as  1911  the  Pan-German  League  is  said  to  have 
circulated  a  definite  propaganda  of  conquest,  with  printed  ap- 
peals containing  maps  of  a  greater  Germany,  whose  sway  from 
Hamburg  to  Constantinople  and  then  southeastward  through 
Asiatic  Turkey  was  marked  out  by  boundaries  very  coincident 
with  the  military  lines  held  today,  under  German  officers,  by 
the  troops  of  Germany,  Austria-Hungary,  Bulgaria  and  Tur- 
key. Adhesion  of  the  German  Government  itself  to  such  a 
plan  was  not  suspected  by  the  other  Powers,  although  the 
propagandists  were  permitted  to  continue  their  activities  un- 
hindered and  to  spread  their  appeals  in  a  country  of  strict  press 


38  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

supervision.  How  closely  the  German  Government  did  ad- 
here to  the  plan  in  reality  has  been  demonstrated  clearly  by 
the  course  of  the  war. 

Following  the  footsteps  of  Bismarck,  who  used  the  Fran- 
co-Prussian war  alliance  to  bring  Baden,  Bavaria  and  Wurt- 
temburg  into  the  German  confederacy  and  then  into  the  Ger- 
man Empire,  Emperor  William  chose  war  as  the  means  of 
establishing  the  broad  pathway  to  the  southeast  which  was 
essential  for  realization  of  the  dream  of  a  great  Germany. 

VERGE   OF  DISSOLUTION. 

The  subjugation  of  Austria-Hungary,  which  would  have 
presented  a  different  task  under  ordinary  conditions,  became  in 
these  circumstances  comparatively  very  simple.  A  polyglot 
combination  of  States,  having  little  in  common  and  apparently 
held  together  only  by  the  decaying  genius  of  the  aged  Em- 
peror Franz  Joseph,  the  dual  monarchy  was  regarded  every- 
where as  on  the  verge  of  dissolution.  Her  helplessness  before 
Russia's  army  became  apparent  early  in  the  war,  and  the  eager- 
ness with  which  Germany  seized  the  opportunity  thus  pre- 
sented is  pointed  to  as  emphasizing  the  far-sightedness  of 
the  German  plans. 

Austria-Hungary's  submission  is  declared  to  be  complete, 
both  in  a  military  and  economic  sense.  The  German  officers 
commanding  her  armies,  abetted  by  industrial  agents,  scattered 
throughout  the  country  by  Germany,  hold  the  Austrian  and 
Hungarian  population  in  a  union  which  neither  the  hardships 
of  war,  the  death  of  the  Emperor  nor  the  inspiration  of  the  out- 
side influences,  such  as  the  Russian  revolution,  can  break. 

Bulgaria's  declaration  of  war  on  the  side  of  Germany  was 
actuated  by  a  German  diplomatic  coup,  which  in  itself  is  re- 
garded now  as  further  evidence  that  a  clear  road  through  to 
the  Dardanelles  was  considered  in  Berlin  as  a  primary  and  im- 
perative purpose  of  the  war. 

In  the  case  of  Turkey,  German  domination  is  even  more 


WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR.  39 

complete  than  in  Austria- Hungary  and  Bulgaria.  Not  only 
have  German  officers  led  in  defending  Turkish  territory  and 
in  eradicating  inharmonious  elements,  such  as  the  Armenians 
and  Syrians,  but  German  industrial  organizations  have  taken  a 
firm  grip  on  Turkish  industry  and  a  large  delegation  of  Ger- 
man professors  have  been  spreading  German  kultur  among  the 
population. 

The  developments  threw  a  new  light  on  many  events  be- 
fore the  war.  Among  them  the  long-unexplained  declaration 
of  Emperor  William  at  Damascus  in  1898  that  all  Mohamme- 
dans might  confidently  regard  the  German  Emperor  as  "their 
friend  forever."  There  also  is  a  complete  understanding  now 
of  Germany's  eagerness  to  obtain,  in  1899,  a  concession  for  the 
Bagdad  railroad,  an  artery  of  communication  now  indispens- 
able to  the  German  operations. 

These  are  the  things  and  conditions  to  which  the  Allies- 
referred  when  in  replying  to  one  of  President  Wilson's  peace 
notes  they  declared  that  war  must  accomplish  the  "liberation  of 
Italians,  of  Slavs,  of  Rumanians  and  of  Tzecho-Slovacs  from 
foreign  domination;  the  enfranchisement  of  populations  sub- 
ject to  the  bloody  tyranny  of  the  Turk;  the  expulsion  from 
Europe  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  and  the  restoration  of  Servia, 
Montenegro  and  Rumania." 

America  entered  the  war  to  fight  for  Democracy.  On  the 
surface  the  United  States  pledged  itself  to  protect  its  ships  and 
make  secure  the  lives  of  its  citizens  on  the  highways  of  the 
world,  but  the  principles  for  which  the  manhood  of  the  coun- 
try were  called  to  fight  have  been  summarized  as  follows : 

That  the  nations  of  the  world  shall  co-operate  and  not 
compete.  The  paradox  of  history  is  that  every  struggle  leads 
to  firmer  unity.  Wars  cemented  France,  unified  the  British 
Empire,  consolidated  the  American  Union. 

That  national  armaments  be  limited  to  purposes  of  inter- 
nal police,  no  nation  be  allowed  to  have  a  force  sufficient  to  be 


40  WHY  AMERICA  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

a  menace  to  general  peace,  and  a  League  of  Peace  be  formed 
which  shall  have  at  its  hand  sufficient  armed  power  to  compel 
order  among  the  States. 

That  nations  be  governed  by  the  people  that  compose 
them,  and  for  the  benefit  of  those  people,  and  not  of  a  ruling 
class. 

That  every  nation  be  governed  with  an  eye  to  the  welfare 
of  the  whole  world  as  well  as  to  its  own  prosperity  or  glory, 
and  patriotism  properly  subjected  to  humanity. 

That  the  power  of  government  be  dissociated  from  ad- 
vancing the  profits  of  capital,  and  made  always  to  mean  the 
welfare  of  labor. 

That  security  of  life,  freedom  of  worship  and  opinion,  and 
liberty  of  movement  be  assured  to  all  men  everywhere. 

That  no  munitions  or  instruments  of  death  be  manufac- 
tured except  under  control  of  the  International  Council  of 
the  World. 

That  the  seas  be  free  to  all. 

That  tariffs  be  adjusted  with  a  view  to  the  general  welfare 
and  not  as  measures  of  national  rivalry. 

That  railways,  telegraph,  and  telephone  lines,  and  all 
other  common  and  necessary  means  of  intercommunication  be 
eventually  nationalized. 

That  every  human  being  in  a  country  be  conscripted  to 
devote  a  certain  part  of  his  or  her  life  to  national  service. 

That  both  labor  unions  and  combinations  of  capital  be 
under  strict  government  control,  so  that  no  irresponsible  group 
may  conspire  against  the  commonwealth. 

That  every  child  receive  training  to  equip  him  or  her  for 
self-support  and  intelligent  citizenship. 

That  woman  shall  enjoy  every  right  of  citizenship. 

That  the  civil  shall  always  have  precedence  over  the  mili- 
tary authority. 

And  that  the  right  of  free  speech,  of  a  free  press,  and  of 
assembly  shall  remain  inviolate. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

Germany's  Barbarity — The  Devastation  of  Belgium — Human  Fiends — Fire- 
brand and  Torch — Kape  and  Pillage — The  Sacking  of  Louvain — Wanton 
Destruction — Official  Proof. 

THE  conduct  of  Germany  in  ignoring  international  treaties 
and  invading  Belgium  first  aroused  the  antagonism  of 
the  United  States  and  the  rest  of  the  civilized  world,  and 
furnished  the  primary  glimpse  of  how  Imperialism  made  light 
of  human  rights.  What  the  Kaiser  and  his  arrogant  followers 
did  is  fully  set  forth  in  the  report  which  a  special  envoy,  ap- 
pointed by  King  Albert  of  Belgum,  laid  before  President  Wil- 
son on  September  16,  1914. 

The  mission  consisted  of  Henry  Carton  de  Wiart,  Min- 
ister of  Justice;  Messrs.  de  Sadeleer,  Hymans  and  Vander- 
velde,  Ministers  of  State,  and  Count  Louis  de  Lichtervelde, 
serving  as  secretary  of  the  mission.  On  being  received  by 
President  Wilson,  Mr.  de  Wiart,  for  the  mission,  outlined  for 
the  world  and  for  America,  the  situation  in  part  as  follows : 

"His  Majesty,  the  King  of  the  Belgians,  has  charged  us 
with  a  special  mission  to  the  President  of  the  United  States. 
Let  me  say  how  much  we  feel  ourselves  honored  to  have  been 
called  upon  to  express  the  sentiments  of  our  King  and  of  our 
whole  nation  to  the  illustrious  statesman  whom  the  American 
people  have  called  to  the  highest  dignity  of  the  commonwealth. 

"Ever  since  her  independence  was  first  established,  Bel- 
gium has  been  declared  neutral  in  perpetuity.  This  neutrality, 
guaranteed  by  the  Powers,  has  recently  been  violated  by  one 
of  them.  Had  we  consented  to  abandon  our  neutrality  for  the 
benefit  of  one  of  the  belligerents,  we  would  have  betrayed  our 
obligations  toward  the  others.  And  it  was  the  sense  of  our 
international  obligations  as  well  as  that  of  our  dignity  and 

honor  that  has  driven  us  to  resistance. 

41 


42  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

"The  consequences  suffered  by  the  Belgian  nation  were 
not  confined  purely  to  the  harm  occasioned  by  the  forced  march 
of  the  invading  army.  This  army  not  only  seized  a  great  por- 
tion of  our  territory,  but  it  committed  incredible  acts  of  vio- 
lence, the  nature  of  which  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  nations. 

"Peaceful  inhabitants  were  massacred,  defenseless  women 
and  children  were  outraged ;  open  and  undefended  towns  were 
destroyed ;  historical  and  religious  monuments  were  reduced  to 
dust  and  the  famous  library  of  the  University  of  Louvain  was 
given  to  the  flames. 

"Our  government  has  appointed  a  Judicial  Commission  to 
make  an  official  investigation,  so  as  to  thoroughly  and  impar- 
tially examine  the  facts  and  to  determine  the  responsibility 
thereof,  and  I  will  have  the  honor,  Exellency,  to  hand  over  to 
you  the  proceedings  of  the  inquiry. 

THE  UNITED  STATES'  ATTITUDE. 

"In  this  frightful  holocaust  which  is  sweeping  over 
Europe,  the  United  States  has  adopted  a  neutral  attitude. 

"And  it  is  for  this  reason  that  your  country,  standing 
apart  from  either  one  of  the  belligerents,  is  in  the  best  position 
to  judge,  without  bias  or  partiality,  the  conditions  under  which 
the  war  is  being  waged. 

"It  is  at  the  request,  even  at  the  initiative  of  the  United 
States,  that  all  civilized  nations  have  formulated  and  adopted 
at  the  Hague  a  law  regulating  the  laws  and  usages  of  war. 

"We  refuse  to  believe  that  war  has  abolished  the  family 
of  civilized  powers,  or  the  regulation  to  which  they  have  freely 
consented. 

"The  American  people  has  always  displayed  its  respect 
for  justice,  its  search  for  progress  and  an  instinctive  attach- 
ment for  the  laws  of  humanity.  Therefore,  it  has  won  a  moral 
influence  which  is  recognized  by  the  entire  world,  lit  is  for  this 
reason  that  Belgium,  bound  as  she  is  to  you  by  ties  of  commerce 
and  increasing  friendship,  turns  to  the  American  people  at  this 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  43 

time  to  let  you  know  the  real  truth  of  the  present  situation. 
Resolved  to  continue  unflinching  defence  of  its  sovereignty  and 
independence,  it  deems  it  a  duty  to  bring  to  the  attention  of 
the  civilized  world  the  innumerable  grave  breaches  of  rights  of 
mankind,  of  which  she  has  been  a  victim. 

"At  the  very  moment  we  were  leaving  Belgium,  the  King 
recalled  to  us  his  trip  to  the  United  States  and  the  vivid  and 
strong  impression  your  powerful  and  virile  civilization  left 
upon  his  mind.  Our  faith  in  your  fairness,  our  confidence  in 
your  justice,  in  your  spirit  of  generosity  and  sympathy,  all 
these  have  dictated  our  present  mission." 

THE  INVESTIGATING  COMMITTEE. 

In  the  report  handed  to  President  Wilson,  the  preface  sets 
forth  that  the  committee  appointed  to  investigate  the  conduct 
of  the  German  invaders,  and  all  of  the  surrounding  circum- 
stances, consisted  of  Messrs.  Cattier,  professor  at  the  Brussels 
University;  Nys,  counselor  of  the  Brussels  Court  of  Appeals; 
Verhaegen,  counselor  of  the  Brussels  Court  of  Appeals; 
Wodon,  professor  at  the  Brussels  University;  Secretary,  Mr. 
Gillard,  Director  of  the  Department  of  Justice.  Afterwards, 
when  the  invasion  made  it  necessary  to  transfer  the  seat  of  the 
government  from  Brussels  to  Antwerp,  a  sub-committee  was 
appointed  there,  consisting  of  Mr.  Cooreman,  Minister  of 
State;  Members,  Count  Goblet  d'Aviella,  Minister  of  State, 
Vice  President  of  the  Senate;  Messrs.  Ryckmans,  Senator; 
Strauss,  Alderman  of  the  City  of  Antwerp ;  Van  Cutsem,  Hon- 
orary President  of  the  Law  Court  of  Antwerp.  Secretaries, 
Chevalier  Ernst  de  Bunswyck,  Chief  Secretary  of  the  Belgian 
Minister  of  Justice ;  Mr.  Orts,  Counselor  of  the  Legation. 

In  brief  the  report  submits  first,  that  in  violation  of  the 
perpetual  treaty  of  June  26,  1831,  Germany  notified  Belgium 
that  France  was  about  to  march  upon  Germany,  and  that  Ger- 
many proposed  to  frustrate  such  a  move  by  sending  its  soldiers 
through  Belgium;  that  the  German  government  had  no  inten- 


44  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

tion  of  making  war  against  Belgium,  and  that  if  Belgium  made 
no  opposition  it  would  evacuate  Belgium  after  hostilities 
ceased,  and  during  the  period  the  German  forces  were  in  the 
country,  would  buy  everything  needed  for  its  army.  Belgium 
replied  that  it  had  assurance  from  France  that  France  had  no 
intention  of  invading  Belgium,  and  that  if  France  attempted 
to  pass  through  Belgium  would  oppose  such  an  act  with  force. 
It  informed  the  German  Imperial  Government  that  it  would 
similarly  oppose  any  move  on  the  part  of  Germany  to  pass 
through. 

Nevertheless  Germany  proceeded  at  once  through  Bel- 
gium. Quoting  articles  from  the  Hague  treaty,  the  commis- 
sion's report  reads : 

THE  DAYS  OF  BABARISM. 

"In  the  days  of  barbarism,  the  population  of  a  territory 
occupied  by  the  enemy  was  deprived  of  all  judicial  capacity. 
At  that  time,"  as  Ghering  writes  ironically,  "  'the  enemy  was 
absolutely  deprived  of  rights;  everything  he  owned  belonged 
to  the  gallant  warrior  who  had  wrenched  it  away  from  him. 
One  had  merely  to  lose  it.' 

"In  our  days  the  rules  of  warfare  clearly  establish  the  dif- 
ference between  the  property  of  the  government  of  the  terri- 
tory occupied  and  the  property  of  individuals.  While  the  pres- 
ent doctrine  allows  the  conqueror  to  seize,  in  a  general  way, 
everything  in  the  way  of  movable  property  belonging  to  the 
State,  it  obliges  him,  on  the  other  hand,  to  respect  the  property 
of  individuals,  corporations  and  public  provincial  administra- 
tions. 

"The  Hague  Convention,  signed  October  18,  1897,  by  all 
the  civilized  States,  among  others  by  Germany,  contains  the 
following  stipulations  regarding  laws  and  customs  of  warfare 
on  land: 

"  cArt.  46.  The  honor  and  right  of  the  family,  the  life  of 
the  individual  and  private  property,  as  well  as  religious  con- 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  45 

victions  and  the  exercise  of  worship,  must  be  respected.  Pri- 
vate property  cannot  be  confiscated. 

"  'Art.  47.    Pillaging  is  formally  prohibited. 

"  'Art.  53.  When  occupying  territory,  the  army  can  only 
seize  cash  as  well  as  funds  and  securities  belonging  entirely  to 
the  State ;  also  depots  of  arms,  ways  and  means  of  transporta- 
tion, warehouses  and  provisions,  and  in  a  general  way  all  mov- 
able property  belonging  to  the  State  and  liable  to  be  used  for 
warlike  operations. 

"  'Art.  56.  Property  of  municipalities,  property  of  estab- 
lishments consecrated  to  worship,  to  charity  and  instruction; 
to  art  and  science,  even  though  belonging  to  the  State,  will  be 
treated  as  private  property.' 

"In  defiance  of  these  conventional  rules,  voluntarily  and 
solemnly  accepted  by  Germany,  she  has  committed,  from  the 
beginning  of  her  invasion  of  Belgian  soil,  numerous  attacks 
upon  private  property." 

GERMAN  CUPIDITY. 

At  Hasselt,  the  report  shows  that  on  August  12,  1914, 
the  Germans  confiscated  the  funds  of  the  branch  of  the  Na- 
tional Bank,  which  amounted  to  2,075,000  francs.  At  Liege, 
on  entering  the  city,  they  forcibly  seized  the  funds  of  a  branch 
of  the  same  bank,  amounting  to  4,000,000  francs.  Moreover, 
upon  finding  at  that  branch  bundles  of  bank  notes  of  5-franc 
denomination,  representing  an  amount  of  400,000  francs,  and 
which  were  not  yet  signed,  they  forced  a  printer  to  sign  those 
bank  notes  by  means  of  a  rubber  stamp,  which  they  had  also 
seized,  and  afterwards  put  the  notes  in  circulation.  The  bank, 
it  is  explained,  was  a  shareholders'  corporation,  the  capital 
having  been  obtained  by  subscription  from  private  parties  and 
was  in  no  wise  an  institution  of  the  State. 

The  enormity  of  this  offence  is  made  apparent  by  the  fact 
that  in  the  war  of  1870,  when  the  Prussians  entered  Rhiems  in 
the  Franco-Prussian  war,  and  they  wanted  to  confiscate  the 


46  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

funds  of  the  branch  of  the  National  Bank  of  France,  Crown 
Prince  Frederick  ordered  that  funds  which  were  found  at  the 
bank  could  not  be  seized  so  long  as  they  were  not  used  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  French  army,  it  having  been  contended  by 
directors  of  the  institution  that  the  bank  was  not  a  State,  but  a 
private  bank.  But  more  than  this  Germany  levied  supplies 
from  every  Belgian  city  and  tried  to  levy  upon  the  city  of 
Brussels  the  sum  of  50,000,000  francs  and  the  province  of  Bra- 
bant 450,000,000  francs. 

TREATY  OBLIGATIONS. 

Categorically,  the  violation  and  disregard  of  every  phase 
of  the  Hague  treaty  is  described.  In  spite  of  the  strict  pro- 
vision that  undefended  cities,  villages  and  dwellings  are  not  to 
be  bombarded,  and  where  bombardment  is  necessary  the  com- 
manding officer  of  the  attacking  party  must  warn  the  authori- 
ties that  such  bombardment  is  to  take  place,  German  aero- 
planes and  dirigibles  bombarded  relentlessly  from  the  begin- 
ning. In  Antwerp  a  Zeppelin  threw  explosive  bombs  at  the 
Royal  Palace,  but  the  missiles  went  astray,  demolishing  private 
residences,  killing  eight  persons  and  injuring  many.  Servants 
were  killed  in  their  beds  in  one  private  house  when  the  bombs 
tore  away  the  top  of  the  building. 

"In  the  Place  du  Poids  Public  a  bomb  fell  on  the  pave- 
ment. Fragments  scattered  all  over  the  place.  Not  a  house 
facing  the  square  was  untouched.  A  policeman  was  cut  to 
pieces,  all  that  was  found  of  him  being  a  leg  covered  with  a  few 
rags  of  his  uniform.  Five  other  persons  who  opened  their 
windows  were  blown  to  atoms.  The  bed-rooms  of  two  houses 
facing  one  another  were  visited.  In  the  first  there  were  three 
corpses.  Blood  was  scattered  all  over  the  place.  The  floor 
was  covered  with  fragments  of  windows  and  with  blood-soaked 
underwear.  On  the  ceiling  and  walls,  parts  of  intestines  and 
brains  were  visible.  In  the  other  house  two  old  persons  had 
been  killed  while  looking  down  upon  the  street.    Later  Ant- 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  47 

werp  was  bombarded,  as  was  Heyst-op-den-Berg  and  the  city 
of  M  alines,  which  was  undefended,  and  where  there  was  not 
a  Belgian  soldier.  At  Malines  the  batteries  fired  shell  after 
shell  in  the  direction  of  the  Cathedral  of  Saint  Rombault,  a 
beautiful  edifice,  which  was  hit  many  times  and  badly  damaged, 
though  there  was  no  military  reason  for  the  assault  as  the  town 
was  practically  abandoned. 

The  commission  turned  over  to  President  Wilson  explos- 
ive bullets  used  by  the  Germans  at  Werchter,  and  submitted 
briefs  from  physicians  who  treated  wounds  made  by  the  ex- 
plosive bullets. 

DETAILED  ATROCITIES  OUTLINED. 
A  few  details  of  the  atrocities  are  outlined  as  follows : 
"German  cavalry,  occupying  the  village  of  Linsmeau, 
were  attacked  by  some  Belgian  infantry  and  two  Gendarmes. 
A  German  officer  was  killed  by  our  troops  during  the  fight, 
and  subsequently  buried  at  the  request  of  the  Belgian  officer 
in  command.  None  of  the  civilian  population  took  part  in  the 
fight.  Nevertheless,  the  village  was  invaded  at  dusk  on  Au- 
gust 10  by  a  strong  force  of  German  cavalry,  artillery  and 
machine  guns.  In  spite  of  the  assurance  given  by  the  Burgo- 
master that  none  of  the  peasants  had  taken  part  in  the  previous 
fighting  two  farms  and  six  outlying  houses  were  destroyed  by 
gun-fire  and  burned.  All  the  male  population  were  compelled 
to  come  forward  and  hand  over  what  they  possessed.  No  re- 
cently discharged  firearms  were  found,  but  the  invaders  divided 
the  peasants  into  three  groups.  Those  in  one  group  were 
bound  and  eleven  of  them  placed  in  a  ditch,  whither  they  were 
afterward  found  dead,  their  skulls  fractured  by  the  butts  of 
German  rifles. 

"During  the  night  of  August  10,  German  cavalry  entered 
Velm  in  great  numbers ;  the  inhabitants  were  asleep.  The  Ger- 
mans, without  provocation,  fired  upon  Mr.  Deglimme-Gever's 
house,  broke  into  it,  destroyed  furniture,  looted  money,  burned 


48  THE  TH1JNUJS  THAT  MADE  MKN   MAD. 

barns,  hay,  corn  stacks,  farm  implements,  six  oxen,  and  the 
contents  of  the  farmyard.  They  carried  off  Mme.  Deglimme 
half -naked,  to  a  place  two  miles  away.  She  was  then  let  go 
and  was  fired  upon  as  she  fled,  without  being  hit.  Her  hus- 
band was  carried  away  in  another  direction." 

Farmer  Jeff  Dierckx,  of  Neerhespen,  bears  witness  to  the 
following  acts  of  cruelty  committed  by  German  cavalry  at 
Orsmael  Neerhespen,  on  August  10,  11  and  12: 

SHOCKING  BARBARITIES. 

"An  old  man  of  the  latter  village  had  his  arm  sliced  in 
three  longitudinal  cuts;  he  was  then  hanged  head  downward 
and  burned  alive.  Young  girls  have  been  raped  and  little  chil- 
dren outraged  at  Orsmael,  where  several  inhabitants  suffered 
mutilations  too  horrible  to  describe.  A  Belgian  soldier  belong- 
ing to  a  battalion  of  cyclist  carbineers  who  had  been  wounded 
and  made  prisoner  was  hanged,  while  another  who  was  tend- 
ing his  comrade  was  bound  to  a  telegraph  pole  and  shot." 

The  sacking  of  Louvain,  which  was  one  of  the  vile  acts  of 
the  Germans  during  the  early  days  of  the  war,  is  described 
briefly  in  the  report  of  the  commission  as  follows : 

"The  Germans  entered  Louvain  on  Wednesday,  August 
19,  after  having  set  fire  to  the  towns  through  which  they 
passed. 

"From  the  moment  of  their  having  entered  the  city  of 
Louvain,  the  Germans  requisitioned  lodgings  and  victuals  for 
their  troops.  They  entered  every  private  bank  of  the  city  and 
took  over  the  bank  funds.  German  soldiers  broke  the  doors 
of  houses  abandoned  by  their  inhabitants,  pillaged  them  and 
indulged  in  orgies. 

"The  German  authorities  took  hostages;  the  mayor  of  the 
city,  Senator  Vander  Kelen,  the  Vice  Rector  of  the  Catholic 
University,  the  Dean  of  the  City;  magistrates  and  aldermen 
were  also  detained.    All  arms  down  to  fencing  foils  had  been 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  49 

handed  over  to  the  town  administration  and  deposited  by  the 
said  authorities  in  the  Church  of  St.  Peter. 

"In  the  neighboring  village,  Corbeck-Loo,  a  young  ma- 
tron, 22  years  old,  whose  husband  was  in  the  army,  was  sur- 
prised on  Wednesday,  August  19,  with  several  of  her  relatives, 
by  a  band  of  German  soldiers.  The  persons  who  accompanied 
her  were  locked  in  an  abandoned  house,  while  she  was  taken 
into  another  house,  where  she  was  successively  violated  by  five 
soldiers. 

LUSTFUL  CRUELTY  OF  THE  GERMANS. 

"In  the  same  village,  on  Thursday,  August  20,  German 
soldiers  were  searching  a  house  where  a  young  girl  of  16  lived 
with  her  parents.  They  carried  her  into  an  abandoned  house 
and,  while  some  of  them  kept  the  father  and  mother  off,  others 
went  into  the  house,  the  cellar  of  which  was  open,  and  forced 
the  young  woman  to  drink.  Afterwards  they  carried  her  out 
on  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house  and  violated  her  successively. 
She  continued  to  resist  and  they  pierced  her  breast  with  bay- 
onets. Having  been  abandoned  by  the  soldiers  after  their 
abominable  attacks,  the  girl  was  carried  off  by  her  parents,  and 
the  following  day,  owing  to  the  gravity  of  her  condition,  she 
was  administered  the  last  rites  of  the  church  by  the  priest  of 
the  parish  and  carried  to  the  hospital  at  Louvain." 

Upon  entering  villages  occupied  by  the  Germans  after 
they  were  driven  back  to  Louvain,  the  report  says  the  Belgian 
soldiers  found  that  the  German  soldiers  had  sacked,  ravaged 
and  set  fire  to  the  villages  everywhere,  taking  with  them  and 
driving  before  them  all  the  male  inhabitants.  "Upon  entering 
Hofstade,  the  Belgian  soldiers  found  the  corpse  of  an  old 
woman  who  had  been  killed  by  bayonet  thrusts;  she  still  held 
in  her  hand  the  needle  with  which  she  was  sewing  when  at- 
tacked ;  one  mother  and  her  son,  aged  about  15  years,  lay  there 
pierced  with  bayonet  wounds ;  one  man  was  found  hung. 

"In  Sempst,  a  neighboring  village,  were  found  corpses 

H  R— 4 


50  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

of  two  men  partially  burned.  One  of  them  was  found  with  legs 
cut  off  to  the  knees ;  the  other  was  minus  his  arms  and  legs.  A 
workman  had  been  pierced  with  bayonets,  afterward  while  he 
was  still  living  the  Germans  soaked  him  with  petroleum  and 
locked  him  in  a  house  which  they  set  on  fire.  An  old  man  and 
his  son  had  been  killed  by  sabre  cuts ;  a  cyclist  had  been  killed 
by  bullets ;  a  woman  coming  out  of  her  house  had  been  stricken 
down  in  the  same  manner." 

A  LAME  EXCUSE  OFFERED. 

Concerning  the  sacking  of  Louvain  itself,  the  report  says 
that  one  detachment  of  the  Germans  met  another  detachment 
while  in  full  flight  from  the  Belgian  soldiers,  and  attacked  one 
another.  This  was  the  basis  for  the  pretext  that  they  had  been 
attacked  by  the  citizenry  of  Louvain  and  was  responsible  for 
the  bombardment  of  the  city.  The  bombarding  lasted  until  10 
o'clock  at  night,  and  afterward  the  German  soldiers  set  fire  to 
the  city. 

"The  houses  which  had  not  taken  fire  were  entered  by 
German  soldiers,  who  were  throwing  fire  grenades,  some  of 
which  seem  to  have  been  provided  for  the  occasion.  The  larg- 
est part  of  the  city  of  louvain,  especially  the  quarters  of  'Ville 
Haute,'  comprising  the  modern  houses,  the  Cathedral  of  St. 
Peter,  the  University  Halls,  with  the  whole  library  of  the  Uni- 
versity with  its  manuscripts,  its  collections,  the  largest  part  of 
the  scientific  institutions  and  the  town  theatre  were  at  the  mo- 
ment being  consumed  by  flames. 

"The  commission  deems  it  necessary,  in  the  midst  of  these 
horrors,  to  insist  on  the  crime  of  lese-humanity  which  the  de- 
liberate annihilation  of  an  academic  library — a  library  which 
was  one  of  the  treasures  of  our  time — constitutes. 

"Numerous  corpses  of  civilians  covered  the  streets  and 
squares.  On  the  routes  from  Louvain  to  Tirlemont  alone  one 
witness  testifies  to  having  seen  more  than  fifty  of  them.  On 
the  threshold  of  houses  were  found  burnt  corpses  of  people, 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  51 

who,  surprised  in  their  cellars  by  the  fire,  had  tried  to  escape 
and  fell  into  the  heap  of  live  embers.  The  suburbs  of  Louvain 
were  given  up  to  the  same  fate.  It  can  be  said  that  the  whole 
region  between  Malines  and  Louvain  and  most  of  the  suburbs 
of  Louvain  have  been  devastated  and  destroyed. 

BASE  INDIGNITIES  TO  CLERGYMEN. 

"A  group  of  75  persons,  among  whom  were  several  not- 
ables of  the  city,  such  as  Father  Coloboet  and  a  Spanish  priest, 
and  also  an  American  priest,  were  conducted,  during  the  morn- 
ing of  Wednesday,  August  26,  to  the  square  in  front  of  the 
station.  The  men  were  brutally  separated  from  their  wives 
and  children,  after  having  received  the  most  abominable  treat- 
ment after  repeated  threats  of  being  shot,  and  were  driven  in 
front  of  the  German  troops  as  far  as  the  village  of  Campen- 
hout.  They  were  locked,  during  the  night,  in  the  church.  The 
following  day,  at  4  o'clock,  a  German  officer  came  to  tell  them 
that  they  might  all  confess  themselves  and  that  they  would  be 
shot  half  an  hour  later.  When,  finally,  they  were  released,  the 
report  continues,  they  were  recaptured  by  another  German  bri- 
gade and  compelled  to  march  to  Malines,  where  they  were 
finally  liberated. 

"An  eye  witness  testified  that  he  met  nothing  except 
burned  villages,  crazed  peasants,  lifting  to  each  comer  their 
arms,  as  mark  of  submission.  From  each  house  was  hanging  a 
white  flag,  even  from  those  that  had  been  set  on  fire,  and  rags 
of  them  were  found  hanging  from  the  ruins.  The  fire  began 
a  little  above  the  American  College,  and  the  city  is  entirely 
destroyed,  with  the  exception  of  the  town  hall  and  the  depot. 
Today  the  fire  continues  and  the  Germans,  instead  of  trying 
to  stop  it — seem  rather  to  maintain  it  by  throwing  straw  into 
the  flames,  as  I  have  myself  seen  behind  the  Hotel  de  Ville. 
The  Cathedral  and  the  theatre  have  been  destroyed  and  fallen 
in,  and  also  the  library.  The  town  resembles  an  old  city  in 
ruins,  in  the  midst  of  which  drunken  soldiers  are  circulating, 


52  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

carrying  around  bottles  of  wine  and  liquor;  the  officers  them- 
selves being  installed  in  arm  chairs,  sitting  around  tables  and 
drinking  like  their  own  men. 

"In  the  streets  dead  horses  are  decaying,  horses  which  are 
completely  inflated,  and  the  smell  of  the  fire  and  the  decaying 
animals  is  such  that  it  has  followed  me  for  a  long  time." 

And  the  policy  which  developed  such  outrageous  conduct 
on  the  part  of  the  Kaiser's  soldiers  in  the  early  days  of  the  war, 
against  which  Belgium  protested  to  the  world,  inspired  brutal 
acts,  ruthlessness  and  cruelty  at  every  stage  and  during  every 
period  of  the  war.  Nowhere  is  there  written  a  single  line  which 
tells  of  the  humanitarian  acts  of  the  German  soldiers.  Those 
who  fight  against  them  acknowledge  their  stoical  bravery,  the 
efficiency  of  the  army,  the  navy  and  the  people  as  a  whole,  but 
there  is  no  reflection  of  refined  instincts  in  any  of  the  acts  of 
Germany  or  the  Germans. 

THE  AMERICAN  MINISTER'S  REPORT. 

Of  «those  conditions  which  existed  in  Belgium  when  the 
German  soldiers  overran  the  country,  America's  own  minister 
to  the  devastated  country,  Brand  Whitlock,  sent  a  report  to 
the  State  Department  in  the  beginning  of  1917,  when  Presi- 
dent Wilson  was  protesting  against  the  treatment  accorded  the 
helpless  people  of  Belgium  by  the  Germans. 

Mr.  Whitlock  tells  how  the  Germans  determined  to  put 
the  Belgians  thrown  out  of  employment  to  work  for  them.  "In 
August,"  says  the  report,  dealing  with  the  treatment  of  the 
helpless  Belgians,  "Von  Hindenburg  was  appointed  supreme 
commander.  He  is  said  to  have  criticised  Von  Bissing's  policy 
as  too  mild,  and  there  was  a  quarrel ;  Von  Bissing  went  to  Ber- 
lin to  protest,  threatened  to  resign,  but  did  not.  He  returned, 
and  a  German  official  said  that  Belgium  would  now  be  sub- 
jected to  a  more  terrible  regime,  would  learn  what  war  was. 
The  prophecy  has  been  vindicated. 

"The  deportations  began  in  October  in  the  Etape,  at 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  53 

Ghent  and  at  Bruges.  The  policy  spread;  the  rich  industrial 
districts  at  Hainaut,  the  mines  and  steel  works  about  Charleroi 
were  next  attacked,  and  they  seized  men  in  Brabant,  even  in 
Brussels,  despite  some  indications  and  even  predictions  of  the 
civil  authorities  that  the  policy  was  about  to  be  abandoned. 

"As  by  one  of  the  ironies  of  life  the  winter  has  been  more 
excessively  cold  than  Belgium  has  ever  known  it  and  while 
many  of  those  who  presented  themselves  were  adequately  pro- 
tected against  the  cold,  many  of  them  were  without  overcoats. 
The  men,  shivering  from  cold  and  fear,  the  parting  from  weep- 
ing wives  and  children,  the  barrels  of  brutal  Uhlans,  all  this 
made  the  scene  a  pitiable  and  distressing  one. 

RAGE,  TERROR  AND  DESPAIR. 

"The  rage,  the  terror  and  despair  excited  by  this  measure 
all  over  Belgium  were  beyond  anything  we  had  witnessed  since 
the  day  the  Germans  poured  into  Brussels.  The  delegates  of 
the  commission  for  relief  in  Belgium,  returning  to  Brussels, 
told  the  most  distressing  stories  of  the  scenes  of  cruelty  and 
sorrow  attending  the  seizures.  And  daily,  hourly  almost,  since 
that  time,  appalling  stories  have  been  related  by  Belgians  com- 
ing to  the  legation,  lit  is  impossible  for  us  to  verify  them,  first 
because  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  exercise  all  possible  tact  in 
dealing  with  the  subject  at  all,  and  secondly  because  there  is 
no  means  of  communication  between  the  Occupations  Gebiet 
and  the  Etappey  Gebiet. 

"I  am  constantly  in  receipt  of  reports  from  all  over  Bel- 
gium that  tend  to  bear  the  stories  one  constantly  hears  of  bru- 
tality and  cruelty.  A  number  of  men  sent  back  to  Mons  are 
said  to  be  in  a  dying  condition,  many  of  them  tubercular.  At 
Molines  and  at  Antwerp  returned  men  have  died,  their  friends 
asserting  that  they  have  been  victims  of  neglect  and  cruelty,  of 
cold,  of  exposure,  of  hunger. 

"I  have  had  requests  from  the  burgomasters  of  ten  com- 
munes asking  that  permission  be  obtained  to  send  to  the  de- 


54  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

ported  men  in  Germany  packages  of  food  similar  to  those  that 
are  being  sent  to  prisoners  of  war.  Thus  far  the  German  au- 
thorities have  refused  to  permit  this  except  in  special  instances, 
and  returning  Belgians  claim  that  even  when  such  packages 
are  received  they  are  used  by  the  camp  authorities  only  as  an- 
other means  of  coercing  them  to  sign  the  agreements  to  work. 

A  MORTAL  BLOW   TO  BELGIANS. 

"By  the  deportation  of  Belgians  to  work  in  Germany," 
says  Mr.  Whitlock's  report,  "they  have  dealt  a  mortal  blow  to 
any  prospect  they  may  ever  have  had  of  being  tolerated  by  the 
population  of  Flanders;  in  tearing  away  from  nearly  every 
humble  home  in  the  land  a  husband  and  a  father  or  a  son  and 
brother;  they  have  lighted  a  fire  of  hatred  that  will  never  go 
out;  they  have  brought  home  to  every  heart  in  the  land,  in  a 
way  that  will  impress  its  horror  indelibly  on  the  memory  of 
three  generations,  a  realization  of  what  German  methods  mean, 
not  as  with  the  early  atrocities  in  the  heat  of  passion  and  the 
first  lust  of  war,  but  by  one  of  those  deeds  that  make  one  de- 
spair of  the  future  of  the  human  race,  a  deed  coldly  planned, 
studiously  matured,  and  deliberately  and  systematically  exe- 
cuted, a  deed  so  cruel  that  German  soldiers  are  said  to  have 
wept  in  its  execution,  and  so  monstrous  that  even  German  offi- 
cers are  now  said  to  be  ashamed." 

And  if  these  acts  were  not  sufficient  to  convince  the  world 
that  Germany  "is  without  the  pale"  so  far  as  civilized  warfare 
is  concerned  her  conduct  in  wantonly  destroying  property  in 
Flanders  while  in  retreat  could  permit  of  no  other  conclusion. 

After  the  violation  of  Belgium  and  the  destruction  of  the 
Lusitania  and  the  adoption  of  the  policy  of  sinking  neutral 
ships  on  sight  for  military  advantage,  or  "necessity,"  why 
shouldn't  the  soldiers  pollute  wells,  kill  trees,  carry  off  the 
girls,  smash  the  household  furniture  not  worth  taking  away 
and  smear  the  pictures  on  the  wall,  just  for  revenge  or  in  the 
sheer  lust  of  destruction? 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  55 

It  makes  no  difference,  so  far  as  the  principles  of  human- 
ity are  concerned,  whether  the  German  army  is  in  victory  or 
suffering  defeat,  advancing  or  retreating.  The  treatment  ac- 
corded the  evacuated  cities  of  the  Somme  district  was  foretold 
by  the  treatment  of  the  cities  occupied  early  in  the  war.  Here 
is  the  wording  of  an  order  posted  during  the  victorious  invasion 
of  Belgium : 

"Order — To  the  people  of  Liege.  The  population  of  An- 
denne,  after  making  a  display  of  peaceful  intentions  toward 
our  troops,  attacked  them  in  the  most  treacherous  manner. 
With  my  authority  the  general  commanding  these  troops  has 
reduced  the  town  to  ashes  and  has  had  110  persons  shot.  I 
bring  this  fact  to  the  knowledge  of  the  people  of  Liege  in  order 
that  they  may  know  what  fate  to  expect  should  they  adopt  a 
similar  attitude. 

"GENERAL  von  BULOW, 

"Liege,  Aug.  22,  1914." 

CRUEL  EXTREME  OF  PUNISHMENT. 

And  yet  this  order  showed  only  a  cruel  extreme  of  pun- 
ishment where  some  punishment  was  to  be  expected.  It  was 
left  for  the  retreating  Germans  of  1917  to  destroy,  without 
provocation  and  without  purpose,  motived  by  revenge  and  ob- 
sessed by  the  Nietschean  doctrine  of  "spare  not." 

Before  Baupaume  was  evacuated  it  was  deliberately  con- 
verted into  a  mass  of  muck.  There  is  no  Bapaume  now.  It  is 
perfectly  understandable  that  the  retreating  soldiers  should 
destroy  their  trenches  and  put  up  the  question,  "Tommy,  how 
do  you  like  your  new  trenches?"  But  why  smear  filth  over 
the  photograph  of  three  little  girls,  a  family  treasure?  All 
around  Bapaume  the  villages  were  looted  and  the  night  the 
deliverers  entered  the  destroyers  made  the  sky  lurid  with  the 
fires  of  towns  and  hamlets.  Some  300  in  the  evacuated  region 
were  burned. 

At  Nesle,  Roye  and  Ham  there  was  not  time  enough  to 


56  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

destroy  everything.  The  house  of  a  doctor  at  Nesle,  a  spe- 
cially attractive  home,  was  not  blown  down  for  strategic  pur- 
poses, but  some  soldiers  did  find  time  to  drive  axes  through  the 
mahogany  panels  of  the  beds  and  smash  the  clocks  and  mirrors. 
They  were  angry  at  being  compelled  to  leave  the  house. 

Villages  like  Cressy,  near  Nesle,  where  a  shell  never  fell 
in  the  course  of  the  war,  have  been  completely  destroyed. 

PERONNE  A  HOPELESS  RUIN. 

There  is  not  a  habitable  house  left  in  Peronne.  The  six- 
teenth century  church  of  St.  Jean  is  but  a  relic.  W.  Beach 
Thomas  wrote  after  the  retreat  that  nothing  was  left  that  was 
valuable  enough  to  be  worth  collection  by  a  penny  tinker  or  a 
rag-and-bone  merchant.  Foul  what  you  cannot  have,  was  the 
motto. 

The  famous  ruins  of  the  Feudal  Castle  of  Coucy,  one  of 
the  finest  relics  of  architecture  of  its  period,  was  wantonly 
blown  up  by  the  Germans  on  retreat.  It  was  built  in  the  thir- 
teenth century  by  Enguerrand  III  and  passed  to  the  French 
crown  in  1498,  and  was  one  of  the  great  historic  landmarks  of 
Northern  France. 

Cpucy  was  one  of  the  noblest  relics  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
respected  by  the  most  barbarous  wars  of  the  past,  whose  don- 
jon (greatest  in  all  Europe)  dates  almost  from  Charlemagne, 
harmless,  time-wrecked,  illustrious  Coucy! 

To  give  an  idea  of  Coucy's  importance,  the  French,  in 
their  first  astonishment  and  sorrow,  proposed  to  make  reprisals 
on  Hindenburg,  should  it  take  ten  years.  Of  course,  they 
will  not ;  it  is  not  their  way. 

Coucy  is  a  mountain  of  blasted  stones.  Shoun  Kelly, 
American,  owned  one  of  the  outer  towers  of  the  great  castle 
and  the  story  of  its  ownership  is  the  American  antithesis  of 
German  ravage.  Americans  were  always  faithful  tourists  to 
Coucy;  but  among  them,  one  loved  more  than  all  the  glorious 
old  ruin  and  its  story  which  began  with  Enguerrand,  the  Sire 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  57 

of  Coucy,  in  the  year  1210.  This  was  the  late  Edmund  Kelly, 
of  New  York  and  Paris,  international  lawyer  and  for  many 
years  counsel  of  the  American  Embassy  in  Paris.  He  medi- 
tated on  the  motto  of  old  Enguerrand:  "I  am  not  king,  nor 
prince,  nor  duke,  nor  even  count:  I  am  the  Sire  of  Coucy!"  In 
fact,  the  Sire  made  a  record  for  standing  off  local  kings. 

"He  was  a  good  American  ahead  of  his  time,"  said  Law- 
yer Kelly;  and  he  took  to  reading  up  the  ancient  chronicles, 
how  Enguerrand's  descendants  stood  off  royalty  for  some  200 
years,  until  finally  bought  out  by  the  wealthy  Louis  of  Orleans, 
and  all  the  later  glories  of  the  place.  Mazarin  dismantled 
Coucy,  but  left  it  standing  in  its  beauty ;  and  Lawyer  Kelly  dis- 
covered it  to  be  a  State  museum,  impossible  to  be  purchased,  in 
these  latter  days,  even  by  a  millionaire.  Not  being  one,  he 
preferred  it  so,  loving  Coucy  more  than  ever,  the  cultured 
American  did  the  next  best  thing. 

A  LITTLE  TOWN  REDUCED. 

The  little  town,  once  so  rich,  had  dwindled  since  Mazarin. 
On  the  castle  side  stood  two  massive  towers  of  the  inner  de- 
fense, belonging  to  the  town.  Mr.  Kelly  asked  Mayor  and 
department  legislature  to  make  a  price  on  the  nearest.  As  soon 
as  he  had  bought  his  tower,  he  used  loving  care  restoring  it. 
He  pierced  windows  through  walls  16  feet  thick.  He  built 
rooms  in  three  stories,  furnishing  them  in  massive  antique  style. 
The  tower  roof  was  his  shady  terrace,  covered  with  a  little 
grove  of  century-old  trees !  From  it  he  dominated  Coucy.  All 
its  soul  of  beauty  lay  beneath  his  view. 

All  was  systematically  blown  up,  the  town,  the  towers,  the 
castle,  by  retreating  Germans  in  their  rage.  Just  masses  of 
crumbled  stones.  The  German  papers  boast  that  it  took  28 
tons  of  high  explosives,  and  any  one  can  see,  this  hour,  the 
plain  of  Coucy  covered  with  a  white  layer  of  powdered  lime- 
stone, for  miles  around. 

What  for?    To  clear  a  battlefield,  they  say.    It  is  not  true. 


58  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

Nothing  is  cleared.    The  masses  of  crumbled  stone  remained, 
when  they  fled  their  "battlefield." 

The  donjon  was  very  high.  It  stood  on  a  kind  of  bluff 
or  elevation,  overlooking  the  country,  and  before  the  days  of 
aeroplanes  it  might  have  been  used  for  observation.  The  don- 
jon walls  were  16  yards  thick,  not  feet,  but  yards!  No  other 
tower  in  Europe  had  those  dimensions.  They  tell  a  story  about 
Mazarin.  He  deemed  so  strong  a  place,  so  near  to  Paris,  might 
be  dangerous  to  the  Crown ;  so  he  dismantled  Coucy  militarily, 
without  destroying  its  architectural  beauty.  The  donjon  wor- 
ried him  in  those  days  when  artillery  could  make  no  impression 
on  its  massive  thickness.  So  Mazarin  put  16  barrels  of  powder 
inside  the  tower,  and  set  them  off.  The  tower  just  converted 
itself  into  gun  barrel !  The  powder  blew  out  all  the  stories  and 
the  roof — shot  them  up  like  a  gun  pointed  at  the  sky!  But 
the  tower  stood,  exactly  as  before. 

OF  MASSIVE  ARCHITECTURE. 

The  masonry  was  admittedly  the  heaviest  achieved  by  the 
Middle  Ages.  From  the  donjon  extended  three  great  vaulted 
halls.  Massive  buildings  continued.  There  was  a  Gothic 
chapel,  a  Tribunal  Hall,  the  Hall  of  the  Nine  Peers  (whose 
statues  remained),  the  Hall  of  the  Nine  Countesses  (whose 
medallion-portraits  were  carved  on  the  monumental  chimney) . 
There  was  a  Romanesque  chapel  (relic  from  Charlemagne,  like 
the  original  donjon),  the  separate  Fortified  Chateau  of  the 
Chatelain  (the  Sire's  First  Officer) ,  and  so  on,  and  so  on. 

The  retreating  Germans  have  not  only  blown  up  Coucy, 
but  that  other  priceless  relic,  the  Tower  of  the  Grand  Constable 
and  the  entire  historic  Chateau  of  Ham,  and  equally  the  Castle 
of  Peronne,  a  jewel  of  beauty — all  in  one  corner  of  the  Val- 
lois !  On  the  smoking  wreck  of  Peronne,  they  left  a  humorous 
placard : 

"Nicht  aergen!  Tur  wundern!  Don't  be  angry,  just 
wonder  1"     Noyon  and  Peronne  are  sacked  and  ruined.     At 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  59 

Chauny  1800  houses  out  of  2500  were  deliberately  burned,  and 
at  a  distance  they  bombarded  the  remainder,  full  of  old  folks 
and  children  whom  they  had  parked  there.  All  the  public 
buildings,  churches,  hospitals  and  poorhouse  were  blown  up. 
Three  hundred  towns  and  villages  were  burning  at  one  time  in 
this  small  section  of  the  Cradel  of  France.  Hindenburg  was 
at  Roisel  when  they  rounded  up  the  populations,  went  through 
their  pockets  for  their  money  (giving  "receipts"),  took  their 
clothes  off  their  backs  (so  that  all  the  American  relief  agencies 
in  Paris  were  overwhelmed  with  telegrams  of  appeal)  and 
burgled  all  the  safes  in  banks  and  business  houses  before  set- 
ting fire  to  the  town  and  blowing  up  the  main  street ! 

ACCORDING  TO  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  WAR. 

The  German  official  communique  said  that  it  was  "all  done 
uniquely  according  to  the  technical  principles  of  modern  war." 
At  Berlin  they  caused  an  American  correspondent  to  cable 
these  words  to  his  papers :  "The  enemy  will  find  great  difficulty 
to  take  shelter  on  a  battlefield  where  everything  has  been  com- 
pletely razed.  We  regret  the  destruction  of  a  beautiful  region 
of  France,  but  it  was  necessary  to  transform  it  into  a  clear  field 
of  battle  before  we  quit  it." 

They  blew  up  the  precious  Romanesque  Church  of  Tracy- 
le-Val  (which  dates  before  the  Gothic).  The  church  was  sit- 
uated in  the  midst  of  the  great  forest  of  Laigue ;  they  blew  up 
the  church — and  left  the  forest  standing!  ISTo  battlefield  was 
cleared,  but  they  hacked  the  bark  to  kill  great  noble  trees  by 
thousands.  They  made  no  effort  to  clear  the  forest;  but  weep- 
ing old  French  peasants  told  how  half  a  German  regiment  was 
occupied  three  days  in  barking  trees  to  prevent  the  sap  from 
mounting.  The  crushed  pearl  of  architecture  lies  in  a  dying 
forest. 

At  Le  Novion,  torch  in  hand,  they  burned  223  houses ;  but 
all  the  gutted  walls  are  standing. 

What  technical  principles  of  war  command  the  wholesale 


60  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

destruction  of  young  fruit  trees?  In  20  orchards,  by  count, 
in  sweet  Leury  (hidden  at  the  bottom  of  a  valley)  every  peach, 
plum,  apricot  and  pear  tree  has  been  assassinated — hacked  and 
standing,  when  the  trunks  are  thick,  and  sprawling,  severed  by 
one  blow  of  a  sharp  hatchet,  young  trees  from  the  thickness  of 
your  wrists  to  your  thumb.  The  French,  with  loving  care, 
trained  peach  and  pear  trees  against  sunny  walls,  as  if  they 
were  grapevines.  The  slender  trunks  are  cut — and  the  garden 
walls  left  standing. 

DESECRATION  OF  TREES. 

The  soldiers  spared  neither  the  orchards  nor  the  single 
trees  that  took  a  generation  to  grow,  and  would  have  borne 
fruit  for  generations  to  come.  Reapers  and  binders  and  other 
farming  machines  were  collected  and  broken  to  pieces.  One 
might  see  a  measure  of  advantage  that  the  deliverers  would 
gain  from  these  things  if  not  destroyed,  but  it  is  an  awful  war 
doctrine  that  refuses  to  discriminate  between  the  immediate  and 
the  eventual,  the  direct  and  the  indirect,  the  important  and  the 
negligible  advantage  that  would  impoverish  posterity  to  get  a 
dime  in  cash.  No  military  advantage  is  sufficient  motive  for 
such  wanton  ravishment.    It  is  military  fanaticism. 

Ambassador  Sharp,  after  a  100-mile  trip  through  the 
evacuated  territory,  declared  that  never  before  in  the  history 
of  the  world  had  there  been  such  a  thorough  destruction  by 
either  a  vanquished  or  victorious  army. 

One  thing  alone  was  left,  after  the  red-brick  villages  had 
been  turned  into  heaps  and  the  murdered  fruit  trees  into  black 
fagots,  on  the  hill  outside  of  St.  Quentin.  This  was  the  log 
hut  and  shooting  box  of  the  Kaiser's  son,  Eitel  Friederick.  Its 
white-barked  beech  was  unburnt,  its  glass  windows  unbroken, 
its  inside  adornments  unlooted,  the  tables  and  chairs  of  its  ter- 
race beer  garden  remained.  All  around  the  works  of  man  and 
God  were  destroyed.  The  contrast  made  this  destroyer's  lodge 
a  sort  of  boast  of  his  destruction. 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  61 

The  shocking  ruin  to  human  life  in  the  evacuated  region 
is  of  even  greater  moment.  The  half-starved  civilians  of  Ba- 
paume  were  forced  to  make  trenches  there  and  later  for  the 
defense  of  Cambrai  also.  All  men  and  boys  strong  enough  to 
work  were  taken  along  with  the  retreating  forces.  Near  Pe- 
ronne  some  hundreds  of  old  men,  women  and  children  were 
found  locked  in  a  barn.  One  woman  pathetically  asked  of  an 
English  officer,  "Are  you  many?"  And  he  was  able  to  answer, 
"We  are  two  millions  now,"  and  see  her  anxiety  turned  to  re- 
lief and  joy.  Children  who  had  been  slowly  starving  for  a 
year  wandered  about  the  ruins  of  their  homes,  but  soon  found 
reasons  for  smiling  at  the  soldiers  who  had  rescued  them. 

NEITHER  MEAT  NOR  MILK. 

These  children  had  had  no  meat  for  months  and  no  milk 
for  a  year  and  had  almost  forgotten  the  taste  of  butter.  They 
probably  never  received  a  quarter  of  the  rations  Americans 
sent.  Girls  were  compelled  to  attend  the  market  gardens,  and 
then  the  Germans  took  all  the  produce.  The  region  was  deso- 
lated and  left  inhabited  by  women  and  children  moribund  with 
misery  and  starvation. 

At  IVoyon,  where  the  Germans  had  concentrated  10,000 
Belgian  refugees,  they  promised  to  leave  the  American  Relief 
Committee  with  sufficient  supplies  to  feed  them.  But  the  last 
patrols  completely  sacked  the  American  relief  storehouses  of 
all  eatables  and  then  dynamited  the  building.  And  it  was  from 
this  place  that  fifty  young  women,  from  18  to  25  years  of  age, 
were  taken  by  the  officers.  Their  distracted  mothers  were  told 
that  they  were  to  be  used  as  "officers'  servants." 

At  Ham,  when  a  mother  of  six  children,  seeing  her  hus- 
band and  two  eldest  daughters  being  carried  away,  remon- 
strated, she  was  told  that  as  an  alternative  she  might  find  their 
bodies  in  a  canal  in  the  rear  of  the  house. 

Nothing  could  be  more  significant  of  the  Government's 
attitude  than  the  incident  told  by  James  W.  Gerard.     The 


62  THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD. 

people  of  a  town  were  imprisoned  or  fined  for  their  conduct 
toward  a  delayed  train  of  Canadian  prisoners.  When  he  heard 
it  he  thought  that  at  last  the  Government  was  going  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  maltreatment  of  prisoners.  But  he  learned  on  in- 
vesigation  that  the  townsfolk  had  been  punished  for  giving  a 
little  food  and  drink  to  the  starving  and  fainting  prisoners. 

And  yet  the  most  singularly  brutal  phase  of  this  destruc- 
tion of  nature  and  wealth  and  art  and  life  is  the  German  de- 
fense of  it.  War  is  always  hell  and  most  of  the  awful  things 
in  this  war  have  had  their  counterparts  in  other  conflicts,  though 
the  Teutonic  element  has  brought  some  peculiar  refinements  of 
cussedness  and  has  given  a  thoroughness  and  "pep"  and  "kick" 
to  the  war  business. 

BETTER  PREPARED  NEXT  TIME. 

German  writers,  instead  of  making  excuses  for  turning 
the  nation  into  a  war  machine  for  forty  years,  complain  that 
Germany  was  not  prepared  as  she  should  have  been  and  would 
be  better  prepared  next  time.  Her  professors  do  not  regret 
that  the  soldiers  at  the  front  are  so  unrestrained  in  cruelty,  but 
urge  that  they  are  too  soft  and  kind  to  make  effective  war.  The 
German  correspondents  all  write  enthusiastically  of  the  devas- 
tation of  the  country  they  are  leaving  and  of  the  desert  created 
by  German  genius.  Editors  speak  of  the  mercy  which  tem- 
pered the  necessary  hardness  towards  this  once  beautiful  stretch 
of  country  and  its  inhabitants.  The  destruction  of  property 
which  can  serve  no  military  purpose  is  defended  on  the  ground 
that  it  is  legitimate  from  a  strategic  point  of  view. 

This  all  amounts  to  saying  everything  must  give  way  to 
the  considerations  of  war.  It  is  taking  the  argument  in  the 
fable  of  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  as  serious  philosophy  and  accept- 
ing the  position  of  the  wolf.  They  fail  entirely  to  see  the  humor 
of  the  fable,  and  hence  the  fallacy  of  the  wolfs  argument. 

The  greatest  hope  of  civilization,  which  trembled  for  a 
time  before  the  spectre  of  German  barbarity,  is  that  frightful- 


THE  THINGS  THAT  MADE  MEN  MAD.  63 

ness  cannot  endure  the  long  and  full  test.  The  great  initial 
advantages  are  more  than  offset  by  new  opponents.  The  gain 
of  the  invasion  of  Belgium  was  canceled  by  England  coming 
into  the  war.  The  advantage  against  England  of  the  U-boat 
campaign  was  more  than  canceled  by  the  entrance  of  the 
United  States  in  the  war. 

Irvin  Cobb  says  that  the  trouble  with  the  Germans  is  that 
they  are  not  "good  sports  and  lack  a  sense  of  humor.  It  is 
impossible  to  conceive  of  a  group  of  German  officers  playing 
football  or  baseball  or  cricket  and  abiding  by  the  rules  of  the 
game.  If  Barbara  Frietchie  had  said  to  a  Prussian  Stonewall 
Jackson,  'Shoot,  if  you  must,  my  gray  old  head/  he'd  have 
done  it  as  a  matter  of  course." 


ARTICLE  IV. 

THE  SLINKING  SUBMABINE. 

A  Vobacious  Sea  Monstee — The  Euthless  Desteuctive  Policy  of  Geemany — 
Staevation  of  Nations  the  Goal, — How  the  Suemaeines  Opebate — Some 
Personal  Expeeiences. 

ALMOST  the  entire  story  of  the  world  war  is  written 
around  the  development  of  the  submarine.  One  can 
scarcely  think  of  the  terrible  conflict  without  bringing 
to  mind  the  wonderful  "underseas"  boat  which  has  made  in- 
famous Germany  famous.  The  truth  is  that,  in  so  far  as  Amer- 
ica is  concerned,  the  conflict  was  precipitated  by  the  ruthless 
submarine  warfare  which  Germany  waged  as  part  of  her  plan 
to  starve  out  England,  France,  Belgium — and  all  nations 
which  opposed  her. 

The  slinking  submarine  proved  an  efficient  instrument, 
whose  activities  clearly  indicated  the  diabolical  intent  and  pur- 
pose of  Germany  to  make  the  whole  world  suffer,  if  necessary, 
to  the  end  that  she  might  gain  her  point  and  perpetuate  the 
Hohenzollern  dynasty.  It  was  not  so  much  that  her  subma- 
rines wrought  havoc — for  death  and  disaster  stalk  always  with 
war — but  the  methods  by  which  Germany  waged  their  warfare 
and  disregarded  all  the  rules  which  had  been  laid  down  for  the 
guidance  of  civilized  countries  at  war  proved  conclusively  that 
even  the  innocent  could  expect  no  quarter  from  her. 

The  story  of  the  sinking  of  the  brave  ocean  steamship 
Lusitania  on  May  7,  1915,  contains  in  its  brief  recital  a  typical 
illustration  of  Germany's  lack  of  humanitarian  instincts.  The 
vessel,  torpedoed  off  the  coast  of  Ireland,  went  to  the  bottom 
of  the  ocean,  carrying  to  death  more  than  1150  persons,  many 
of  them  prominent  Americans.  With  an  audaciousness  which 
has  no  counterpart  in  the  history  of  civilized  warfare,  German 

64 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  65 

agents  in  the  United  States  had  caused  advertisements  to  be 
printed  in  the  public  press,  warning  citizens  against  sailing 
on  the  vessel,  and  advised  that  she  was  in  danger  of  being 
destroyed. 

The  world  stood  aghast  and  believed  it  impossible  that 
Germany  should  carry  out  her  threat,  but  they  were  soon  to  be 
disillusioned.  Because  the  handsome  vessel  passed  through  a 
zone  of  the  seas  which  the  Teuton  war  lords  declared  block- 
aded, they  sent  a  torpedo  from  an  underseas  boat  into  her 
bowels.  The  horrors  of  that  event  are  still  fresh  in  the  minds 
of  millions.  INTo  such  ruthless  and  wanton  destruction  of  inno- 
cent human  beings  had  been  accomplished  by  a  so-called  civili- 
zation at  war. 

THE  DUTIES  OF  WAR  CAST  ASIDE. 

Articles  of  The  Hague  agreement  defining  the  rights  and 
duties  of  nations  at  war,  and  which  Germany  had  accepted, 
were  thrust  aside  and  disregarded  by  Imperial  Germany.  The 
Hohenzollern  dynasty  was  above  rules  and  regulations.  Inter- 
national law  and  the  rights  of  non-combatants  at  sea  were  as 
nothing.  That  all  nations  had  agreed  that  the  enemy  ship  must 
give  the  captain  of  the  vessel  attacked  opportunity  to  land 
innocent  passengers  was  forgotten.  There  had  not  been  a 
word  of  warning. 

And  Germany,  and  the  adherents  of  the  Imperial  Govern- 
ment, expressing  regret  that  Americans  should  have  been  sac- 
rificed, professed  deep  sorrow  on  one  hand  and  on  the  other 
shouted  with  glee.  America  protested  vigorously,  quoting  the 
laws  and  demanding  that  Germany  recognize  them — not  mere- 
ly that  she  leave  American  vessels  alone — and  give  assurance 
that  no  such  further  acts  would  be  committed. 

Contending  that  the  sinking  of  the  ship  was  justifiable,  in 
the  exigencies  of  war,  Germany  ceased  for  a  short  time  her 
wanton  sinking  of  boats  without  warning.  For  almost  a  year 
her  underseas  crafts  had  been  preying  upon  the  small  British 

H  R— 5 


66  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

coasting  vessels,  and  sunk  hundreds  of  fishing  boats,  trawlers 
and  steamships.  England's  mercantile  marine  was  the  object 
of  the  Teuton's  attacks,  and  no  one  had  anticipated  any  danger 
to  Americans  or  American  interests. 

Germany  had  no  reasons  for  desiring  to  attack  American 
boats  and  she  promised  to  mend  her  ways.  There  followed  a 
brief  period  in  which  no  vessels  were  sunk  on  which  were  Amer- 
icans, and  then  without  warning  the  campaign  against  all  ves- 
sels was  renewed.  A  dozen  were  sunk  on  which  were  Ameri- 
can seamen  or  non-combatant  passengers,  none  of  whom  was 
given  warning  or  time  to  land  before  a  torpedo  sent  the  boat  to 
the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  Threats  on  the  part  of  President 
Wilson  to  take  action  against  Germany  finally  brought  another 

cessation. 

GROWING  DISTRESS   AND  AMAZEMENT. 

"The  sinking  of  the  British  passenger  steamship  Fabala 
and  other  German  acts  constitute  a  series  of  events  which  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  has  observed  with  growing 
concern,  distress  and  amazement,"  said  President  Wilson  in  a 
note  on  the  submarine  warfare.  "This  Government  cannot 
admit  the  adoption  of  such  measures  or  such  a  warning  of 
danger  as  in  any  degree  an  abbreviation  of  the  rights  of  Amer- 
ican shipmasters  or  American  citizens,  bound  on  lawful  errands 
as  passengers  on  merchant  ships  of  belligerent  nationality.  It 
must  hold  the  Imperial  German  Government  to  a  strict  ac- 
countability for  any  infringement  of  those  rights,  international 
or  incidental. 

"The  objection  to  their  present  method  of  attack  lies  in 
the  practical  impossibility  of  employing  submarines  in  the  de- 
struction of  commerce  without  disregarding  those  rule,s  of  fair- 
ness, reason,  justice  and  humanity  which  all  modern  opinions 
regard  as  imperative. 

"American  citizens  act  within  their  indisputable  rights  in 
taking  their  ships  and  traveling  wherever  their  legitimate  busi- 
ness calls  them  upon  the  high  seas. 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMAEINE.  67 

"No  warning  that  an  unlawful  and  an  inhuman  act  will  be 
committed  can  possibly  be  accepted  as  an  excuse  or  palliation 
for  that  act,  or  as  an  abatement  of  the  responsibility  for  its 
commission.    *     *     * 

"The  Imperial  German  Government  will  not  expect  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  to  omit  any  word  or  any  act 
necessary  to  the  performance  of  its  sacred  duty  or  the  inalien- 
able rights  of  the  United  States  and  its  citizens,  and  of  safe- 
guarding their  free  exercise  and  enjoyment." 

WHOLESALE  DESTRUCTION  OF  VESSELS. 

Apparently  Germany  modified  her  submarine  policy  for  a 
period  of  upward  of  a  year,  or  until  in  February,  1917,  when 
to  the  astonished  world  she  threw  aside  all  pretense  and  de- 
clared her  intention  of  destroying  any  vessel  which  attempted 
to  cross  or  sailed  into  a  zone  which  she  established  along  the 
English  coast  and  around  English  and  French  ports.  Amer- 
ica's further  protests  availed  not;  her  citizens,  many  of  them, 
went  to  the  bottom  of  the  seas,  and  some  of  them  suffered 
almost  unbelievable  cruelties  or  neglect,  when  the  captain  of  a 
German  sea  raider  with  some  humanitarian  instincts  permitted 
these  innocent  passengers  or  seamen  to  be  rescued  from  the 
torpedoed  vessels  on  which  they  were. 

Even  the  Red  Cross  vessels  and  Belgian  relief  ships  carry- 
ing supplies  and  food  to  the  maimed  or  sick  at  war  and  the 
starving  children  of  Belgium  did  not  escape  the  torpedo  from 
the  submarine.  English  hospital  ships  were  attacked,  and  men 
unable  to  protect  themselves  were  subjected  to  danger  because 
the  Germans  feared  that  something  might  be  carried  on  the 
boat  which  would  prove  valuable  to  the  Allied  forces  in  making 
war. 

Dozens — even  hundreds  of  vessels  of  all  sorts — were  sunk 
from  week  to  week.  Food  and  supplies  for  the  Allied  forces 
were  destroyed,  until  both  England  and  France  were  threat- 
ened with  starvation. 


68  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

All  this  was  the  work  of  the  submarine. 

One  smiled  twenty-five  years  ago  when  he  read  that  highly 
imaginative  story  of  Jules  Verne,  "Twenty  Thousand  Leagues 
Under  the  Sea,"  and  wondered  if  it  would  ever  be  possible  for 
man  to  create  such  a  marvelous  underseas  craft  as  that  which 
the  famous  French  writer  described.  Today  the  imaginative 
detail  of  the  submarine  which  the  novelist  described  has  been 
crystallized,  and  the  world  has  learned  that  dreams  sometimes 
come  true. 

Marvelous  things  have  been  developed  by  the  war  which 
is  involving  the  peace  and  security  of  the  world,  but  no  single 
device  has  had  such  an  effect  upon  the  warfare  and  upon  the 
methods  of  waging  it  as  the  diabolical  submarine,  which,  like 
an  assassin  in  the  night,  sneaks  upon  the  great  ships  along  the 
water  highways  of  the  world  and  sends  them  with  their  human 
freight  to  the  bottom  of  the  ocean. 

TORPEDO'S  DEADLY  WORK. 

A  giant  cigar-shaped  missile,  whose  nose  is  pointed  with 
guncotton  and  filled  with  high  explosives — and  which  the 
world  knows  as  the  torpedo — launches  forth  from  the  subma- 
rine, and  speeding  under  the  drive  of  a  propeller  at  the  stern 
steers  its  way  into  the  side  of  the  battleship  or  great  steamship. 
The  torpedo  plunges  into  the  bowels  of  the  vessel.  There  is  a 
tremendous  explosion,  and  the  watertight  compartments  of  the 
vessel  are  torn  open ;  the  boat  fills,  and  the  pride  of  the  seas  is 
no  more. 

Had  the  vessel's  master  and  her  crew  any  warning  ?  No ; 
unless  the  vigilant  officer  on  the  bridge  should  note  a  thin  pole 
with  a  hooked  end  projecting  above  the  surface  of  the  ocean 
some  miles  away,  and  turning  his  glasses  upon  it  discover  that 
it  is  the  "eye"  of  a  submarine — the  periscope — which  is  pro- 
truding above  the  surface.  Then  he  may  turn  his  larger  vessel 
and  ram  the  submarine,  or  change  the  course  of  his  craft  so  that 
the  torpedo  launched  by  the  submarine  will  miss  its  mark,  or 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  69 

perhaps  expert  gunners  may  turn  the  muzzles  of  their  rapid- 
fire  guns  upon  the  underseas  craft  and  riddle  it  before  it  can 
get  far  enough  below  the  surface  of  the  water  to  make  the 
attack  upon  it  futile. 

EFFICIENCY  OF  THE  SUBMARINE. 

The  enormous  inroads  on  the  world's  shipping  made  by 
German  submarines  during  the  war  shows  the  efficiency  of  this 
diabolical  device.  In  the  first  two  years  and  a  half  of  the  war 
statistics  were  compiled  to  show  that  more  than  10  per  cent  of 
the  world's  merchant  marine  was  destroyed  by  Germany's 
underseas  craft  of  the  U-boat  type.  Incidentally,  the  name 
U-boat  as  applied  to  submarines  developed  because  Germany, 
instead  of  naming  these  slinking  boats,  as  is  the  custom  with 
surface-cruising  vessels,  painted  upon  the  conning  tower  or 
nose  of  the  craft  the  letter  U,  representing  the  word  "under- 
seas," coupled  with  the  numeral  denoting  the  number  of  the 
boat.  Thus  those  who  sail  the  ocean  highways  came  to  recog- 
nize the  fact  that  a  conning  tower  or  low,  sharp-nosed  craft 
bearing  the  mystic  characters  U-9  was  a  German  underseas 
boat  NTo.  9. 

The  statistical  records  at  the  end  of  April,  1917,  showed 
that  nearly  3000  vessels  of  almost  5,000,000  gross  tons  were 
destroyed  by  the  U-boats  in  the  war.  More  than  half  of  the 
vessels  sunk  belonged  to  England.  Norway  and  France  were 
the  next  greatest  sufferers  from  the  submarine  warfare.  In 
one  week  after  Germany  announced  her  intention  to  give  no 
quarter,  but  to  sink  any  vessel  which  came  within  the  range  of 
the  U-boat  torpedoes,  the  toll  of  ships  lost  was  more  than 
400,000  tons. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  war  the  submarine  was  to  all  in- 
tents and  purposes  a  novelty — a  boat  of  recognized  possibili- 
ies,  but  existing  very  largely  in  the  experimental  stage.  Its 
use  was  very  largely  ignored  by  naval  men,  although  it  was 
conceded  that  when  properly  developed  it  would  prove  a  won- 


70  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

derful  agency  of  destruction.  The  proud  commanders  of  the 
great  battleships,  with  their  10,  12  and  14  inch  guns,  which  sent 
great  shells  miles  across  the  ocean,  looked  down  upon  the  little 
underseas  boat,  and  applied  to  it  the  sobriquet  of  "tin  sardine.' ' 
But  the  "tin  sardine"  has  grown  up,  and  the  commander 
of  the  monster  war  vessel  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  little  craft 
which  he  ridiculed.  A  short  time  ago  Holland,  the  American 
inventor  of  the  modern  submarine,  died  of  a  broken  heart.  His 
type  was  necessarily  an  experimental  one.  He  built  five  boats 
before  he  was  able  to  sell  one  to  the  United  States  Government, 
and  this  latter  one,  after  being  bought  by  a  junk  dealer,  who 
intended  to  break  it  up  for  its  metals,  was  finally  rescued  from 
such  an  inglorious  end  by  the  city  of  New  York,  which  has 
placed  it  in  her  municipal  museum. 

PRINCIPLE  OF  THE  SUBMARINE. 

Germany  has  developed  the  highest  type  of  submarines, 
which  she  has  used  to  the  fullest  advantage.  The  principle  of 
the  submarine  is  that  of  a  floating  bottle.  An  empty  bottle,  as 
every  one  knows,  will  float  on  the  surface,  but  submerges  as 
soon  as  it  is  filled  with  water.  The  submarine  has,  as  part  of 
its  constructive  features,  a  number  of  compartments  which,  as 
they  are  filled  or  emptied  of  water,  enables  the  craft  to  sub- 
merge or  rise. 

At  the  bow  and  stern,  respectively,  there  are  two  hori- 
zontal rudders,  and  as  these  are  manipulated  at  various  angles 
so  the  bow  points  either  upward  or  downward,  and  with  a 
steady  gliding  motion  the  submarine  slides  under  or  is  brought 
to  the  surface. 

This,  in  brief,  is  the  story  of  the  submarine.  Its  history 
is  another  matter ;  its  radius  of  action  and  results  achieved  one 
of  the  marvels  of  the  ages.  A  long-sheathed  body,  the  shape 
of  a  cigar  with  the  butt  end  to  the  fore,  the  inside  filled  with 
machinery  and  compactness  the  order  of  the  day,  might  be  re- 
garded as  a  fair  description  from  a  physical  standpoint.     It 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  71 

has  spread  terror  to  all  corners  of  the  earth,  and,  taken  in  pro- 
portion to  its  size  and  steaming  radius,  may  well  be  said  to  be 
the  superior  of  the  superdreadnought. 

The  manner  in  which  the  submarine  is  operated  is  difficult 
to  describe.  It  leads  a  sort  of  dual  existence.  When  cruising 
along  the  surface  "awash,"  it  is  propelled  like  a  motorboat,  the 
power  being  provided  by  a  gasoline  engine ;  but  when  it  dives 
or  submerges  it  is  operated  underwater  by  electric  motors,  and 
the  steering,  pumping,  handling,  loading  and  firing  of  the  tor- 
pedoes is  done  pneumatically  and  electrically.  The  interior  of 
the  submarine  is  a  marvel  of  mechanical  complexity  and  scien- 
tific detail.  There  are  gauges  to  show  the  water  pressure,  to 
indicate  the  speed,  to  show  the  depth;  sensitive  devices  by 
which  the  commander  can  tell  of  the  approach  of  vessels; 
wheels,  cranks,  levers  and  instruments  which  are  used  in  driv- 
ing and  controlling  this  almost  human  mechanical  agency  of 
the  seafighter. 

SUBMARINE  AN   ANOMALY  IN  WARFARE. 

The  submarine  is  the  sudden  and  amazing  problem  of  the 
naval  world.  While  naval  men  assert  with  confidence  that  it 
can  never  win  the  mastery  of  the  seas,  in  the  same  breath  they 
will  admit  that  it  may  easily  prevent  the  older  and  better 
known  types  of  ships  from  establishing  the  mastery  that  was 
once  theirs.    It  is  an  anomaly  in  warfare. 

Many  are  the  tales  of  horror  told  by  survivors  of  ships 
which  have  been  torpedoed  by  the  undersea  boats  of  the  Teu- 
tons. The  lordly  Lusitania,  on  board  of  which  were  some  of 
the  leading  lights  of  literature  and  some  of  the  world's  wealthy 
men,  was  sent  to  the  bottom  without  the  least  warning.  Neu- 
tral shipping  has  been  devastated,  and  men,  women  and  chil- 
dren have  been  murdered  by  the  hand  of  the  Kaiser,  as  exempli- 
fied in  the  lurking  submarine. 

One  of  the  dastardly  tragedies  of  the  war  was  the  sinking 
of  the  Lars  Kruse,  a  ship  flying  the  Danish  flag  and  which  had 


72  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

been  chartered  by  the  Belgian  Relief  Commission.  This  was 
sunk  in  the  early  part  of  February,  1917,  and  the  crew  of  nine- 
teen men,  together  with  the  captain  and  other 'officers,  with  the 
exception  of  the  first  mate  and  Axel  Moeller,  the  first  engineer, 
perished  in  the  bitter  cold  sea.  No  warning  was  given  by  the 
attacking  submarine;  indeed,  no  sight  of  it  was  had  by  the 
crew.  Delivering  its  torpedo  as  it  lay  submerged,  it  silently 
stole  away  into  the  night  after  the  murders  had  been  done. 

In  the  maritime  court  in  Copenhagen  Mr.  Moeller  tells  of 
the  sinking  of  the  ship.  Dressed  as  the  regulations  of  the  Ger- 
man autocrat  demanded,  with  the  balloon,  flag  and  bunting  dis- 
played at  each  of  the  mastheads,  together  with  other  marks  of 
identification,  the  ship  was  steaming  along  in  the  bright  moon- 
light when  she  was  struck,  according  to  the  testimony  of  the 
engineer. 

SHIP  NOT  STRUCK  BY  A  MINE. 

The  fact  that  the  ship  was  hit  near  the  fourth  hatch  alone 
combats  the  theory  that  she  was  struck  by  a  mine.  In  this  latter 
case  the  mine  would  have  struck  her  nearer  the  bow.  The  ship 
was  near  the  mouth  of  the  English  channel  when  hit.  In  an 
instant  she  started  to  settle,  and  the  crew  at  once  lowered  away 
the  single  lifeboat. 

The  boat  had  hardly  started  over  the  side,  however,  before 
the  ship  lurched,  and  with  a  mighty  heave  went  down  stern  first. 
She  seemed  to  turn  a  back  somersault,  according  to  the  engi- 
neer, and  because  of  the  fact  that  the  lifeboat  was  not  clear  it 
was  dragged  under.  The  men  succeeded  in  cutting  the  ropes, 
however,  and  the  lifeboat  came  to  the  surface,  although  bottom 
side  up.  Engineer  Moeller  was  struck  on  the  head  as  the  boat 
came  to  the  surface,  but,  although  he  was  momentarily  stunned, 
the  icy  water  quickly  revived  him. 

Striking  out  for  the  lifeboat,  the  engineer  soon  had  a  tight 
grip  on  her  side.  A  man  struggling  in  the  water  grasped  his 
wrist,  but  by  a  quick  movement  he  wrenched  himself  free,  and 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  73 

then,  climbing  upon  the  boat,  reached  out  and  caught  the  man 
by  the  hand.  Then  began  a  slow  struggle  to  get  him  aboard, 
but  the  men  were  unequal  to  the  task,  and  the  man  in  the  water 
sank.  Part  of  the  skin  and  flesh  of  his  hand  remained  in  the 
ringers  of  Moeller,  showing  the  desperation  with  which  he  had 
clung  to  the  man's  hand. 

Three  other  men,  who  were  fast  becoming  exhausted,  were 
assisted  upon  the  boat,  where  they  lay  sprawled  across  its  bot- 
tom. Four  others  were  in  the  water,  making  a  total  of  seven 
who  were  alive. 

Water  and  air  were  freezing  cold,  and  Moeller,  who  was 
in  the  water,  together  with  three  others,  held  to  the  gunwales 
with  stiffened  fingers.  Within  the  hour  one  of  the  sailors  gave 
up  the  struggle,  and  with  a  farewell  to  the  others  slid  quietly 
into  the  depths. 

PASSENGERS'  AGONIZING  SUFFERINGS. 

Finally  Moeller  climbed  upon  the  upturned  boat,  where 
he  lay  listening  to  the  shrieks  of  his  companions.  He  said  that 
their  cries  were  most  pitiful.  The  cabin  boy  was  the  next  vic- 
tim. He  cried  pitifully  for  a  time,  but  finally  became  silent 
and  slid  into  the  water.  One  after  another,  the  men  died  of 
exposure  and  slipped  into  the  peaceful  sea. 

After  a  time  the  only  persons  remaining,  besides  the  third 
mate,  were  the  two  who  had  thrown  themselves  across  the  bot- 
tom of  the  boat.  Finally  one  of  them  gave  up  the  struggle, 
and  the  other,  in  an  effort  to  combat  the  cold,  pulled  the  clothes 
from  his  dead  body  and  wrapped  them  about  himself.  The 
boat  settled  a  little,  and  finally  both  were  corpses,  tying  with 
feet  and  hands  dipping  into  the  sea.  The  engineer  said  that  he 
did  not  have  the  heart  to  push  their  bodies  into  the  water, 
although  he  knew  they  were  dead. 

Finally  the  third  mate  was  the  only  other  man  alive.  The 
clothes  of  the  engineer  were  frozen  fast  to  his  body,  and  he  felt 
that  he  was  dying  of  cold.    The  third  mate  started  to  get  a  sort 


74  THE  SLINKING  SUBMAKINE. 

of  bluish  black  from  the  cold,  and  with  a  gasping  cry  he  at- 
tempted to  sit  up  straight.  Then  reason  left  Jiim,  and  for  a 
couple  of  hours  he  shouted  and  shrieked,  and,  as  the  sun  began 
to  streak  the  sky  and  dawn  brought  slight  comfort,  the  dement- 
ed man  raved  and  swore. 

Then  a  flash  of  reason  seemed  to  return  to  him  and  he 
spoke  to  Moeller. 

"I'm  going,"  he  said.  "Give  my  love  to  my  wife." 
The  man  had  been  married  just  before  starting  on  this  ill- 
fated  voyage.  With  this  farewell  message  on  his  lips  he  died. 
When  Moeller  returned  to  his  home  he  found  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  deliver  the  message  to  the  wife  of  the  dead  man,  because 
of  the  fact  that  worry  had  driven  her  insane. 

TROUSERS  USED  AS  SIGNAL. 

Shortly  after  the  death  of  his  companion  Moeller  saw 
the  smoke  of  a  steamer  on  the  horizon.  Summoning  all  his 
strength,  he  tore  the  trousers  from  the  limbs  of  one  of  the  dead 
men,  and,  using  them  as  a  means  of  signaling,  swung  them 
about  his  head  to  attract  attention.  As  the  engineer  made 
every  effort  to  attract  the  attention  of  those  aboard  the  steam- 
ship, he  saw  a  sneaking  submarine  slowly  edging  toward  her. 
This  made  him  shout  all  the  louder,  thinking  thereby  to  warn 
the  captain  of  the  ship  of  his  danger.  His  efforts  were  vain, 
however,  and  in  a  short  time  the  ship  had  gone  to  the  bottom 
and  the  crew  was  adrift  in  the  lifeboats.  The  sunken  ship 
proved  to  be  a  Russian  steamer. 

In  his  efforts  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  intended  vic- 
tim of  the  U-boat,  the  drifting  man  had  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  captain  of  the  submarine,  and  it  was  this  boat  to  which 
his  cold-stiffened  body  was  hauled  a  few  minutes  later.  It  was 
a  time  before  his  numb  body  could  be  thawed  out. 

Seeming  to  know  from  which  ship  he  had  been  cast  off, 
the  engineer  was  closely  questioned  by  the  captain  of  the  sub- 
marine.   As  the  captain  talked  he  made  motions,  as  though  to 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMAEINE.  75 

shut  out  from  before  his  eyes  a  horrible  sight.  He  told  Moeller 
afterwards  that  the  most  horrible  sight  he  had  ever  seen  was  the 
overturned  boat  with  the  two  corpses  laying  on  it,  and  the  lone 
man  signaling  for  help.  The  victim  was  black  from  cold,  and 
his  legs  were  rubbed  by  members  of  the  crew.  Port  wine  was 
given  him,  and  later  food  and  coffee. 

Then  the  captain  continued  his  questioning.  He  knew 
the  name  of  the  boat  on  which  Moeller  had  been  engineer,  and 
from  his  intimate  knowledge  of  the  sinking  of  her,  the  engineer 
felt  sure  it  was  his  submarine  that  had  done  the  work. 

SUBMARINE  TOWS  RUSSIAN  SHIP. 

Turning  his  attention  to  the  lif  eboats  of  the  Russian  ship 
which  he  had  just  torpedoed,  the  captain  of  the  submarine 
promised  to  tow  them  to  the  French  coast.  He  had  been  tow- 
ing them  but  two  hours,  however,  when  he  came  below  and  told 
Moeller  that  he  had  sighted  a  French  destroyer,  and  that  he 
would  have  to  make  his  escape.  He  gave  the  engineer  his 
choice  of  staying  on  the  submarine,  in  which  case  it  would  be 
fourteen  days«bef  ore  he  touched  port,  after  which  he  was  prom- 
ised his  freedom,  or  the  privilege  of  getting  aboard  one  of  the 
lifeboats,  and  taking  his  chances  of  rescue  by  the  destroyer. 

Electing  to  take  his  chances  in  the  lifeboat,  Moeller  was 
fitted  out  with  new  clothing,  the  outfit  being  topped  off  with  a 
fur-lined  overcoat.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  the  captain 
had  taken  this  clothing  from  the  stores  of  the  Russian  steamer 
before  sinking  her,  and  the  engineer  learned  when  he  got  into 
the  lifeboat  that  he  was  wearing  the  greatcoat  of  one  of  the 
shivering  Russians. 

Just  before  submerging  the  U-boat  set  off  a  couple  of  red- 
light  bombs,  for  the  purpose  of  attracting  the  attention  of  the 
crew  of  the  destroyer,  and  submerged.  The  drifters  were 
picked  up  by  the  destroyer,  which  steamed  for  France.  The 
captain  of  the  U-boat  had  promised  Moeller  that  he  would  not 
attack  the  destroyer,  although  he  had  been  trailing  her  for  two 


76  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

weeks.  The  U-boat  was  sunk  before  she  reached  port,  and  all 
perished. 

An  American  importer  who,  because  of  his  German  name 
and  the  intimate  relations  he  enjoyed  with  certain  important 
men  in  Berlin,  had  been  taken  to  the  hearts  of  some  of  the 
leaders,  became  a  factor  in  pro-German  activities  in  Cuba.  He 
was  taken  into  the  confidences  of  many  of  the  officials  and 
learned  the  plans  of  the  Tirpitz  group. 

Deciding  that  his  allegiance  was  American,  he  returned  to 
the  United  States.  In  his  possession  were  many  of  the  inner 
secrets  of  the  German  Government,  and  these  were  given  to 
the  officials  in  Washington.  His  information  with  reference  to 
the  submarine  has  been  of  great  value  to  the  government. 

For  the  sake  of  convenience  we  will  call  the  man  Johann 
Schmidt.    This  is  his  story : 

THE  U-BOAT  TYPE  OF  SUBMERSIBLE. 

Germany's  most  successful  and  highly  developed  class  of 
submarine  has  been,  of  course,  the  U-boat  type  of  submersible. 
These  are  the  terrors  of  the  sea  which  have  succeeded  in  cross- 
ing the  Atlantic,  and  have  been  developed  both  as  the  fighting 
and  as  the  commercial  U-boat. 

Herr  Schmidt  reported  that  Germany  was  constructing 
submarines  25  per  cent  larger  than  anything  the  United  States 
had  ever  seen  or  heard  of.  His  information  was  to  the  effect 
that  Germany  had  a  building  capacity  for  ten  submarines  a 
week.  The  ability  to  produce  these  boats  with  such  rapidity  is 
due  to  the  process  of  standardization — the  practice  of  modern 
efficiency  which  has  made  it  possible  for  American  factories  to 
turn  out  such  big  quantities  of  automobiles  in  a  limited  period. 

All  parts  of  the  German  U-boats  are  made  in  standard 
sizes  and  from  the  same  original  pattern.  Consequently,  these 
parts  are  turned  out  by  machinery  in  replica,  and  the  building 
of  the  finished  boats  is  merely  a  matter  of  assembling  them  at 
points  to  which  the  various  parts  have  been  shipped.     The 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  77 

Diesel  oil  engine,  which  is  regarded  as  the  ideal  power-pro- 
ducing engine  for  submarines,  has  been  developed  to  its  highest 
state  of  efficiency  by  Germany,  and  is  made  at  the  famous 
Krupp  gun  works,  the  great  engine  works  in  Augsburg, 
Emden  and  Nuremburg,  and  other  less  well-known  places  in 
Germany. 

It  has  been  estimated  that  Germany  has  anywhere  from 
250  to  500  submarines,  and  it  is  said  that  the  aim  is  to  produce 
1000  of  these  craft,  to  absolutely  destroy  the  commerce  of  the 
seas  and  starve  into  submission  England  and  France. 

HOW  SUBMARINES  WORK. 

According  to  Herr  Schmidt,  the  submarines  work  in 
groups  of  four.  Because  of  the  limited  capacity  of  the  boats 
for  carrying  provisions,  supplies  and  fuel,  it  is  necessary  for 
them  to  have  supply  bases,  to  which  they  can  return  and  secure 
torpedoes.  In  operation  each  group  consists  of  four  subma- 
rines, traveling  along  in  a  diamond-shaped  formation,  one  in 
front,  one  on  either  flank  and  one  in  rear.  Eight  miles  sepa- 
rate the  boats.  The  leading  submarine  carries  the  extra  gaso- 
line and  supplies  and  acts  as  a  scoutship;  she  sights  a  vessel, 
reports  its  speed  and  direction  and  then  submerges — her  task 
is  done. 

The  two  torpedo  carriers  on  either  flank  immediately 
change  their  courses  so  as  to  converge  on  the  prey,  and  they 
arrive  one  on  either  side  of  her — they  get  her  in  between  them. 
The  boat  in  the  rear  keeps  them  informed  as  to  the  doomed 
ship's  progress,  and  submerges  at  the  last  moment.  She  car- 
ries the  extra  crews  for  the  fighting  pair.  The  U-boats  are 
fairly  well  protected  against  the  onslaught  of  the  light  torpedo- 
boat  destroyers  and  chasers,  because  the  decks  are  protected  by 
several  feet  of  water  at  almost  all  times,  while  the  commanding 
tower  is  covered  with  from  two  to  three  inches  of  the  best  steel 
armor  plate. 

It  is  related  that  at  the  outset  of  the  U-boat  menace,  Eng- 


78  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

land  ordered  its  commanding  officers  to  ram  the  U-boats  on 
sight.  The  length  to  which  the  Germans  will  go  in  an  effort  to 
win  is  illustrated  by  the  fact  that,  in  consequence  of  this  order, 
a  Von  Tirpitz  council  presented  this  answer:  Attacking  sub- 
marines were  equipped  with  explosive  mines  containing  300  to 
400  pounds  of  nitroglycerin  or  guncotton.  To  the  top  of  this 
mine  was  fastened  a  fake  periscope.  This  devilish  device  was 
attached  to  the  submarine  by  a  light  cable,  and  towed  along 
the  surface  of  the  water  1000  feet  or  more  behind  the  subma- 
rine. The  result  that  would  follow  any  attempt  on  the  part  of 
a  commander  to  run  down  one  of  these  decoys  is  readily 
imagined. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  A  PERISCOPE. 

The  periscope  is  distinctly  a  submarine  device  which  is 
worthy  of  brief  description.  It  is,  in  effect,  a  long  tube,  with 
an  elbow  joint  at  the  top  and  a  similar  one  at  the  bottom.  At 
the  elbow  joints  at  both  ends  are  arranged  reflectors.  The  re- 
flector in  the  upper  end  catches  the  object  which  comes  within 
the  range  of  vision,  and  reflects  the  image  down  the  tube  to  the 
mirror  at  the  lower  elbow,  where  the  pilot  sees  it.  The  prin- 
ciple of  the  periscope  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  *  "busybody," 
familiar  to  householders,  and  which  is  placed  on  the  sill  of  an 
upper  window,  so  that  a  person  inside  the  house  may  see  who 
is  at  the  front  door. 

The  Germans  have  recently  devised  a  new  form  of  peri- 
scope, designed  to  make  the  device  invisible  to  the  lookout  of 
approaching  boats.  This  device  consists  of  two  mirrors,  put 
together  like  a  "Y"  lying  on  its  side,  the  wide  part  in  front. 
These  skim  through  the  waves  and  converge  the  image  upon 
the  low  periscope's  lens,  which  shoots  the  light  down  the  tube 
to  the  receiving  apparatus  below.  When  looked  at  from  a  dis- 
tance the  mirrors  reflect  the  surface  of  the  sea,  so  that  a  look- 
out sees  nothing  but  the  waves  as  they  are  reflected  in  the 
mirror. 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMAKINE.  79 

The  Germans  use  the  bottom  of  the  sea  as  regular  "land" 
for  their  supply  bases,  and  when  the  submarines  go  to  the  sur- 
face it  is  precisely  like  an  aeroplane  mounting  the  air.  The 
submarine  fleet  boasts  also  of  "mother  boats."  They  lie  on  the 
bottom  of  the  ocean,  in  designated  places,  and  rise  at  night  to 
hand  out  their  supplies.  Crews  are  changed  and  tired  men  go 
back  to  the  bottom  to  rest  up,  while  fresher  comrades  take  their 
places. 

So,  too,  the  submarine,  with  its  ability  to  rest  on  the  bot- 
tom of  the  sea,  has  become  an  efficient  boat  for  mine  laying. 
The  mine  layers  work  from  the  undersea  boats  without  fear  of 
disturbance,  the  divers  walking  out  from  the  submarines  to  the 
floor  of  the  sea  without  being  seen  or  without  ever  coming  to 
the  surface. 

TALES  OF  REMARKABLE  EXPLOITS. 

American  citizens  landed  from  vessels  sunk  by  German 
submarines  tell  remarkable  tales  of  the  strenuous  exploits  of 
the  U-boats.  In  one  case  three  undersea  boats  appeared  simul- 
taneously alongside  the  ship,  one  being  a  submarine  cruiser, 
300  feet  long,  and  the  others  old-fashioned  submarines,  with  a 
length  of  about  120  feet. 

In  another  case  a  German  submarine  wore  an  elaborate 
disguise  of  a  fishing  boat.  This  submarine  carried  a  gun  which 
had  a  range  of  nearly  five  miles. 

In  at  least  two  cases  the  crews  of  vessels  sunk  by  sub- 
marines were  rescued  from  open  boats  by  passing  ships,  only 
to  suffer  a  repetition  of  disaster  when  the  ship  on  which  they 
had  taken  refuge  fell  prey  to  an  underwater  boat. 

A  seaman  from  Pensacola,  who  was  a  member  of  the  crew 
of  a  Swedish  sailing  vessel,  said : 

"We  were  almost  within  sight  of  land  late  in  the  after- 
noon when  we  observed  a  Norwegian  sailing  vessel  in  an  en- 
counter with  a  submarine  eight  miles  away.  Apprehending 
that  our  turn  would  come  next,  we  prepared  a  lifeboat.     A 


80  THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE. 

300-foot  submarine  came  up  to  us  in  due  course  and  fired  three 
warning  shots  from  its  heavy  gun. 

"We  pulled  our  boat  over  to  the  lifeboat  from  the  'Nor- 
wegian ship  previously  sunk,  and  a  dozen  hours  later  were 
picked  up  by  a  British  steamer.  We  had  only  a  brief  stay  on 
the  British  boat,  as  she  was  torpedoed  the  same  morning. 
After  a  few  hours  in  the  boats  we  were  found  by  a  British 
patrol  and  landed." 

A  Baltimore  seaman  from  a  Danish  sailing  vessel  said: 

THE  SHIP  ABANDONED. 

"We  abandoned  ship  in  response  to  three  shots  from  a 
submarine.  Thereupon  the  submarine  fired  twenty-two  shots 
into  the  hull  of  the  ship,  sinking  her.  We  tried  to  speak  with 
the  submarine  commander,  but  he  told  us  he  was  in  a  hurry,  as 
he  had  to  attend  to  a  Norwegian  bark  which  was  waiting  a 
short  distance  off. 

"We  pulled  for  the  nearest  land,  and  all  our  twenty-five 
men  got  ashore  safe,  although  both  lifeboats  were  badly 
smashed  up  in  the  surf  as  we  were  beaching  them." 

A  Philadelphian  described  the  manner  in  which  his 
steamer  escaped  being  sunk. 

"We  were  attacked  by  a  submarine  disguised  as  a  fishing 
vessel,"  he  said.  "She  opened  fire  on  us  at  five  miles,  sending 
fifteen  shots  at  us,  and  smashing  our  wireless.  She  pursued  us 
for  an  hour.  We  did  not  use  our  gun.  Finally  a  British  patrol 
boat  appeared.  The  submarine  submerged,  disguise  and  all, 
presenting  a  ludicrous  sight  as  the  carefully  prepared  equip- 
ment simulating  a  fishing  boat  sank  beneath  the  waves." 

The  captain  of  an  American  sailing  ship  which  was  sunk 
said: 

"Submarines  are  lying  along  the  sea  lanes  in  regular 
nests.  They  keep  well  under  the  water  most  of  the  time,  com- 
ing up  now  and  then  for  periscopic  observations,  or  on  hear- 
ing the  approach  of  merchant  craft,  which  often  can  be  iden- 


02 


oS 

a    . 

m 
P-, 
& 
o 
o 


-s  a 
a  o 

u  to 
c3  a 
a,  53 

fl  „  ^ 

S"8 
£=  5 

o3  72  g 

a^  o 

©    BQ   00 

•^  c3  g 

(73    U  ^H 

_d       " 

— <  j    o 

"2-      M 

.a  .  a 

o3  m  a 

o     rt 

©  a^ 
.a--*  © 

&isa 

©  d 

>  a5*-" 
bo 

cS  c3  ^ 

111  t>>-S 

■s.a  a 

&,£> 

ce  a 
0<>- 


02 

© 

if 

a  - 

03$ 

^  a 

W    S3 

P  a 


<  o 
<&  £ 

w  a 


Photo  Underwood  &  Uutierw  ouu. 
THE  ARREST  OF  THE  ASSASSIN. 

Scene  immediately  after  the  murder  of  the  Archduke  and  Archduchess  of  Austria  in  the  streets  of 
Sarajevo,  Bosnia.    The  arrest  of  Gavrio  Princip,  the  murderer. 


©Underwood  <fc  Underwood. 

NATIONAL  GUARDSMAN  WEARING  COMPLETE  EQUIPMENT,  READY  FOR  WAR. 

A  soldier's  equipment  consists  of  a  great  number  of  articles,  skillfully  packed  so  that  they  make  a 
small  bundle,  considering  the  number  of  articles.  The  kit  includes'a  blanket,  rifle,  bayonet,  kit 
bag,  cartridge  belt,  canteen,  pan,  plate,  knife,  fork,  spoon,  tent  spikes,  rubber  blanket  aud  other 
miscellaneous  articles.  The  photo  shows  three  views— side,  front  and  back,  with  equipment 
attached. 


Photo.  American  Press  Association. 
CANADIAN  OFFICIAL.  PHOTOGRAPH. 
The  taking  ol  Vimy  Ridge,  on  the  western  front.    Canadian  brigade  machine  gunners  digging 

into  shell  holes. 


©American  Press  Association, 
CANADIAN  OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH. 
Stretcher  cases  on  the  western  front  waiting  to  be  loaded  on  a  light  railway. 


83—i  d 

•^  C8-S 
e3  0>  £ 

^  o 


ft'3  PI 
^    -PI 

1-4    OQ 


Photo  International  Film  Service. 
CAPTURE  OF  BAPAUME  BY  BRITISH. 
Scene  on  the  day  British  troops  entered  Bapaume,  a  French  city  evacuated  by  the  Germans  in 
their  retreat  to  the  Hindenburg  line.    Cheerful  British  soldiers  are  seen  in  a  street. 


Photo  Underwood  ct  Underwood. 
FRENCH  PASSING  THROUGH  RECAPTURED  NO  YON. 
They  are  on  the  heels  of  the  Germans.    The  photograph  shows  how  the  town  was  wrecked  by  the 

Germans  before  they  evacuated, 


SOLDIERS  OF  THE  DIFFERENT  NATIO? 
This  picture  shows  the  portraits  and  headdress  of  45  differ 


1*18  ENGAGED  IN  THE  WORLD  WAR. 

jipresentative  fighters  now  engaged  in  the  European  war. 


"  V— I-C— T— O— R— Y." 
Sailors  spelling  the  word  "  VICTORY"  with 


Underwood  &  Underwood. 


©N.  G.  Moser. 
From  Underwood  &  Underwood. 

Sighting  through  the  40  power  telescope  on  the  U.  S.  S.  Pennsylvania.    Objects  at  great  distances 
are  clearly  distinguished  through  this  telescope. 


©  American  Press  Association. 
GROUP  OF  RUSSIAN  SAILORS. 
They  are  the  first  to  come  to  New  York  since  the  United  States  entered  the  war. 


©American  Press  Association. 
SERBIAN  CORPS  ORGANIZED  IIS   THE  UNITED  STATES. 
Hundreds  of  Serbians  organized  an  army  and  went  to  France  and  joined  the  offensive.     The 
photo,  shows  the  men  leaving  San  Francisco,  where  they  were  mobilized.    The  United  States 
paid  for  the  transportation  ot  the  men. 


©American  Press  Association. 
BRITISH  SAILORS  IN  NEW  YORK. 

They  are  from  the  H.  M.  S.  Roxburgh,  and  took  part  in  welcoming  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Joflre 

in  New  York  City 


„__ Photo.  American  Press  Association, 

1HE  GREAT  AMERICAN  HABIT. 
French  Jackies,  for  the  first  time  in  the  United  States,  learn  all  the  delights  of  the  gTeat  American 

drink,  the  Ice  Cream  Soda. 


Photo  International  Film  Service. 
"TANK"  ARTILLERY  PROTECTION. 
U.  S.  soldiers  learning  this  new  method  of  warfare. 


Photo  Press  Illustrating  Co. 
THE  BARBED  WIRE  WAR. 

Germans  laying  barbed  wire  entanglement  at  the  Russian  front. 


Underwood  &  Underwood,  N.  Y. 


CARRYING   OLD   GLORY  THROUGH   LONDON. 
United  States    soldiers,  carrying  the  Stars  and  Stripes  and  Regimental  Standard, 
passed   cheering    crowds   at   the  head   of  a  National   army  command  that  marched 
through  London  on  May  11th,  1918. 


Photo  Underwood  &  Underwood. 
THE  FIGHTING  KING  OP  BELGIUM. 

Albert  I,  who  since  the  outbreak  of  the  war  has  been  known  as  the  "  Fighting  King," 
is  a  nephew  of  the  late  King  Leopold,  whom  he  succeeded  in  1909.  The  photograph 
shows  his  wife  and  three  children. 


THE  SLINKING  SUBMARINE.  81 

tified  readily  by  the  sound  of  the  engines.  By  thus  conserving 
fuel  the  submarines  are  able  to  remain  away  from  their  base  a 
long  time,  and  also  they  find  means  of  renewing  their  stores 
from  ships  which  they  sink. 

"The  U-boat  which  sank  us  had  been  out  for  six  weeks. 
She  had  one  British  captain  on  board.  She  renewed  all  her 
supplies  from  our  boat  and  took  all  the  nautical  instruments. 
The  submarine  gave  us  a  sharp  signal  to  halt,  with  a  shell  from 
a  distance  of  two  miles.  It  was  good  marksmanship.  The 
shot  hit  the  ship  squarely,  but  caused  no  casualties.  We 
stopped  and  took  to  the  boats.  The  submarine  came  up  in 
leisurely  fashion,  sank  the  ship  with  bombs  and  passed  the  time 
of  day  with  our  boats.  She  had  a  crew  of  thirty-seven,  and 
was  250  feet  long. 

"We  were  picked  up  by  a  Norwegian  sailing  vessel,  on 
which  we  spent  six  days.  She  was  then  attacked  by  a  120-foot 
submarine.  We  all  took  to  the  Norwegian's  boats.  The  sub- 
marine commander  declined  to  look  at  the  Norwegian  cap- 
tain's papers.  We  had  another  twenty-four  hours  in  open 
boats,  and  then  were  picked  up  by  a  British  patrol  and 
landed." 


H  R— <5 


CHAPTER  V. 
THWAKTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

Nets  to  Entangle  the  Sea  Sharks  of  War  —  "  Chasers  "  or  "  Skimming- 
dish  "  Boats — "  Blimps  "  and  Seaplanes — Hunting  the  Submarine  with 
"  Lance,"  Bomb  and  Gun — A  Sailor's  Description. 

THE  advantage  which  Germany  gained  by  the  development 
of  what  has  been  termed  the  supersubmarine  placed  the 
other  nations  where  it  became  absolutely  necessary  for 
them  to  concentrate  their  energies  in  an  effort  to  counteract 
the  devastation  which  the  U-boats  brought  upon  the  seas. 
England  tried  first  to  protect  the  English  channel  and  many 
of  its  ports  with  mines,  floating  bombs  and  submarine  nets,  and 
while  the  latter  served  as  barriers  which  prevented  the  sub- 
marines penetrating  into  some  of  the  important  waters  and 
harbors,  they  could  act  merely  in  a  protective  sense. 

The  submarine  net  is  a  specially  devised  net  with  heavy 
iron  or  wire  meshes,  similar  to  a  fishing  net.  These  nets — 
miles  in  length — were  born  of  the  nets  originally  devised  to 
sweep  harbors  clear  of  mines.  They  are  carried  between  two 
boats  described  as  trawlers,  which  are  a  form  of  sea-going  tug 
with  powerful  engines,  that  can  draw  a  heavy  load.  A  heavy 
cable  runs  from  trawler  to  trawler,  and  from  this  the  chain  net 
is  suspended  in  the  water.  It  is  heavily  weighted  at  the  bot- 
tom so  as  to  hold  it  in  a  perpendicular  position.  The  trawlers 
steaming  along,  side  by  side,  sweep  up  with  the  net  anything 
which  may  be  placed  in  the  water  for  the  purpose  of  blowing 
up  or  injuring  vessels. 

The  submarine  nets  in  some  places  have  been  anchored  to 
form  a  regular  barrier  against  the  passage  of  submarine  boats, 
and  in  this  way  were  effective,  but  their  use  could  in  no  way  re- 
strict the  underseas  boats  in  their  work  upon  the  open  seas. 

The  most  effective  plan  of  overcoming  the  dire  conse- 
quences of  the  U-boat  warfare  was  found,  therefore,  to  lie  in 

82 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  83 

the  use  of  submarine  chasers  and  airships,  the  two  operating 
together  in  conjunction  with  the  battleships,  cruisers  and  tor- 
pedo boat  destroyers. 

The  submarine  chaser  is  a  light-draught,  high-powered, 
skimming-dish  type  of  husky  motorboat,  mounting  rapid-fire, 
3  or  4<-inch  guns.  In  order  to  prove  effective  against  the  sub- 
marine it  is  necessary  to  have  many  of  these  boats,  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  particular  interest  that  the  marvelous  resources  of 
the  United  States  at  the  time  of  her  entrance  into  the  war  en- 
abled her  to  immediately  begin  a  campaign  for  the  construction 
of  chasers,  which  would  be  able  to  guard  the  seas  in  the  chan- 
nels of  traffic  and  along  the  ports  into  which  the  submarine 
might  attempt  to  sneak. 

NO  EXPERT  NAVAL  KNOWLEDGE  REQUIRED. 

The  operation  of  the  chaser  does  not  require  the  degree  of 
technical  skill  and  knowledge  of  naval  strategy  required  in  the 
handling  of  ships  of  the  naval  type.  A  fleet  of  chasers  is 
manned  largely  by  naval  reserves,  who  have  a  certain  amount  of 
training,  but  who  are  neither  navigators  nor  experts  in  naval 
affairs.  The  operations  are,  however,  directed  by  the  naval 
authorities. 

The  submarine  chaser  is  effective  because  it  draws  very 
little  water,  has  high  speed,  can  be  quickly  turned  and  diverted 
from  its  course  and  does  not  present  any  great  depth  of  hull  at 
which  the  submarine  can  fire  a  torpedo.  It  would  be  possible 
for  a  torpedo  to  pass  under  a  chaser  without  hitting  it — if  the 
submarine  cared  to  waste  such  an  expensive  weapon  on  so  small 
an  adversary.  When  the  submarine  attempts  to  come  to  the 
surface  and  use  the  rapid-fire  gun  with  which  she  is  armed  she 
is  at  a  disadvantage,  because  it  takes  her  several  minutes  to 
emerge.  Additional  time  is  required  to  swing  the  gun  up 
through  its  automatic  hatch  while  the  men  scramble  to  the  deck 
to  man  it. 

The  chaser,  with  a  speed  of  approximately  35  to  40  miles 


84  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

an  hour,  will  travel  somewhere  between  a  mile  and  a  half  to 
two  miles  in  this  period.  Its  gun  has  been  ready  from  the  start, 
and  the  chaser  has  had  half  a  dozen  shots  or  so  with  only  a 
single  hit  needed  to  put  the  submarine  out  of  commission.  Even 
if  the  submarine  is  at  the  surface  and  has  her  gun  mounted 
ready  for  action,  she  is  at  a  disadvantage  with  the  chaser.  The 
chaser,  taking  advantage  of  her  speed  and  small  size,  goes 
skimming  across  the  water  at  the  rate  of  40  miles  an  hour,  and 
it  takes  a  mighty  fine  gunner  to  be  able  to  hit  a  small  craft,  go- 
ing in  a  zigzag  course  over  the  water  at  such  speed. 

The  chaser  may  continue  to  circle  the  submarine  awaiting 
her  opportunity  which  will  of  necessity  come  when  the  U-boat 
attempts  to  submerge.  The  submarine  must  go  through  the 
regular  form  of  running  back  her  gun,  and  battening  down  the 
water-tight  hatches,  before  she  can  submerge,  and  the  latter 
process  again  takes  several  minutes.  Therefore  while  the  sub- 
marine is  preparing  to  dip,  the  chaser  can  run  upon  her  and  let 
loose  the  fire  from  its  rapid-fire  gun. 

1A  POOR  SURFACE  FIGHTER. 

The  submarine,  by  very  virtue  of  the  qualities  which  make 
it  a  good  submarine,  is  a  poor  boat  for  surface  fighting. 
It  can  carry  no  very  heavy  armament,  and  it  is  not  heavily  arm- 
ored. The  problem  of  stowing  away  all  the  heavy  machinery, 
supplies,  torpedoes  and  devices  necessary  for  her  operations 
and  maneuvering  has  presented  about  all  the  difficulties  the 
constructors  have  been  able  to  handle.  The  highest  speed  of 
the  submarine  is  not  in  execess  of  20  miles  an  hour.  The  sub- 
marine must  be  light  and  easy  to  handle.  It  gains  in  steadi- 
ness and  certainty  of  operation  with  increased  size,  but  it  loses 
in  capacity  for  quick  and  delicate  maneuvering. 

In  addition  the  submarine  has  what  is  termed  a  strategic 
vulnerability.  A  shot  which  might  mean  nothing  more  serious 
than  a  hole  in  the  side  to  a  surface  boat  would  end  the  sub- 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  85 

marine's  usefulness  for  underseas  work  and  convert  her  into  a 
helpless  hulk  of  surface  craft. 

The  submarine  is  an  easy  quarry  for  a  chaser,  for  even 
when  submerged  and  moving  along,  the  U-boat  creates  a  dis- 
tinct wave  on  the  surface  of  the  water  which  can  be  followed  by 
the  chaser.  The  little  boats  are  just  what  their  name  implies — 
chasers — and  besides  having  the  qualities  already  described 
they  may  conceal  themselves  behind  large  steamers,  and  when 
the  submarine  in  preparing  to  launch  a  torpedo  makes  its  pres- 
ence known  the  chaser  may  speed  from  its  hiding  place  and 
drive  the  underseas  craft  away,  even  if  it  does  not  succeed  in 
injuring  it. 

OPERATING  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  AN  AEROPLANE. 

The  chasers  also  have  a  special  facility  of  operation  in  con- 
nection with  the  aeroplane  or  seaplane,  principally  because  of 
their  high  speed ;  and  next  to  the  chaser  the  aeroplane  is  one  of 
the  submarine's  worst  enemies.  Used  in  conjunction  with  the 
regular  torpedo  boat  destroyers  of  the  navy,  the  chaser  and  the 
aeroplane  promise  in  future  wars  to  minimize  the  effectiveness 
of  the  underseas  craft.  This  is  proven  by  the  fact  that  imme- 
diately after  the  United  States  naval  forces  joined  those  of  the 
Allies  in  European  waters,  the  disasters  resultant  upon  sub- 
marine attacks  were  greatly  reduced.  The  speedy  destroyers, 
while  not  actually  sinking  many  submarines,  by  their  vigilance 
prevented  the  submarine  from  operating. 

Large  types  of  the  chasers  ordered  in  this  country  by  the 
Russian  Government  are  72  feet  long  by  11  feet  3  inches  wide 
and  draw  3  feet  3  inches  of  water.  Each  boat  carries  three  of 
the  8-cylinder  6%x7%  Duesenberg,  350  to  400  horsepower 
motors.  The  boats  carry  an  18-inch  torpedo  tube  amidships 
and  a  47-millimetre  rapid-fire  gun  on  the  forward  deck.  They 
are  controlled  from  the  bridge  deck  with  a  sheltered  cabin  for 
the  quartermaster,  with  controls  from  either  the  shelter  or 


86  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

bridge  deck.    They  have  a  guaranteed  speed  of  twenty-eight 
knots. 

Deck  arrangements  consist  of  the  following :  A  hatch  to 
the  fo'castle,  followed  by  the  emplacement  for  the  rapid-fire 
gun.  Following  this  is  the  steering  shelter  containing  dupli- 
cate controls,  &c,  for  the  engine  room  and  for  the  steering. 
Immediately  aft  of  the  steering  shelter  is  the  bridge  deck,  lo- 
cated on  top  of  the  engine  room  trunk  house.  The  entire  after 
half  of  the  vessel  is  a  clear  sweep  of  deck  with  the  exception  of 
a  booby  hatch  to  crews'  quarters  well  aft. 

The  boats  are  arranged  for  wireless  with  foremast  and 
jigger  mast.  Rail  stanchions  in  the  way  of  the  torpedo  tube 
are  hinged  down,  giving  clear  sweep  to  the  tube  for  firing  pur- 
poses. 

PROVISION  FOR  OFFICERS  AND  CREW. 

Below  decks  ample  space  has  been  provided  for  the  crew 
and  officers.  The  forepeak  is  arranged  for  chain  lockers  and 
bosun's  gear  lockers,  followed  by  ship's  galley,  which  has  two 
pipe  berths.  Next  to  the  galley  is  located  the  officers'  cabin 
and  wireless  room,  which  is  entered  by  a  hatch  from  the  steer- 
ing shelter.  This  cabin  accommodates  two  officers  and  includes 
lavatory,  officers'  desks,  wireless  desk  and  folding  mess  table. 

Next  aft  is  the  machinery  space,  in  which  are  located  the 
three  eight  cylinder  Duesenberg  motors,  a  three  k.  w.  universal 
lighting  set,  the  necessary  oil  tanks,  batteries  and  a  work  bench. 
The  next  compartment  contains  fuel  tanks,  with  1300  gallons 
capacity.  Aft  of  this  compartment  is  located  the  crew's  quar- 
ters, berthing  eight  men,  with  lavatory  attached.  The  hull  is 
divided  into  six  watertight  compartments  by  steel  bulkheads. 

The  hull  is  of  wooden  construction,  as  developed  for  this 
service  by  the  builders. 

The  72-footers  develop  a  speed  of  twenty-eight  knots  and 
have  a  cruising  radius  exceeding  1200  miles.  The  design  of 
the  hull  is  the  concave  bottom,  square  bilge  type,  developed  for 
this  particular  service.     It  furnishes  a  steady  gun  platform, 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  87 

which,  with  the  necessary  speed,  is  the  most  vital  feature  of  a 
submarine  chaser. 

The  demand  for  speed  and  stability  was  borne  out  by  the 
experience  of  the  Russian  and  Italian  navies  in  their  active 
work  and  no  consideration  at  all  is  given  propositions  from 
these  two  countries  which  do  not  range  well  about  twenty-five 
knots. 

Exceptional  success  was  attained  by  the  Russian  Black  Sea 
and  by  the  Italian  high  speed  fleets  in  actual  use  and  their  de- 
mand for  exceptional  speed  was  based  on  experience. 

ilt  is  a  well  known  fact  that  the  Russian  government  was 
successful  in  patroling  its  shores  and  in  protecting  its  harbors 
and  shipping.  The  Italian  government  also  was  exceptionally 
successful  in  maintaining  its  mercantile  fleet  in  comparative 
safety  and  in  protecting  its  harbors  against  the  offensive  work 
of  enemy  submarines.  The  entire  Italian  fleet  of  submarine 
chasers  consists  of  high  speed,  high  powered  motor  patrol  boats, 
most  of  which  were  equipped  with  American  made  motors. 

CATALOGUED  AS  "  PATROL  BOATS." 
In  a  general  way  the  "chasers"  are  catalogued  in  naval 
circles  as  "patrol  boats."  England  has  thousands  of  them, 
ranging  from  motorboats  to  naval  auxiliaries,  raking  the  Eng- 
lish Channel,  the  North  Sea  and  the  waters  all  about  the  Brit- 
ish Isles.  iAs  a  rule  the  boats  work  in  groups  of  five  or  six, 
one  boat  serving  as  a  flagship — and  often  there  is  a  "blimp" 
attached  to  the  fleet.  The  armament  of  these  small  vessels  is 
distinctive.  Each  carries,  besides  a  deck  gun,  a  "depth 
charge,"  half  a  dozen  lance  bombs  and  arms  for  each  member 
of  the  crew.  The  deck  gun  fires  a  shell  that  weighs  about 
thirteen  pounds. 

The  "depth  charge"  is  a  submarine  bomb,  so  constructed 
that  it  is  discharged  at  any  determined  depth  of  water  when 
thrown  overboard.  If  the  water  is  100  feet  deep  the  bomb 
will  explode  at  that  depth.     The  bombs  are  used  to  drop  in 


88  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

places  where  the  submarine  has  been  located  or  is  expected  of 
lurking  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  While  the  exploding  bomb 
may  not  strike  the  underseas  boat  it  will  create  havoc  on  board 
the  underwater  craft  if  discharged  in  close  proximity,  the  extra 
water  pressure  exerted  causing  disarrangement  of  the  delicate 
mechanism,  if  not  rendering  the  boat  unfit  for  service. 

Some  of  the  patrol  boats  of  the  English  have  been  armed 
with  "lance  bombs."  These  are  bombs  of  highly  explosive  char- 
acter which  are  fastened  to  the  end  of  a  long  pole  or  staff. 
They  are  used  just  as  a  harpoon  is  used  when  by  chance  a  sub- 
marine may  emerge  from  the  water  in  too  close  proximity  to 
the  chaser.  It  is  not  of  record  that  any  U-boats  have  been  sunk 
with  these  strange  javelins,  but  official  reports  show  that  the 
boats  are  armed  with  them  for  emergencies. 

CHASER  TROUBLES  THE  SUBMARINE. 

What  with  dragging  bombs  through  the  water,  and  set- 
ting traps  and  nests  for  the  submarines,  the  chasers  make  great 
trouble  for  the  underseas  craft,  but  the  ingenious  Germans  are 
constantly  on  the  alert,  and  it  has  been  proved  that  in  one  or 
two  instances  at  least  the  submarines  cut  their  way  through 
the  heavy  chain  nets  which  were  set  to  catch  them  near  Havre. 
It  was  said  that  the  submarine  was  provided  with  steel  knives 
or  wire  cutters,  and  shears  operated  by  electricity  or  pneumatic 
pressure,  which  enabled  the  boat  to  cut  its  way  through  the  bar- 
rier of  chains  and  wires. 

As  a  means  of  visualizing  the  operations  of  the  "chaser" 
and  giving  some  idea  of  the  excitement  which  attends  the  at- 
tempt to  run  down  the  under-seas  craft,  the  following  descrip- 
tion by  an  English  sailor  is  interesting.  The  chase  occurred 
off  the  Isle  of  Wight : 

"Offshore  a  short  distance  was  a  patrol  boat  lying  very 
low  and  flying  distress  signals.  We  had  run  over  to  her  and 
learned  that  about  an  hour  before  the  periscope  of  a  submarine 
had  been  stuck  up  not  far  from  her,  then  the  craft  had  sub- 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  89 

merged,  appeared  again  about  a  mile  away,  and  fired  four 
shots,  which  let  in  enough  water  slowly  to  sink  the  patrol, 
which  before  the  war  had  been  nothing  but  a  dirty  little  trawler. 

"Finding  the  crew  of  the  patrol  could  take  care  of  them- 
selves in  their  small  boats  and  learning  that  the  submarine  had 
run  over  to  the  westward,  where  we  knew  chain  net  traps  to  be 
laid,  we  circled  in  that  direction. 

"Our  powerful  motors  thrummed  evenly.  The  water 
seemed  to  part  ahead  of  us,  and  the  gunners  squinted  along  the 
surface,  looking  for  the  glimpse  of  a  periscope  or  the  first  sign 
of  the  hull  of  the  U-boat  if  she  should  be  proceeding  awash. 

CREW  THRILLED  WITH  JOY. 

"Suddenly,  off  to  the  west,  we  made  out  her  periscope. 
Intense  joy  thrilled  our  little  crew.  She  was  inshore  from  us. 
She  was  between  our  circular  course  and  the  chain  nets — in  the 
trap.  The  periscope  we  had  seen  might  be  a  dummy,  for  a 
submarine  frequently  casts  loose  a  phoney  periscope  to  draw 
fire,  but,  at  any  rate,  she  must  have  been  between  us  and  the 
nets  if  she  cut  it  loose. 

"Presently,  probably  after  a  look  around,  the  periscope 
suddenly  disappeared,  and  we  knew  it  was  a  real  one  with  a 
German  U-boat  on  the  end  of  it.  Like  a  flock  of  falcons  we 
were  swooping  down  on  the  prey. 

"Abruptly  the  lead  boat  comes  to  a  dead  stop  and  lists 
heavily  to  starboard.  Evidently  something  is  wrong.  We  see 
men  crawl  out  over  the  stern  and  fish  around  with  boat  hooks 
and  poles.  Cold  as  it  is,  one  man  goes  overboard  and  remains 
under  water  so  long  we  could  not  believe  he  would  come  up 
alive.    The  boat  had  fouled  the  chain  nets. 

"Circling  round  in  an  ever  smaller  radius,  we  search  the 
water  for  a  periscope,  a  shadow,  or  the  conventional  "streak 
of  dirty  grease'  or  line  of  bubbles.' 

"All  of  us  have  towing  torpodoes  out.  These  are  bombs 
on  long  cables  which  are  towed  astern  and  sink  to  a  certain 


90  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

specified  depth.  If  the  cable  fouls  anything  at  all,  as  the  boat 
goes  ahead,  the  bomb  pulls  up  to  it,  and,  when  it  bumps,  it 
explodes. 

"We  are  in  line.  Suddenly  there  is  a  crash  and  a  roar 
just  ahead  of  us.  I  am  thrown  off  my  feet.  Barrels  of  water 
splash  down  into  our  cockpit  and  roll  off  the  decks.  The  bow 
lifts  itself  clean  for  a  second.  II  think  that  the  submarine  has 
blown  us  up.    Perhaps  I  am  dead  already. 

"Then  we  settle  down  again,  and  except  for  a  scared  look 
on  the  faces  of  a  couple  of  men  and  rather  nervous,  forced  jests 
on  the  lips  of  others,  we  are  plowing  ahead  just  as  before. 

"Nothing  has  happened  except  the  towing  torpedo  of  the 

boat  in  front  of  us  in  the  line  fouled  a  submerged  spar,  or  a  bit 

of  wreckage,  and  exploded  right  under  our  bow.    'If  we  had 

been  a  few  yards  closer  we  would  never  have  been  there  any 

more.' 

FOULS  A  SUBMERGED  SPAR. 

"As  we  realized  what  had  happened,  our  tongues  were 
loosened,  and,  if  the  crew  of  the  boat  ahead  could  have  heard 
what  we  said  about  them,  we  would  have  lost  their  friendship 
most  assuredly. 

"Way  inshore,  after  a  circling  chase  of  perhaps  twenty 
minutes,  the  submarine  came  up.  She  was  in  such  shallow 
water  that  she  probably  was  having  trouble  in  operating  sub- 
merged.    She  was  gone  then. 

"What  followed  was  very  business-like.  It  illustrates  the 
attitude  the  British  have  come  to  take  toward  the  submarines 
because  of  their  flagrant  violations  of  every  form  of  inter- 
national law  and  decency.  It  is  the  attitude  which  any  country, 
obliged  to  fight  against  them,  will  assume.  To  the  British 
mind,  submarines  must  be  exterminated,  just  as  one  would  ex- 
terminate a  nest  of  poisonous  vipers,  or  a  nest  of  hornets.  Peo- 
ple ask  me  how  many  submarines  are  being  captured  now. 
Very  few!    Many  are  destroyed,  but  few  captured. 

"No  sooner  did  the  hull  of  the  submarine  show  itself  than 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  91 

we  began  to  hammer  her  with  our  three-inch  guns.  She  opened 
fire,  but  her  shots  went  wild,  and,  in  a  few  seconds,  she  dis- 
appeared. 

"As  fast  as  we  could,  we  ran  over  to  where  she  had  gone 
down.  If  the  principles  which  obtain  on  land,  in  the  air  or  in 
the  navy  at  large,  existed  in  submarine  warfare,  we  would  have 
gone  over  to  see  if  we  could  rescue  any  of  the  wounded,  but  it 
was  a  U-boat  and  we  simply  made  sure  that  there  was  nothing 
left  of  the  craft. 

"About  where  she  went  down,  a  quantity  of  gas  and  air 
bubbles  were  rising,  and  the  dirty  patch  of  oil  was  once  more 
in  evidence.  That  was  a  pretty  certain  sign  the  career  of  one 
U-boat  was  at  an  end,  for  the  sea  must  have  been  pouring  into 
her,  and  even  though  all  her  crew  did  not  drown,  once  the  salt 
water  reached  the  storage  batteries,  the  chloride  would  do  the 
work. 

WERE  TAKING   NO  CHANCES. 

"But  we  are  taking  no  chances.  We  circle  round  and 
round  the  spot  and  drop  depth  bombs — deadly  machines. 
These  are  powerful  explosives  which  are  set  so  they  will  de- 
tonate at  a  certain  depth.  We  first  sounded  the  bottom  and 
then  set  our  bombs  for  ten  fathoms.  Suddenly  I  hear  a  cry 
from  the  boat  behind  us.  One  of  the  crew  reaches  out,  grabs 
the  collar  of  a  man  who  has  just  dropped  a  depth  bomb  over 
the  stern  and  yanks  him  unceremoniously  into  the  cockpit.  At 
a  glance  I  see  what  has  happened. 

"The  engineer  has  stalled  his  motor — just  as  the  bomb 
was  let  go.  It  sinks  slowly,  and  there  is  a  slight  momentum 
left  in  the  submarine-chaser.  We  hold  our  breath  and  watch 
in  suspense,  expecting  any  second  to  see  our  comrades  hurled 
into  the  air  among  a  mushroom  of  water  and  splinters. 

"There  is  no  way  to  help  them.  Suddenly  there  is  a  muf- 
fled roar,  a  column  of  water  rises  to  what  seems  a  hundred  feet, 
and  falls  back,  drenching  every  one  who  is  near  it.    But  our 


92  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

comrades  are  unhurt.  The  momentum  of  their  boat  has  car- 
ried them  just  far  enough  to  save  them  from  being  blown  to 
atoms.  That  is  the  second  narrow  escape  for  our  little  squad- 
ron in  this  chase  after  a  single  submarine. 

"But  our  work  is  done.  There  is  no  doubt  now  about  the 
fate  of  the  U-boat.  It  is  not  necessary  for  one  of  the  depth 
bombs  actually  to  come  in  contact  with  the  submerged  craft 
to  destroy  it.  When  under  water,  a  submarine's  rigidity  is  mul- 
tiplied. Its  elasticity  is  next  to  nothing.  An  explosion  as 
powerful  as  that  of  a  depth  bomb  near  it,  is  almost  certain  to 
cripple  it  if  not  destroy  it.  It  is  the  same  principle  as  that 
which  kills  fish  in  a  pond  when  dynamite  is  exploded  beneath 
the  surface  of  the  water.  The  shock  is  sufficient  to  kill  the  men 
in  the  U-boat,  and  so  we  glide  along  homeward,  secure  in  the 
knowledge  that  even  if  our  gunfire  did  not  finish  the  enemy, 
the  bombs  have  done  the  work.  On  the  surface,  we  notice 
swarms  of  dead  fish." 

THE  HAWK-EYED  AEROPLANE. 

The  last  wrinkle  developed  for  submarine  hunting  was 
the  aeroplane.  Like  a  fish-hawk  it  can  see  its  prey  beneath  the 
water  by  flying  high  in  air.  Another  step  just  a  bit  in  advance 
of  aeroplane  scouting  for  submarines  is  the  use  of  a  small 
dirigible  for  the  same  purpose.  But  the  cleverest  development 
of  the  aeroplane-submarine  idea  involved  the  use  of  seaplanes 
for  the  purpose  of  launching  submarine  torpedoes  at  enemy 
ships. 

Here's  how  this  is  practiced.  As  most  folks  know,  the 
seaplane  differs  from  the  land-flying  craft  in  that  it  rides  on 
floats  instead  of  wheels.  These  floats  permit  the  seaplane  to 
come  to  rest  on  the  waves,  and  to  launch  itself  again.  Between 
these  floats,  which  resemble  a  pair  of  broad  home-made  sleds, 
may  be  slung  a  torpedo.  The  same  type  of  missile,  this,  that 
is  used  by  the  submarine  and  the  destroyer — a  long,  cigar- 
shaped  cylinder,  operated  by  compressed  air  driving  a  pro- 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  93 

peller,  and  equipped  with  a  warhead  filled  with  guncotton. 
The  torpedo  is  held  by  slings,  delicately  adjusted  so  that  they 
can  be  released  in  an  instant. 

The  great  seaplane,  swinging  the  missile  of  death  between, 
its  giant  floats,  climbs  the  skies  in  search  of  an  enemy  ship. 
From  a  distance  of  miles,  perhaps,  the  seaplane  looks  like  a 
gull.  To  the  observer  in  the  plane,  however,  sweeping  the 
horizon  with  his  binoculars,  a  ship  is  plainly  and  easily  seen. 

NOT  TO  BE*  OUT-DISTANCED. 

Off  in  the  distance  is  spied  a  ship  suspected  of  being  an 
enemy  transport,  ilt  isn't  hard  to  determine — the  ship  can- 
not steam  away  from  them,  no  matter  how  swift  its  engines. 
A  seaplane  can  go  so  fast  that  it  makes  the  fastest  torpedo 
boat  destroyer  look  as  if  it  were  standing  still.  The  attacked 
transport  may  try  to  bring  its  anti-aircraft  guns  to  bear,  if 
luckily  it  is  equipped  with  them.  Failing  this,  the  soldiers  will 
man  the  decks  with  their  rifles  ready.  Then  there  is  a  duel  of 
skill  and  daring  between  the  men  on  the  cruiser  and  the  lone 
fighters  in  the  seaplane. 

The  seaplane  must  swoop  sufficiently  close  to  the  water 
to  release  the  torpedo  and  let  it  drop  without  damage.  And 
this  must  be  done  from  a  sufficient  distance  to  safeguard  the 
seaplane  from  the  vessel's  guns.  The  superior  speed  and  mo- 
bility of  the  seaplane  gives  it  a  great  advantage  over  the  ship 
attacked. 

(Another  of  the  weapons  or  instruments  of  warfare  de- 
vised largely  for  use  in  destroying  the  evil  submarine  is  the 
"blimp."  This  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  small  dirigible 
balloon,  hundreds  of  which  the  United  States  government 
started  to  build  when  it  entered  the  war. 

The  blimp  is  an  aerial  sea-scout.  Its  principal  employ- 
ment is  for  observation.  It  is  a  watcher  of  enemy  movements 
on  the  water.  But  it  is  also  serviceable  for  attack,  and  espe- 
cially for  assailing  submarines. 


94  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

The  British  used  blimps  for  the  latter  purpose,  and  to 
great  advantage.  The  dirigible  sausage-balloon,  when  a  sub- 
marine is  descried,  can  hover  over  it  (as  an  aeroplane  cannot) , 
remaining  as  nearly  stationary  as  may  be  desired,  and  waiting 
for  an  opportunity  to  drop  a  bomb  with  accurate  aim. 

If  the  submarine  be  under  water,  and  its  presence  be- 
trayed by  the  peculiar  surface-ripple  that  marks  its  wake,  a 
bomb  with  a  delay-action  fuse  can  be  dropped  upon  it,  the 
projectile  not  exploding  until  it  reaches  a  depth  of  fifty  feet 
or  so.  In  case  the  first  bomb  does  not  score  a  hit,  there  are 
others  to  follow,  with  better  luck  perhaps. 

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  "BLIMP." 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  blimp  is  an  important  aux- 
iliary of  the  flying-machine  in  the  pursuit  of  the  submarines. 
Both  together,  in  this  exciting  sport,  supplement  the  swift 
power-boats  called  "submarine-chasers." 

For  some  time  the  Navy  Department  has  trained  enlisted 
men  and  officers  for  this  work,  chiefly  at  a  Gulf  port,  where 
a  school — it  is  no  war  secret — of  aviation  and  ballooning  has 
been  maintained.  Six  officers  and  40  men  are  required  for 
each  coast  station. 

The  Navy  Department  adopted  for  the  blimp  a  standard- 
ized pattern,  with  definite  published  specifications,  in  accord- 
ance with  which  contractors  turned  them  out  in  numbers.  It 
is  a  sausage-shaped  balloon  160  feet  long,  with  a  great  di- 
ameter of  31%  feet,  and  containing,  when  inflated,  77,000 
cubic  feet  of  hydrogen  gas. 

The  fabric  of  the  "envelope" — that  is  to  say,  of  the  gas- 
bag— is  coated  both  outside  and  inside  with  rubber.  It  is  re- 
quired that  the  balloon  shall  not  lose  more  than  1  per  cent  of  its 
gas-content  in  24  hours.  When  inflated  it  must  be  able  to 
carry  (including  its  own  weight)  a  total  of  5275  pounds. 

If  the  "Zeppelin"  be  excepted,  the  blimp  is  the  most 
highly-developed  and  scientific  heavier-than-air  flying  machine 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  95 

ever  devised.  It  has  a  cruising  speed  of  35  miles  an  hour, 
but  at  a  pinch  can  travel  ten  miles  an  hour  faster.  At  the 
"cruising"  rate,  it  carries  enough  gasoline  to  keep  going  for 
sixteen  hours;  at  45  miles,  its  load  of  "petrol"  will  suffice  for 
ten  hours. 

Even  the  best  war  balloons  of  a  few  years  ago  were  at  the 
mercy  of  the  winds.  It  is  not  so  with  the  blimp.  Barring 
storms,  it  is  able  to  navigate  the  air  as  it  wishes.  It  can  rise 
safely  to  an  altitude  of  a  mile  and  a  half.  To  furnish  fuel  for 
its  engine  of  100  horsepower  it  carries,  in  two  tanks,  100  gal- 
lons of  gasoline. 

DESCRIPTION   OF   THE   "BLIMP." 

In  effect,  the  blimp  is  a  combination  of  balloon  and  aero- 
plane. Like  the  latter,  it  is  provided  with  "skids"  (resembling 
sled  runners  and  made  of  ash  wood) ,  or  sometimes  with  bicycle 
wheels,  for  safe  landing  on  terra  firma.  When  designed  for 
sea  scouting,  floats — cylinders  of  waterproof  fabric  stuffed 
with  vegetable  fibre — are  attached  to  the  skids,  or  to  the  wheels, 
so  that  the  airship,  in  calm  weather,  may  be  able  to  rest,  like  a 
sea  bird,  on  the  waves,  if  desired. 

The  blimp's  balloon  envelope  must  contain  two  smaller 
balloons,  together  holding  19,250  feet  of  hydrogen  gas.  The 
idea,  of  course,  is  that  if  anything  happens  to  the  major  bal- 
loon— puncturing  by  gunfire  or  by  other  mishap — the  "bal~ 
loonets"  inside  of  it  will  keep  the  machine  afloat. 

The  wingless  aeroplane  is  suspended  from  the  balloon  by 
cables  of  galvanized  wire.  There  is  a  special  arrangement  by 
which  the  "pilot" — the  man  who  steers  and  operates  the  air- 
ship— can  at  any  time  measure  the  pressure  of  hydrogen  in 
the  balloon,  thus  knowing  what  he  has  to  count  on  in  the  way 
of  carrying  power. 

The  front  part  of  the  blimp's  car  is  occupied  by  the  engine 
and  radiator,  behind  which  is  a  bulkhead  of  sheet  steel.  In 
the  rear  of  this  bulkhead  sits  the  pilot,  and  behind  him  the 


96  THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT. 

"observer,"  who  makes  sketches  and  takes  notes  of  anything 
important  that  he  sees.  Behind  the  observer  are  the  tanks  for 
fuel  oil  and  300  gallons  of  water  ballast.  The  body  of  the  car 
is  covered  with  aeroplane  linen,  save  for  the  engine,  which  is 
sheathed  with  sheet  aluminum. 

In  order  to  hold  whatever  position  in  the  air  may  be  de- 
sired, the  blimp  is  equipped  with  two  horizontal  fins  and  three 
vertical  fins.  Not  every  blimp,  that  is  to  say,  but  the  pattern 
approved  and  required  of  contractors  by  the  Navy  Depart- 
ment. These  fins  are  made  of  wood  and  light  steel  tubing,  re- 
inforced with  wire,  covered  with  aeroplane  linen  rubber 
painted  and  finished  with  varnish. 

THE   "  BLIMP  "    WELL   EQUIPED. 

There  are  also  two  horizontal  rudders  and  two  vertical 
rudders,  for  steering  up  and  down  or  sidewise.  They  work  on 
ball  bearings.  A  blimp,  one  should  understand,  is  a  fish  in  the 
ocean  of  air,  a  swimmer — just  as  the  aeroplane  is  a  flyer,  like 
the  bird. 

The  blimp's  "car"  carries  an  electric  storage  battery  to 
furnish  lights.  The  same  battery  energizes  a  searchlight  for 
night  scouting.  A  wireless  apparatus,  for  transmitting  infor- 
mation to  the  shore  station,  is  part  of  the  equipment. 

The  blimp,  as  already  stated,  is  a  sea  scout.  It  is  meant 
to  be  operated  from  a  base  on  shore — which  base  is  in  constant 
communication  by  telegraph  and  wireless  with  the  great  radio 
stations  that  are  strung  all  along  our  coasts  at  intervals  of  200 
miles.  These  stations,  in  turn,  are  in  communication  with  the 
huge  wireless  outfit  at  Arlington  (across  the  Potomac  from 
Washington),  whose  "antennae,"  uplifted  on  tall  steel  towers, 
receive  instantaneous  war  news  from  half  the  world. 

Thus  if  (just  for  illustration)  a  blimp  spies  a  hostile  sub- 
marine, the  news  is  instantly  transmitted  to  the  Navy  Depart- 
ment. The  department  orders  its  "chasers"  and  warplanes 
nearest  to  the  scene  to  go  after  the  undersea  boat.    Within  a 


THWARTING  THE  U-BOAT.  97 

few  minutes  the  pursuit  has  started,  and  the  U-boat  finds  itself 
in  much  the  same  situation  as  a  fox  hunted  by  hounds.  In  this 
case,  however,  the  hounds  are  in  the  air,  as  well  as  "quartering" 
the  aqueous  terrain. 

The  United  States'  blimps  are  modeled  on  European  pat- 
terns. But  they  are  to  have  special  improvements  of  their  own. 
To  make  sure  of  their  efficiency  and  structural  correctness, 
each  contractor,  in  offering  bids  to  furnish  them,  was  required 
to  exhibit  a  model,  exactly  like  the  sausage  balloons  he  pro- 
posed to  make,  but  of  toy  size — one-thirtieth  the  length  of  the 
full-sized,  completely  equipped  aerial  sea  scout. 


H  B— f 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

Aeroplanes  and  Airships — They  Spy  the  Movements  of  Forces  on  Land  or 
Sea — Lead  Disastrous  Bomb  Attacks — Valuable  in  "  Spotting  V  Sub- 
marines— The  Bombardment  at  Messines  Ridge. 

JUST  as  the  submarine  has  revolutionized  warfare  on  the 
seas  and  presented  new  problems  for  the  naval  experts  to 
solve,  so  the  aircraft  of  the  last  decade  has  had  its  effect 
upon  the  operation  of  land  forces.  Probably  the  aeroplane 
and  the  dirigible  balloon  have  had  a  greater  influence  on  the 
conduct  of  battles  and  military  campaigns  as  a  whole  than  any 
other  device  utilized  in  connection  with  the  war. 

It  is  significant,  too,  that  just  as  America  produced  the 
first  submarine,  and  then  failed  as  a  nation  to  develop  it  to  its 
highest  state  of  efficiency  for  military  use,  so  American  in- 
ventors were  pioneers  in  the  construction  and  successful  oiaera- 
tion  of  aeroplanes,  or  airplanes,  which  were  first  developed  to 
their  greatest  efficiency  and  utility  by  the  French  and  Ger- 
mans. 

Some  of  the  most  striking  events  of  the  war  centre  around 
the  use  of  the  airplanes  or  dirigibles,  and  aside  from  the  pic- 
turesqueness  and  thrilling  atmosphere  that  seem  to  surround 
their  use,  the  operator  of  the  aircraft  has  proved  himself  one 
of  the  most  valuable  servants  in  modern  warfare.  He  has  re- 
duced the  proudest  cavalry  to  second  place  in  the  matter  of 
reconnoissance,  and  has  rendered  services  which  have  hereto- 
fore been  impossible. 

The  air-man  sails  out  over  the  lines  of  battle,  so  far  above 
the  earth  when  necessary  as  to  be  out  of  range  of  the  most 
powerful  guns,  and  with  glasses  looks  down  upon  the  whole 
country.  His  machine,  whether  it  be  a  dirigible  balloon  or 
airplane,  is  equipped  with  a  wireless  telegraph  instrument  with 

98 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  99 

which  he  is  able  to  send  brief  messages  back  to  his  own  line 
or  military  headquarters.  He  can  and  does  mark  the  changed 
positions  of  the  contending  forces,  note  the  entrenchments  and 
reinforcements,  follow  movements,  and  last  but  not  least,  as 
was  noticeable  in  one  of  the  desperate  attacks  upon  the  Ger- 
man position  in  June,  1917,  swoop  down  upon  the  enemy,  at- 
tack the  lines  and  forces  with  bombs,  and  rain  bullets  upon 
them  from  rapid-fire  guns. 

No  longer  can  the  enemy  mask  its  heavy  batteries  or  con- 
ceal them  beneath  earthen  mounds,  plant  them  in  corners  of  the 
forests  or  in  clumps  of  bushes  without  their  being  located. 
The  "eyes  of  the  sky,"  as  the  planes  are  now  termed,  can  spy 
them  out.  And  when  the  airman  has  communicated  to  his  mili- 
tary commanders  the  positions  of  the  opposing  batteries,  he 
acts  as  a  director  in  instructing  the  friendly  gunners  in  finding 
the  range  and  cleaning  out  the  enemy. 

THE  AIR  SCOUT'S  USEFULNESS. 

The  air  scout  can  detect  the  enemy's  lines  of  communica- 
tion and  raid  it  with  bomb  attacks.  Even  when  the  land  forces 
cannot  reach  the  enemy  with  gunfire  he  can  rain  missiles  of 
all  sorts  upon  them.  Sometimes  the  airman  flies  over  the 
enemy  lines  and  drops  glittering  tinsel  or  bright  metal  de- 
vices, which  falling  to  the  ground  serve  as  marks  for  the  artil- 
lerymen in  finding  the  range. 

Where  the  cavalry  scout  or  creeping  scout  of  days  gone 
by  could  never  have  proved  successful,  the  airman  has  easily 
accomplished  his  purpose.  He  has  carried  messages  from  one 
frontier  to  another  in  hours,  when  it  would  have  taken  days  for 
a  scout  on  horseback  or  on  foot  to  have  rendered  the  service, 
if  they  could  have  accomplished  it  at  all.  He  has  eliminated 
distance. 

Trench  warfare  developed  in  the  world- war  in  a  way  that 
has  never  before  been  deemed  necessary  or  possible,  but  the 
miles  of  trenches  which  conceal  the  men  from  the  fire  of  the 


100  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

enemy  are  plainly  visible  to  the  airmen.  And  armed  with 
cameras  having  powerful  telescopic  lenses  they  can  photo- 
graph the  entire  scene  and  send  to  their  own  military  head- 
quarters not  mere  indicated  plans  of  the  battle  lines,  but  exact 
photographs. 

The  war  has  shown  conclusively  that  once  the  formation 
of  the  battle  line  has  been  decided  upon  it  is,  in  a  measure,  a 
fixture.  It  may  be  subject  to  rearrangement,  but  this  is  when 
the  force  of  battle  demands,  or  for  strategic  purposes,  but 
such  an  arrangement  requires  a  great  deal  of  time  and  much 
work.  The  battle  fronts  on  the  borders  of  France  and  Bel- 
gium have  ranged  from  100  to  nearly  300  miles  in  length,  with 
nearly  3,000,000  strung  out  in  opposing  lines  along  the  entire 
distance. 

LIKE  AN  IMMENSE  GRIDIRON. 

The  ground  has  been  dug  up  and  trenched  until  the  sur- 
face of  the  earth  looks  like  an  immense  gridiron.  The  sol- 
diers almost  live  within  the  trenches  and  dug-outs  beneath  the 
ground.  Telephone  and  telegraph  wTires  run  through  the 
trenches  and  even  railroad  tracks  are  laid  so  that  small  engines 
go  whirring  through  the  ditches  like  "dinky"  locomotives  in  a 
coal  mine. 

And  the  "eyes  in  the  skies"  make  it  possible  for  the  com- 
manders to  know  each  other's  strength  and  the  disposition  of 
the  forces  at  all  times. 

Particularly  has  the  air  scout  proved  valuable  in  enabling 
commanders  to  execute  their  final  orders  without  grievous 
error.  There  is  danger  of  possible  mis  judgment  because  of 
the  great  length  of  the  firing  lines.  The  airmen  verify  posi- 
tions and  make  last  minute  reports,  taking  minutes  to  perform 
services  that  cavalry  forces  or  other  scouting  parties  would 
have  taken  hours  or  days  to  render. 

Operated  in  conjunction  with  cavalry  scouts,  and  motor 
and  cycle  squads,  the  airplane  is  a  destruction-directing  and 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  101 

defensive  force.  And  it  was  the  large  fleet  of  aircraft  that 
aided  Germany  in  making  such  rapid  advance  in  its  drive 
toward  Paris  in  the  early  days  of  the  war.  The  scouts  recon- 
noitering  in  the  early  dawn  were  able  to  report  the  situation 
and  give  the  commanders  time  to  move  their  forces  before  the 
Belgians  and  French  were  aware  of  what  was  being  done. 

Germany  had  probably  the  largest  fleet  of  airplanes  at 
the  beginning  of  the  conflict  and  is  said  to  have  possessed  up- 
ward of  500,  of  various  sorts,  and  this  does  not  include  the 
famous  Zeppelins  or  dirigible  balloons.  She  also  had  some- 
thing like  two  dozen  factories  which  could  turn  out  flying 
machines,  and  had  been  at  work  on  the  development  of  her  air 
craft  long  enough  to  have  her  patterns  and  methods  of  manu- 
facture somewhat,  if  not  entirely  standardized.  During  the 
third  year  of  the  war  it  was  estimated  that  she  had  more  than 
quadrupled  her  force  of  flying  machines. 

GERMANY'S  PREPAREDNESS. 

Germany's  preparedness  in  this  as  well  as  in  other  direc- 
tions was  what  enabled  her  to  obtain  such  a  tremendous  ad- 
vantage in  the  beginning  of  the  war.  Later  England  and 
France  concentrated  on  the  development  of  aeroplane  squads 
or  corps,  and  when  the  United  States  entered  the  war  one  of 
the  first  detachments  sent  into  France  consisted  of  100  aviators. 
How  rapidly  the  aeroplane  forces  were  developed  is  indicated 
by  the  statement  made  in  the  beginning  of  1916  that  the  air 
forces  of  the  Allies  were  represented  by  3380  aeroplanes  of 
various  types  and  64  dirigible  balloons,  while  Austria  and  Ger- 
many had  2000  aeroplanes  and  70  dirigibles. 

The  dirigibles — the  type  of  airship  commonly  referred  to 
as  Zeppelins — have  the  advantage  over  the  heavier-than-air 
machines  of  being  almost  silent  in  their  operations,  while  at 
the  same  time  they  can  remain  for  a  longer  time  suspended  in 
air  over  a  camp  or  battleground  without  being  detected.  The 
Zeppelin  is  the  development  of  the  old  balloon,  made,  however, 


102  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

in  a  conical  shape  with  a  long  basket  or  car  attached.  They 
are  driven  by  propellers  similar  to  those  used  with  aeroplanes, 
but  as  the  power  generated  by  the  engines  is  merely  used  to 
drive  the  machines  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  maintaining 
their  position  in  the  air,  the  motors  do  not  have  to  be  so  power- 
ful.   They  are  steered  by  rudders. 

Some  of  the  largest  Zeppelins  which  have  been  leading 
factors  in  night  raids  conducted  by  the  Germans  on  London 
and  English  coast  resorts  are  capable  of  maintaining  a  speed 
of  60  miles  an  hour.  One  of  these  immense  Zeppelins  was 
reported  to  have  covered  1300  miles  in  less  than  forty  hours, 
covering  the  German  borders,  and  still  keeping  in  touch  with 
its  base.  The  Zeppelins,  because  of  their  large  size,  can  carry 
large  quantities  of  bombs,  wireless  apparatus,  signals  and  elec- 
tric searchlights.  They  can  rise  to  a  height  that  places  them 
fairly  beyond  the  range  of  the  aerial  guns  used  for  fighting 
the  air  forces  of  the  army. 

MANY  KINDS  OF  BOMBS. 

The  bombs  used  are  as  diversified  as  the  crafts  on  which 
they  are  carried.  The  French  aviators  at  one  time  dropped 
long  steel  billets  or  arrows  which  had  swedged  heads  and 
sharpened  points.  These  missiles,  dropped  from  the  height  of 
a  thousand  feet  or  more,  attained  a  velocity  and  force  which 
made  them  dangerous  weapons  of  the  minor  sort. 

The  bombs,  in  the  main,  however,  consist  of  jacketed 
shells  containing  high  explosives,  some  of  which  are  con- 
structed on  what  is  called  the  delayed-action  principle.  Such 
bombs  explode  after  penetrating  the  fort  or  object  which  they 
strike,  instead  of  going  off  by  contact.  Germany  is  said  to 
have  developed  some  of  these  that  were  of  such  size  and  power 
as  to  penetrate  an  armored  ship.  As  much  as  50  pounds  of 
explosives  or  chemicals  is  declared  to  have  been  carried  in 
some  of  the  larger  ones. 

The  big  dirigibles  mount  machine  guns  of  superior  range. 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  103 

Some  of  them  have  been  armored  to  an  extent,  and  to  make 
them  less  easily  detected  they  have  been  painted  tints  and  col- 
ors to  harmonize  with  the  clouds  and  sky.  Special  kinds  of 
gas  have  been  used  to  fill  the  envelopes  or  bags,  and  instead  of 
one  large  bag  they  consist  of  a  series  of  bags  enclosed  in  an 
envelope  or  casing,  so  that  if  a  bullet  would  penetrate  the 
envelope  it  would  only  destroy  one  of  the  gas  bags,  and  not 
cause  the  whole  thing  to  collapse. 

Besides  having  proved  of  great  value  in  the  land  cam- 
paigns, the  aircraft  has  shown  itself  to  be  one  of  the  most  ef- 
fective devices  of  warfare  for  use  against  the  submarine,  and 
all  manner  of  naval  craft.  From  the  heavens  they  can  see  the 
submarine  under  the  water,  and  as  either  the  dirigible  or  the 
aeroplane  can  develop  a  speed  greater  than  that  of  any  battle- 
ship or  cruiser,  it  is  not  difficult  for  it  to  soar  over  the  vessel 
and  drop  bombs  upon  it.  Even  gas  bombs  have  been  used  in 
the  raids  by  the  aircraft. 

ACCURACY  THE  GREAT  DIFFICULTY. 

The  difficulty  in  the  use  of  bombs  has  been  in  accurately 
directing  the  death-dealing  devices  when  the  airship  or  aero- 
plane is  in  motion.  To  assist  in  this  work  aerial  range  finders 
have  been  devised.  These  are  constructed  on  the  principle  of 
the  finder  on  a  camera,  with  graded  scale  markings  to  indi- 
cate the  allowance  that  must  be  made  for  speed  and  motion. 
Complete  apparatus  has  been  built  up  for  launching  the  pro- 
jectiles from  the  large  dirigibles,  and  to  insure  the  missiles 
traveling  properly  vanes  have  been  attached  to  some  of  them. 

In  a  test  made  under  the  auspices  of  the  French  Govern- 
ment and  the  Aerial  Club  of  France,  a  few  years  ago,  one  of 
the  bomb-launching  machines  on  an  aeroplane  scored  eleven 
bull's-eye  shots  in  a  target  ten  yards  in  diameter,  from  an  alti- 
tude of  more  than  2000  feet,  while  the  aeroplane  was  going  at 
a  speed  of  more  than  65  miles  an  hour. 

Though  there  has  not  been  any  widespread  use  of  the  plan 


104  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

the  air  has  been  "mined5'  in  an  experimental  way  to  protect 
certain  sections  against  night  raids  by  the  airmen.  Mining  the 
air  consists  of  locating  small  balloons  over  an  area,  each  bal- 
loon being  attached  to  the  other  with  wires.  The  small  bal- 
loons have  attached  to  them  explosive  bombs  which  would 
destroy  the  larger  aircraft  if  it  was  to  run  into  this  nest  of  air 
vessels  in  the  dark. 

Reverting  to  the  use  of  aircraft  in  naval  warfare  it  may 
be  said  that  to  the  aeroplane  the  relatively  fast  fleet  is  virtually 
stationary.  About  the  only  case  parallel  to  the  aeroplane  look- 
ing over  the  hill  and  down  on  concealed  enemy  positions  would 
be  in  rising  above  the  smoke  screen  thrown  out  by  destroyers. 

THE  SMOKE  SCREEN. 

The  smoke  screen,  by  the  way,  which  has  been  used  by  the 
British  with  marked  success  in  many  instances,  is  an  Ameri- 
can invention.  The  low,  swift  craft  are  equipped  with  special 
oil  burners  which  throw  off  dense  volumes  of  heavy  smoke, 
which  float  low  over  the  surface  of  the  water,  concealing  the 
maneuvers  of  the  larger  boats  and  protecting  them  from  the 
skill  of  enemy  gunners.  Its  effectiveness,  of  course,  is  influ- 
enced by  the  direction  and  strength  of  the  wind.  Used  gen- 
erously by  small  craft  convoying  a  ship  through  a  submarine 
area,  it  should  be  of  great  value. 

A  battleship  can  see  about  as  far  as  it  can  shoot,  anyhow. 
Except  for  smoke  screen,  or  the  famous  "low  visibility,"  which 
means  foggy  weather  or  darkness,  no  enemy  within  range  can 
be  concealed. 

What  the  fleet  commander  wants  to  know  is  how  those 
enemy  vessels  beyond  the  horizon,  which  may  be  within  range 
of  his  guns  tomorrow,  the  day  after,  or  next  week,  may  be 
distributed,  and  how  many  of  them  there  are.  This  is  where 
the  speed  of  the  airplane  comes  in. 

A  machine  which  can  travel  100  miles  an  hour  covers  a 
thousand  miles  in  10  hours.    Locating  an  approaching  enemy 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  105 

fleet  this  distance  away,  it  brings  back  the  news  of  the  approach 
in  10  hours.  It  takes  the  fleet,  traveling  at  15  miles  an  hour, 
two  days  and  18  hours  to  cover  this  distance.  The  aeroplane 
can  beat  it  by  two  days  and  eight  hours. 

But  the  aeroplane  flying  high  enough  to  give  it  the  widest 
practical  range  of  vision  is  able  to  see  only  over  a  path  75  miles 
wide  under  the  most  favorable  weather  conditions.  Haze  will 
cut  this  down  considerably.  This  means  that  for  anything  like 
complete  scouting  work  a  flee*  must  be  equipped  with  a  large 
number  of  them. 

PROPORTION  OF  FIGHTING  PLANES. 

Then,  too,  there  must  be  a  generous  proportion  of  fight- 
ing planes  to  spread  out  in  a  very  wide  circle  beyond  the  fleet. 
It  will  be  appreciated  that  this  circle  must  be  a  mighty  wide 
one  if  the  enemy  planes  be  kept  far  enough  away  to  prevent 
their  counting  the  number  and  type  of  ships  in  the  command. 
There  is  required  also  a  large  detail  to  guard  against  the  sub- 
marines. While  an  aeroplane  can  see  quite  deep  in  the  sea, 
this  penetrating  vision  is  limited  to  the  water  directly  beneath 
it.  It  can  see  straight  down  in  the  water,  but  not  off  to  the  side 
at  an  angle. 

If  such  a  thing  is  possible,  air  control  at  sea  is  more  im- 
portant than  over  the  land,  and  of  first  value  is  the  fighting 
plane.  In  this  connection  there  is  an  aeroplane  gun  which 
works  well.  It  is  a  double-ender.  That  is,  there  is  a  breech  in 
the  middle,  and  the  two  ends  are  muzzles.  In  air  fighting  it  is 
seconds  and  fractions  of  seconds  that  count,  and  the  advantage 
of  this  gun  lies  in  that  it  can  be  fired  in  opposite  directions, 
thus  cutting  down  the  length  of  the  arc  through  which  it  has 
to  be  swung  to  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  enemy. 

Of  exceptional  value  to  the  United  States  navy  is  the 
super- American  type  of  planes  which  the  Curtiss  factories  have 
developed  and  which  have  done  such  wonderful  service  for  the 
British.     In  this  type  the  fuselage  is  entirely  enclosed,  built 


106  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

with  a  hull  much  along  the  lines  of  the  motorboat  or  hydro- 
plane.   The  'plane  may  thus  come  to  rest  safely  in  the  open  sea. 

It  weighs  nearly  6000  pounds  and  can  carry  a  useful  load 
of  more  than  2000  pounds.  The  boat  is  slung  well  below  the 
planes,  eight  feet  below  the  lower  one,  which  has  a  span  of  66 
feet.  Eight  feet  above  this  is  the  upper  plane,  which  overlaps 
the  lower  plane  by  13  feet  on  each  side.  The  complete  span 
of  the  upper  plane  is  92  feet.  It  can  carry  six  to  eight  men,  if 
necessary,  altogether  a  huge,  st^nly,  dependable  machine  with 
two  powerful  motors. 

And  what  was  done  to  give  America  the  equipment  of 
'planes  which  we  needed? 

RESOURCES  AT  GOVERNMENT'S  COMMAND. 

Fifteen  aeroplane  manufacturers,  with  a  combined  capi- 
tal of  $30,000,000  and  a  total  capacity  of  175  machines  a  week, 
organized  and  placed  all  their  resources  at  the  command  of  the 
government.  The  organization  provided  for  the  interchange 
of  ideas  and  plans  and  for  the  standardization  of  manufacture, 
which  resulted  in  a  material  increase  in  output. 

One  hundred  and  seventy-five  machines  a  week  should 
give  us,  in  a  year,  9100.  And  there  are  other  conditions  which 
may  modify  the  estimate  both  favorably  and  unfavorably. 
There  is,  for  instance,  a  limit  to  the  amount  of  seasoned  lum- 
ber available  in  this  country  of  the  peculiar  type  and  quality 
needed  for  airplane  construction.  Provision  must  be  made  for 
the  future  in  this  respect.  All-steel  machines  have  been  made 
and  used  in  Europe  to  some  extent,  but  no  metal  alloy  has 
been  developed  which  is  likely  to  take  the  place  of  wood  in 
general  construction.  The  manufacturers  developed  some 
interesting  things  along  these  lines  which  were  not  given  to 
the  public. 

In  the  Spring  of  1917  the  fighting  in  the  air  took  on  an 
entirely  new  interest  abroad,  because  of  the  German  policy  of 
painting  their  machines  most  grotesque  patterns.    They  seemed 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  107 

to  have  taken  this  idea  from  the  old  American  Indian  custom 
of  painting  their  faces  to  frighten  their  opponents,  or  else  the 
fancies  of  the  German  airmen  were  allowed  to  run  riot  with 
vivid  color  effects. 

British  pilots  daily  brought  home  from  over  the  lines  new 
reports  of  fantastic  creations  encountered  amid  the  clouds.  The 
gayest  feathered  songsters  that  came  north  with  the  Spring  did 
not  rival  the  variegated  hues  of  the  harlequin  birds  that  rose 
daily  from  the  German  airdromes.  The  coming  of  this  fan- 
tastic order  of  things  in  the  air  was  first  heralded  by  a  squadron 
of  scarlet  German  planes.  It  then  was  noticed  that  some  of 
the  enemy  machines  were  striped  about  the  body  like  yellow- 
jackets. 

GAUDY  TASTES  OF  AIRMEN. 

Nothing  appeared  too  gaudy  to  meet  the  tastes  of  the 
enemy  airmen,  who  seemed  to  have  been  given  carte  blanche 
with  the  paint  brush.  There  were  green  planes  with  yellow 
noses,  silver  planes  with  gold  noses,  khaki-colored  planes  with 
greenish-gray  wings,  planes  with  red  bodies,  green  wings  and 
yellow  stripes,  planes  with  red  bodies  and  wings  of  green  on 
top  of  blue,  planes  with  light  blue  bodies  and  red  wings.  Virtu- 
ally all  the  gaudiest  machines  were  in  red  body  effects,  with 
every  possible  combination  of  colors  for  their  wings.  Some 
had  one  green  wing  and  one  white ;  some  had  green  wings  tip- 
ped with  various  colors. 

One  of  the  most  fantastic  met  had  a  scarlet  body,  brown 
tail  and  reddish-brown  wings,  with  white  maltese  crosses 
against  a  bright  green  background.  One  machine  looked  like 
a  pear  flying  through  the  air.  It  had  a  pear-shaped  tail  and 
was  painted  a  ruddy  brown,  just  like  a  large  ripe  fruit.  One 
of  the  piebald  squadrons  encountered  was  made  up  of  white, 
red  and  green  machines.  There  still  were  others  palpably 
painted  for  what  became  known  as  "camouflege"  purposes, 
as  guns,  wagons  and  tents  often  are  painted  to  blend  with  the 
landscape  and  thus  avoid  detection. 


108  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

This  lavish  use  of  paint,  however,  did  not  reduce  the  heavy 
daily  loss  inflicted  on  the  Germans  by  the  British  flyers.  But 
it  must  not  be  imagined  that  the  Germans  did  not  put  up  a 
stalwart  fight.  Just  as  their  resistance  was  strengthened  on 
land,  so  it  was  increased  in  the  air.  Just  as  the  Germans  threw 
in  new  divisions  of  infantry  and  new  batteries  of  artillery  to 
check  the  Allies'  offensive,  so  they  sent  aloft  hundreds  of  new 
machines  to  contest  for  the  mastery  of  the  air,  an  important 
phase  of  modern  war. 

The  manner  in  which  the  British  flying  corps  dominated 
the  air  during  the  battle  of  Messines  Ridge  in  June,  1917,  and 
completely  smothered  the  German  aviation  service  for  the  time 
being  is  one  of  the  most  thrilling  and  remarkable  stories  of  the 
entire  war. 

Hundreds  of  British  planes  were  well  behind  the  German 
lines  when  the  battle  broke  into  its  fury  at  dawn.  They  had 
stolen  over  during  the  darker  intervals  of  the  brief  night  when 
the  moon  was  hidden  by  storm  clouds.  Other  hundreds  went 
aloft  with  the  first  faint  streaks  of  coming  day  and,  guided  by 
the  flashes  of  the  guns,  flew  into  the  thick  of  the  fighting. 

COMBED  BY  MACHINE  GUNS. 

During  the  night  British  machines  combed  enemy  railway 
stations,  trains,  ammunition  dumps  and  troops  coming  up  on 
the  march.  Others  hovered  above  German  airdromes  and 
circled  low  among  airplane  sheds  and  fired  hundreds  of  rounds 
from  machine  guns  into  them  and  prevented  the  enemy  ma- 
chines from  coming  out.  Later  in  the  day,  while  the  fighting 
was  most  intense,  British  airmen  dropped  about  three  tons  of 
bombs  on  the  German  flying  grounds  as  a  further  deterrent, 
which  proved  highly  effective. 

In  addition  to  shutting  the  German  airmen  out  of  any 
early  participation  in  the  battle,  the  British  airplanes  were  in 
a  large  degree  responsible  for  the  fact  that  the  Germans  could 
not  launch  a  counter  attack  of  appreciable  strength  until  forty 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  109 

hours  after  the  battle  for  the  ridge  began  and  every  bit  of 
ground  desired  by  the  British  in  this  particular  operation  had 
been  taken  and  secured. 

Far  back  of  the  German  lines  the  British  planes  seached 
out  troops  in  every  hamlet,  town  and  village.  In  several  places 
they  saw  them  gathering  or  marching  in  the  main  streets, 
whereupon  they  flew  down  low  at  times  and  opened  a  fire 
which  scattered  the  gray-clad  soldiers  in  all  directions.  All 
pilots  report  that  their  accurate  fire  had  a  most  demoralizing 
effect  upon  the  hostile  troops.  Convoys  and  ammunition  and 
supply  columns  were  attacked  while  on  the  march  and  the  dis- 
organized men  left  their  teams  and  automobiles  on  the  roads 
while  they  sought  shelter  in  nearby  ditches. 

AIRPLANES  ATTACK  TROOPS. 

Airplanes  attacked  troops  in  the  support  trenches  and 
sent  them  scurrying  to  the  cover  of  their  dugouts.  One  pilot 
made  so  many  of  these  attacks  that  he  finally  ran  out  of  ammu- 
nition, but  he  delivered  his  last  stroke  by  letting  go  his  signal 
rockets  at  a  platoon  of  soldiers  who,  evidently  mistaking  this 
for  some  particularly  horrible  new  style  of  war  frightfulness, 
fled  in  all  directions. 

German  troops  were  fired  upon  in  the  more  distant  back 
areas  as  they  were  entraining  for  the  front.  Many  of  the 
enemy  retreating  from  the  British  attack  and  hiding  in  shell 
holes  were  seen  by  the  low-flying  airmen  and  pelted  with 
bullets. 

One  British  pilot  patrolled  a  road  for  half  an  hour  before 
he  saw  anything  to  shoot  at.  Then  a  German  military  auto- 
mobile with  three  officers  sitting  in  the  back  seat  came  along. 
The  Britisher  dived  at  them  from  a  height  of  three  hundred  feet, 
firing  at  them  as  they  came.  He  flew  so  low  eventually  that 
the  wheels  of  his  under  carriage  barely  missed  the  automobile, 
which  swerved  into  a  ditch  while  going  at  about  forty  miles 
an  hour  and  crashed  into  a  tree. 


110  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

This  same  pilot  later  came  across  an  active  field  gun  bat- 
tery and  charged  it,  scattering  the  gun  crew  and  hitting  a  num- 
ber of  them.  Still  further  along  he  attacked  a  column  of  Ger- 
mans marching  in  fours.  The  column  broke  when  he  opened 
fire,  scattering  to  both  sides  of  the  road.  At  no  time  during 
his  stay  inside  the  German  lines  was  this  pilot  more  than  500 
feet  from  the  ground. 

ON  CONTACT  PATROL  WORK. 

Large  numbers  of  British  machines  were  on  contact  patrol 
work,  flying  low  over  the  advancing  lines  of  infantry,  con- 
stantly watching  their  movements,  their  progress,  any  tem- 
porary reverse,  any  attempt  to  form  counter-attacks  and  all 
the  while  sending  detailed  reports  back  to  corps  and  army 
headquarters. 

Of  the  fourteen  planes  lost  during  the  day  of  the  battle, 
a  majority  were  those  contact  machines.  They  had  to  fly 
through  a  frightful  storm  of  their  own  as  well  as  the  enemy's 
artillery  fire,  and  they  succumbed  to  chance  blows  from  these 
exploding  missiles. 

Late  on  the  day  of  the  battle,  when  the  enemy  machines 
had  finally  arrived  from  more  distant  airdromes,  there  was 
some  good  fighting  in  the  air,  some  of  it  at  close  quarters  with 
collisions  barely  avoided.  Twenty  enemy  machines  were  ac- 
counted for  in  the  fighting,  some  flopping  about  until  they 
broke  up  in  the  air  and  others  being  driven  down  on  their  noses 
in  yellow  buttercup  fields  so  far  back  of  the  fighting  line  that 
no  shell  had  ever  marred  the  symmetry  of  the  landscape. 

Some  of  the  most  marvelous  work  was  done  by  artillery 
airships.  One  squadron  of  these  alone,  acting  with  several 
batteries  of  British  heavies,  succeeded  in  silencing  seventy-two 
German  batteries  before  six  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
attack  which  began  at  3.10  o'clock  in  the  morning.  These 
planes  also  directed  the  firing  on  the  enemy's  guns  en  route 
to  the  front,  some  of  the  big  weapons  being  drawn  by  cater- 


THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE.  Ill 

pillar  tractors.  Wherever  a  thousand  or  more  troops  were 
observed  forming  for  possible  counter-attacks  the  artillery 
planes  directed  "shoots"  upon  them. 

So  complete  was  the  British  domination  of  the  air  along 
the  front  of  attack  that  not  a  single  one  of  the  British  artillery 
observing  aeroplanes  was  lost  during  the  week  that  the  intense 
bombardment  was  going  on.  During  the  battle  British  aero- 
planes also  attacked  and  silenced  a  number  of  enemy  machine- 
gun  positions. 

The  growth  of  the  aeroplane  industry  has  developed  as 
many  makes  of  machines  as  there  are  makes  of  automobiles, 
but  in  a  general  way  aeroplanes  are  divided  into  four  classes — 
monoplanes,  biplanes,  triplanes  and  hydroplanes.  About  90 
per  cent  of  all  designs  are  monoplanes  and  biplanes,  and  the 
types  are  distinguished  by  their  single  set  of  wings  or  planes 
or  the  double  planes  or  wings.  Both  types  have  their  advan- 
tages in  use,  the  biplane  being  regarded  as  more  stable  for  cer- 
tain scouting  purposes  than  the  monoplane.  It  can  carry 
heavier  weights — has  greater  lifting  power — but  is  not  capable 
of  as  great  speed  or  as  easily  maneuvered. 

MACHINE  ON  PRACTICAL  BASIS. 

The  War  has  placed  the  machine  on  an  intensely  practical 
basis.  The  manufacturers  have  learned  that  machines  con- 
structed along  certain  lines  will  travel  at  such  and  such  a  speed 
and  have  a  certain  lifting  capacity,  will  rise  under  a  particular 
speed  and  may  be  expected  to  do  certain  things  under  certain 
circumstances,  but  with  all  the  advance  which  has  been  made 
in  the  construction  of  the  air  machines,  the  designers  do  not 
yet  understand  all  the  "factors"  that  enter  into  the  "why"  of 
the  case. 

The  makers  have,  however,  succeeded  in  standardizing 
their  machines  to  a  degree.  The  story  of  how  the  aeroplane 
flies  is  a  highly  technical  and  scientific  one,  but  the  basic  prin- 
ciple is  the  reaction  of  air  and  an  inclined  surface  in  motion. 


112  THE  EYES  OF  BATTLE. 

It  might  be  likened  to  a  stone  skipping  across  the  surface  of 
a  pond,  if  the  imagination  can  conceive  of  the  water  as  being 
air.  It  is  simplicity  itself  to  drive  an  inclined  plane  against 
the  air  with  such  force  that  the  impact  will  produce  a  lifting 
power.  In  raising  an  ordinary  kite,  for  instance,  the  boy  runs 
into  the  teeth  of  the  wind.  His  kite  is  so  attached  to  a  string  as 
to  stand  at  an  angle,  and  as  he  runs  the  pressure  against  the 
air  drives  the  kite  upward.  In  the  aeroplane  the  propellers 
drive  the  machine  into  the  air  with  such  force  that  the  planes, 
standing  at  an  angle,  guide  the  machine  upward. 

There  are  innumerable  problems  to  be  solved — those  of 
buoyancy,  delicacy  of  balance  and  many  others — but  the  de- 
signers themselves  have  not  been  able  to  determine  upon  a 
precise  formula  for  their  solution.  It  is  sufficient  that  the 
aeroplane  has  reached  a  degree  of  practicability  in  construction 
and  use  which  insures  its  permanent  existence,  and  has  given 
the  military  and  the  naval  forces  one  of  the  greatest  agencies 
in  the  world  for  protecting  themselves  and  watching  their 
enemies* 


CHAPTER  VII. 

WAK'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

Chemistry  a  Dbmon  of  Destruction — Poison  Gas  Bombs — Gas  Masks — Hand 
Grenades — Moetars — "Tanks" — Feudal  "Battering  Bams" — Steel  Hel- 
mets— Strange  Bullets — Motor  Plows — Eeal  Dogs  of  War. 

THINGS  new  and  passing  strange — thousands  of  them — 
have  been  brought  into  being  by  the  great  world  war. 
Human  minds  have  developed  things  undreamed  of  by 
science  or  fiction — things  that  a  few  years  ago  would  have 
been  considered  too  strange  and  fantastic  for  even  the  profes- 
sional romancer  to  weave  into  the  tissues  of  his  stories. 

Every  known  science  has  been  called  upon  to  produce  its 
quota  of  new  things  which  might  be  used  for  the  destruction 
or  the  protection  of  men  at  war.  The  wonders  of  chemistry 
have  always  lent  descriptive  inspiration  to  the  pen  of  writers, 
but  mankind  to  get  a  vivid  conception  of  the  horrors  of  chem- 
istry has  had  to  wait  for  the  great  world  war. 

The  conflict  which  has  involved  the  entire  world  might 
almost  be  termed  a  warfare  of  chemists.  Without  their  dia- 
bolical products,  ranging  all  the  way  from  high  explosives  to 
poison  gases,  it  would  have  few  of  the  characteristics  of  ultra- 
frightfulness  that  render  it  unique  in  the  history  of  inter- 
national struggles. 

But  of  all  the  instruments  of  destruction  used  in  this  war, 
there  is  none  more  horrifying  than  the  so-called  "incendiary 
bomb,"  which  sets  instant  fire  to  whatever  it  touches  and  which 
spreads  flame  in  a  manner  so  terrific  that  three  or  four  such 
gravity-projectiles  dropped  from  an  aeroplane  burned  up  the 
whole  of  a  peaceful  Dutch  village  in  a  few  minutes. 

Now,  what  is  the  fearsome  stuff  with  which  such  bombs 
are  loaded?  A  new  chemical  compound?  Not  at  all.  What 
they  contain  is  simply  the  mixture  of  two  of  the  most  harmless 

H  R— 8  113 


114  WAK'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

things  in  the  world— oxide  of  iron  (which  is  simply  iron  rust) 
and  powdered  aluminum. 

When  these  two  innocent  substances  are  mixed  together 
the  result  is  a  compound  truly  infernal  in  its  potentialities  for 
mischief.  It  is  not  an  explosive  but  if  set  on  fire  it  burns  with 
an  intensity  that  is  positively  appalling.  Nothing  will  put  it 
out ;  no  quantity  of  water  has  any  effect  upon  the  raging  flames 
it  engenders. 

This  is  the  material  used  for  loading  incendiary  bombs. 
It  is  ignited  in  such  projectiles  by  a  mercury-fulminate  cap 
that  sets  off  a  fuse  containing  powdered  magnesium — the  stuff 
photographers  employ  for  flashlights. 

THIN  SHELLS  OF  STEEL. 

These  bombs  are  thin  shells  of  steel  or  iron — mere  con- 
tainers for  the  mixture  before  described.  They  are  so  con- 
trived that  the  fuse  is   instantly  ignited  when  they   strike. 

Whereupon  the  shell  is  melted  by  the  heat  generated 
within  it  and  a  flood  of  fiercely  burning  metal  is  scattered  in 
all  directions.  All  of  this  seems  rather  extraordinary,  and  it 
is  worth  explaining. 

Oxygen  has  an  affinity  for  iron,  readily  combining  with 
the  latter — which  is  the  reason  why  iron  is  liable  to  rust.  This 
rust  is  a  chemical  compound  of  iron  and  oxygen ;  in  other  words, 
oxide  of  iron.  But  oxygen  has  a  much  greater  affinity  for 
aluminum.  And  so,  when  the  two  metals  are  powdered  and 
mixed  together  and  heat  is  applied  the  oxygen  flies  out  of  the 
iron  rust  and  combines  with  the  aluminum. 

The  process  is  started  in  the  bomb  by  the  burning  mag- 
nesium. And  then  the  oxygen  passes  out  of  the  iron  and  into 
the  aluminum  so  rapidly  that  an  enormously  high  temperature 
is  developed.  It  runs  up  to  3500  or  4000  degrees  Fahrenheit — 
which  means,  of  course,  a  tremendous  combustion.  The  mix- 
ture of  aluminum  and  iron  burns  like  so  much  tinder — though 
such  a  way  of  putting  it  is  absurdly  feeble. 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  115 

The  present  war  has  been  conspicuously  marked  by  rever- 
sions to  ancient  methods  of  fighting.  In  this  line  the  incendiary 
bomb  offers  an  excellent  illustration.  It  is  in  effect  merely  an 
adaptation  of  an  idea  utilized  by  the  Saracens — we  should  call 
them  Turks  nowadays — in  their  warfare  with  the  Crusaders 
of  the  Middle  Ages. 

DREAD  INSTRUMENT  OF  WAR. 

The  instrument  of  war  most  dreaded  by  the  .Crusaders,  as 
they  found  it  in  the  hands  of  the  Turks,  was  the  incendiary 
bomb — a  projectile  that  flew  through  the  air  "like  a  fiery 
dragon"  as  they  described  it,  and  set  fire  to  whatever  it  touched. 
Sometimes  it  was  provided  with  iron  barbs,  by  which  it  clung 
to  buildings. 

This  was  one  of  the  ways  in  which  the  Saracens  employed 
the  celebrated  "Greek  fire" — an  inflammable  compound  that  is 
understood  to  have  been  a  mixture  of  petroleum,  saltpeter  and 
pitch.  The  chief  horror  of  it,  from  the  Crusaders'  point  of 
view,  was  that  it  was  unquenchable.  Mere  water  had  no  effect 
upon  it.  Hence  they  were  sure  that  it  must  be  of  diabolical 
origin. 

But  the  up-to-date  incendiary  bomb  is  a  great  improve- 
ment on  its  original  of  the  Middle  Ages.  The  modern  con- 
trivance is  thoroughly  scientific,  and  it  does  its  destructive  busi- 
ness with  certainty  and  dispatch. 

No  less  effective  are  the  gas  bombs  which  were  introduced 
by  the  German  soldiers  at  Rheims,  and  which  when  exploding 
near  the  trenches  occupied  by  the  French  and  English  threw 
off  vapors  and  poisonous  gases  which  killed  or  overwhelmed 
thousands  of  brave  men.  These  devices  used  in  violation  of  all 
rules  of  civilized  warfare  sent  hundreds  to  the  hospitals.  Sev- 
enty-five victims  were  taken  at  one  time  from  the  trenches  to 
the  hospital  at  Zuydcoote,  north  of  Dunkirk,  where  it  was 
found  that  some  of  those  who  had  inhaled  the  fumes  turned 
a  violet  tinge. 


116  WAK'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

Altogether  it  was  estimated  that  from  3000  to  5000  men 
were  affected  by  the  gas  fumes  in  this  first  onslaught  and  at 
least  10  per  cent  of  those  who  were  overcome  succumbed  to 
the  deadly  fumes.  Many  of  those  who  inhaled  the  poisons 
expectorated  blood  and  for  days  afterward  were  racked  by  ter- 
rible coughing.  In  many  cases  fever  developed  in  a  few  days 
ending  with  pneumonia.  "When  the  men  were  not  sufficiently 
poisoned  to  cause  death  they  were  so  affected  that  their  use- 
fulness as  soldiers  was  ended  for  all  time.  The  poison  made 
them  confirmed  invalids. 

INTRODUCTION  OF  GAS  MASK. 

Naturally  human  ingenuity  was  called  into  play  to  pro- 
tect men  against  the  poisons  and  the  gas  mask  came  into  being. 
These  were  of  many  types.  The  early  creations  consisted 
primarily  of  a  nose  and  mouth  covering  with  a  receptacle  for 
inclosing  a  sponge  or  gauze  soaked  with  a  chemical  which  pos- 
sessed the  power  to  neutralize  the  gas  fumes.  Such  devices 
have  been  used  by  fire  fighters  in  large  cities  the  world  over 
where  the  men  battling  to  save  buildings  have  been  compelled 
to  enter  smoke-filled  rooms  and  cellars.  Other  types  which 
have  proven  more  effective  are  designed  after  the  fashion  of 
the  diving  apparatus,  and  having  a  small  tank  of  compressed 
oxygen  with  feeding  tubes  running  to  the  mask.  The  oxygen 
combines  with  the  contaminated  air 'breathed  through  absorbent 
cotton  or  sponge  and  provides  the  wearer  with  the  proportion 
of  oxygen  necessary  to  existence.  And  even  the  horses  have 
been  provided  with  such  masks. 

But  to  go  back  to  bombs.  All  through  France  and  Bel- 
gium, and  wherever  the  Prussian  soldiers  found  their  way, 
there  was  evidence  of  the  use  of  hand  grenades  which  were 
thrown  against  the  sides  of  or  into  buildings  to  set  them  in 
flames.  Some  of  these  devices,  made  of  sheet  metal,  were  in 
their  action  similar  to  the  "Fourth  of  July  torpedoes"  familiar 
to  every  American  school  boy.    When  thrown  they  exploded 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  117 

throwing  oil  and  chemicals  over  walls  and  floors.  Some  of 
them  seem  to  have  been  loaded  with  bullets  and  were  in  effect 
hand  shrapnel. 

Then  there  developed  from  the  primary  use  of  these  nefar- 
ious weapons  the  recognized  hand  grenade,  which  is  actually 
hand-shrapnel,  plied  by  men  at  close  quarters.  Thousands  of 
these  have  been  thrown  by  the  armies  in  their  charges  on  the 
trenches.  And  then,  to  offset  the  use  of  these  devices  in  the 
offensive,  there  came  into  being  also  the  smoke  bombs.  These 
when  exploding  throw  up  great  clouds  of  black  smoke  which 
hang  over  everything. 

EFFECTIVE  IN  A  HUNDRED  WAYS. 

The  use  of  such  bombs  has  proved  effective  in  a  hundred 
ways.  They  have  been  used  to  create  a  perfect  shield  of  smoke 
to  conceal  the  movements  of  troops,  or  prevent  the  enemy  from 
finding  the  range  with  their  long  distance  guns.  Similarly 
bombs  which  contained  burning  chemicals  have  been  used  to 
hold  in  check  the  approaching  enemy  forces. 

Half  way  between  the  great  gun  and  the  hand  grenade 
stand  among  war  weapons  the  trench  mortars.  The  first  of 
these  were  used  by  the  Japanese  in  their  war  with  Russia.  The 
Japanese  mortars  were  mere  logs  hollowed  out  and  strength- 
ened by  wrappings  of  bamboo  rope.  The  projectiles  fired 
from  these  were  empty  provision  tins  filled  with  high  explosives, 
scraps  of  metal,  bits  of  stone  or  whatever,  in  the  emergency, 
could  be  found  to  fill  them. 

The  mortars  are  pitched  at  an  angle  and  the  projectiles 
are  shot  with  a  skyrocket  effect,  to  land  in  the  trenches  or  camp 
of  the  enemy.  The  Germans  developed  the  idea  and  the  per- 
fected mortars  are  of  steel,  and  capable  of  throwing  bombs 
weighing  several  hundred  pounds. 

And  then  the  great  moving  fort  which  has  been  called 
"the  tank!"  Those  snorting,  fire-spitting  dragons  which  were 
depicted  for  us  in  childhood  can  scarcely  bring  to  our  mind  a 


118  WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

greater  element  of  the  fanciful,  the  horrible,  and  the  powerful 
than  the  steel  hulks  which  came  into  being  in  this  war  under 
the  name  of  "tanks." 

We  see  them  in  our  mind's  eye  spitting  fire  as  they  crossed 
No  Man's  Land,  amid  the  smoke  and  dust  of  bursting  shells. 
Keeping  steadily  on  their  courses  they  dived  into  huge  craters 
made  by  exploding  shells ;  stretched  themselves  across  trenches, 
brushed  trees  and  boulders  aside,  and  kept  steadily  on  their 
courses.  German  wire  entanglements  were  as  so  many  pieces 
of  string  before  their  huge  frames.  Nothing  deterred  them. 
They  moved  forward  into  the  face  of  the  enemy,  reaching  the 
first  line  of  German  trenches.  There  the  soulless  devices  sat 
complacently  astride  the  trenches,  and  turning  their  guns  along 
the  ditches  swept  them  in  both  directions. 

THE  TANK  DEFIES  ALL  OBSTACLES. 

The  tanks  which  were  introduced  by  the  English,  move 
along  on  revolving  platforms,  so  to  speak.  These  platforms 
enable  the  tank  to  overcome  all  obstacles  as  the  caterpillar 
tread  is  curved  up  in  the  arc  of  a  huge  circle  at  the  front  which 
gives  the  vehicle  its  wonderful  tractive  powers.  This  large 
curvature  acts  as  a  huge  wheel  with  a  tremendously  long  lever- 
age equal  to  the  radius  of  the  circlet  or  the  spokes  of  the 
imaginary  wheel  of  the  same  diameter.  Only  that  portion  of 
the  assumed  wheel  which  would  come  in  contact  with  the 
ground  acts  as  the  lever,  and  it  is  just  this  portion  that  is  repro- 
duced in  the  front  end  of  a  caterpillar  belt. 

Although  varying  in  size  and  details,  all  tanks  have  the 
common  characteristic  of  being  divided  into  three  main  com- 
partments between  the  two  side  caterpillar  frames.  The  first 
is  the  observation  compartment  in  which  the  driver  and  his 
helper  are  perched  high  above  the  ground  to  direct  the  move- 
ments of  the  huge  steel  beast. 

In  the  middle  is  the  ammunition  room  from  which  the  guns 
carried  in  the  two  side  turrets  are  fed.     At  the  rear  is  the 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  119 

engine  room.  From  two  or  four  gasoline  engines  are  used — 3 
these  driving  the  rear  axle  and  its  integral  sprockets  over  which 
the  caterpillars  run.  The  latter  run  an  idler  pulley  or  sprock- 
ets at  the  extreme  front  ends  and  are  supported  by  means  of 
rollers  attached  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  frame  on  each  side 
when  passing  over  the  top.  This  movement  of  the  caterpillar 
belts  is  exactly  analogous  to  that  of  the  ordinary  variety  of 
garden  insect  with  the  same  name  which  similarly  lays  down 
his  own  track  by  humping  his  back  continuously  and  regard- 
less of  the  land  surface. 

The  tanks  are  steered  by  a  pair  of  small  ordinary  wheels 
at  the  rear.  These  are  supported  in  a  pivot  on  a  frame  extend- 
ed from  the  rear.  They  are  merely  for  steering,  and  support 
none  of  the  weight  of  the  tank  except  when  bridging  wide 
trenches  or  dips  in  the  surface.  Steering  can  be  accomplished 
by  making  one  caterpillar  go  faster  than  the  other  by  manipu- 
lating clutches  on  the  driving  mechanism. 

TANK'S  "CATERPILLAR"  FEATURE. 

The  "caterpillar"  feature  of  the  tank  had  its  origin  in  the 
caterpillar  belts  or  shoes  which  were  first  used  on  the  great 
field  guns  and  mortars — those  tremendous  weapons  which 
shoot  bombs  and  shells  weighing  tons  and  containing  500  or 
more  pounds  of  gun-cotton  or  explosive  which  on  contact  is 
discharged,  rending  everything  for  yards  around. 

These  guns,  as  well  as  the  smaller  field  guns,  have  had 
attached  to  them  great  shields  of  steel  behind  which  the  gun- 
ners stand,  so  that  they  are  protected  against  the  old-fashioned 
sharpshooters  whose  duty  it  was  to  pick  off  the  gunners. 

The  caterpillar  or  wheel  belts  on  the  big  guns  consist  of 
flat  blocks,  or  shoes,  wider  than  the  tires  of  the  wheels.  They 
are  hinged  and  fastened  together  so  as  to  form  a  great  chain, 
and  when  placed  on  the  wheels  present  broad  surfaces  to  the 
ground  and  keep  the  gun  carriages  from  sinking  into  the  soft 
earth.    With  a  set  of  tljese  shoes  a  heavy  gun  can  be  drawn 


120  WAK'S  STKANGE  DEVICES. 

over  soft  and  irregular  ground,  which  would  be  almost  impass- 
able where  the  gun  is  mounted  on  wheels  of  ordinary  width. 

Before  these  belts  were  devised  it  was  necessary  for  every 
gun  crew  to  carry  a  supply  of  beams,  jackscrews  and  devices 
to  be  used  in  extricating  the  heavy  guns  when  they  got  fast  in 
the  mud.  Now  every  gun  has  these  belts  which  can  be  put  on 
or  detached  in  a  few  minutes. 

Paradoxically,  this  is  the  day  of  the  big  gun's  greatest 
effectiveness,  and  the  day  of  its  greatest  limitations.  The  war 
has  taught  us  more  in  two  years  about  gunnery  and  the  effect 
of  various  types  of  ordnance  under  varying  conditions  than 
could  have  been  learned  in  twenty  years  of  theoretical  research 
— for  actual  experience  proves  where  theoretical  research 
merely  gives  ground  on  which  to  base  an  opinion. 

NATIONAL  RESOURCES  TO  DISLODGE  A  MAN. 

One  of  the  things  that  we  have  learned  is  that  when  man 
takes  unto  himself  the  humble  pick  and  shovel  and  proceeds 
to  dig  a  hole  for  himself  in  the  ground,  we  can  get  him  out  of 
that  hole  only  by  drawing  on  the  combined  resources  of  a 
nation,  by  constructing  one  of  the  most  complex  and  expensive 
instruments  in  the  world,  and  with  it  hurling  at  man  dug-in 
a  projectile  weighing  a  good  part  of  a  ton. 

The  blunder,  perhaps  unavoidable,  which  stands  out  with 
equal  emphasis  among  the  preliminary  preparations  of  all  the 
nations  engaged  in  the  struggle  was  the  underestimation  of 
the  artillery  power  required  for  the  conduct  of  a  successful 
military  campaign  under  modern  conditions  of  warfare.  It 
was  an  underestimation  so  great  that  in  the  light  of  develop- 
ments it  will  some  day  prove  ridiculous. 

At  the  opening  of  the  war  two  opposed  theories  of  artil- 
lery effectiveness  were  held  by  the  combatants.  The  French 
swore  by  the  medium  calibre,  rapid-fire,  low-trajectory  field 
piece.  The  Teutons  had  devoted  their  best  efforts  to  the  de- 
velopment of  guns  so  big  that  their  opponents  were  tempted, 


WAR'S  STEANGE  DEVICES.  121 

before  they  learned  better,  to  regard  them  as  too  unwieldy  for 
effective  field  service.  Both  were  right,  the  French  in  the  full 
sense  and  intention  of  the  term,  the  Teutons  by  pure  accident. 

It  should  be  explained  here  that  the  word  Teuton  is  used 
advisedly,  for  in  reality  it  is  to  the  Austrians  before  the  Ger- 
mans that  the  development  of  the  11 -inch  and  bigger  field 
gun,  with  its  special  carriage  and  caterpillar-tread  wheels  owes 
its  existence.  It  was  Austrian  guns  and  Austrian  gunners 
that  first  made  the  heavy  artillery  of  the  Teuton  armies 
famous. 

The  French  field  piece  performed  all  that  was  expected 
of  it,  but  it  was  handicapped  by  unforeseen  conditions  of  war- 
fare. The  heavy  Teuton  guns  performed  their  mission  in  the 
very  introductory  stages  of  the  war,  then  failed,  and  later,  by 
the  irony  of  fate,  proved  to  be  the  very  things  required  when 
the  unforeseeen  war  conditions  developed. 

A  WONDERFUL  GUN. 
The  Germans  and  Austrians  believed  that  they  could 
develop  a  big  gun  which  could  be  given  sufficient  mobility  for 
use  in  the  field,  and  with  commendable  and  methodical  applica- 
tion they  proceeded  to  do  so.  The  theory  was,  first,  that  it 
could  batter  down  any  permanent  fortifications  that  man  could 
build,  and  when  it  was  pitted  against  the  concrete  ramparts 
of  Liege  and  Namur  it  blew  them  out  of  existence  in  a  few 
hours.  The  Teutons  had  scored,  and  scored  so  heavily  that 
the  Allies  barely  escaped  the  fate  the  Germans  had  prepared 
for  them  in  an  overwhelming  sweep  on  Paris.  That  they  did 
escape  this  fate  is  no  doubt  in  a  large  measure  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  second  effectiveness  claimed  by  the  Teutons  for  their 
heavy  ordnance  failed  in  its  full  accomplishment.  Used  in 
open  fighting,  the  great  explosive  shells  hurled  by  these  guns 
did  not  do  the  damage  expected  to  the  wide,  open  firing  lines 
of  the  Allies,  nor  did  they  produce  the  moral  effect  expected. 
The  great  shells  tore  tremendous  craters  in  the  ground,  from 


122  WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

which  the  force  of  the  explosion  was  expended  upward  in  a 
sort  of  cone*shape,  shooting  above  the  heads  of  any  troops  in 
the  vicinity  except  those  immediately  adjacent  to  the  explo- 
sion. In  the  meantime  the  field  pieces  of  the  French,  with 
their  extreme  mobility  and  rapidity  of  fire,  were  scattering 
death  and  destruction  with  their  straight  shrapnel  fire  in  the 
solid  formations  which  were  so  popular  with  the  Germans  in 
the  early  stages  of  the  war,  and  which  today  they  do  not  seem 
to  be  able  to  drop  entirely. 

So  far  the  French  piece  did  all  expected  of  it.  The  Ger- 
man piece  had  proved  its  ability  only  to  blow  up  permanent 
fortifications,  and  this  was  nullified  immediately  by  the  action 
of  the  French  in  abandoning  the  concrete  shelters  and  moving 
their  own  guns  into  newly  and  quickly-constructed  trench  forts. 

A  THING  UNDREAMED  OF. 

But  the  thing  that  neither  side  had  dreamed  of  was  the 
settling  down  of  the  war  on  the  west  front  into  an  eternal  line 
of  opposing  trenches  to  face  each  other  for  years.  That  it  did 
so  was  due  to  the  monumental  blunders  on  the  part  of  the 
German  staff  in  allowing  itself  to  be  outmaneuvered  and  beaten 
back  from  the  gates  of  Paris  by  numerically  inferior  forces,  and 
still  further  outmaneuvered  in  the  extension  of  the  lines  north- 
ward in  that  famous  series  of  flanking  movements  which  finally 
reached  the  sea. 

It  was  their  success  in  driving  the  German  army  to  earth 
when  it  was  stronger  than  they  were  that  saved  the  Allies  and 
gave  them  the  breathing  time  required  in  which  to  further  their 
preparations  and  train  new  troops,  and  likewise  it  is  this  same 
mode  of  trench  warfare  which  has  made  their  task  so  difficult 
when  they  have  taken  the  offensive. 

Against  ordinary  trench  lines,  as  known  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  war,  the  French  field  pieces  were  more  effective 
than  the  heavy  cannon  of  the  Teutons,  just  as  they  had  been  in 
the  open.     Snooting  in  flat  trajectory  across  the  trench,  and 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  123 

exploding  just  above  it,  the  shrapnel  scattered  more  death 
downward  than  the  heavy  projectile  could  scatter  upward  after 
it  had  buried  itself  in  the  soft  earth. 

But  with  the  continuous  line  of  trenches  stretching  from 
Switzerland  to  the  sea,  with  consequent  impossibility  of  out- 
flanking, demonstrated  by  the  Germans  to  their  sorrow  in 
repeated  repulses  of  their  drives  to  cut  through  to  Calais,  each 
side  felt  justified  in  replying  to  the  artillery  of  the  other  by 
digging  deeper  and  more  permanently,  with  many  feet  of 
shelter  overhead.  This  ended  the  effectiveness  of  shrapnel 
except  for  the  repulse  of  attacks,  and  again  the  heavy  guns 
swung  into  the  position  of  pre-eminence. 

A  SITUATION  ALMOST  BEYOND  CONTROL. 

It  was  at  this  stage,  however,  that  both  sides  realized  how 
totally  inadequate  the  supply  of  these  heavy  guns  and  ammuni- 
tion was  to  cope  with  the  situation.  While  the  heavy  gun  was 
more  effective  in  blasting  out  the  enemy  from  his  dug-outs 
than  the  field  piece,  it  required  many  times  the  artillery  power 
which  either  side  possessed  to  handle  the  job. 

Then  commenced  the  race  of  the  ammunition  and  gun 
factories  to  turn  out  their  products  by  the  ton  where  they  had 
been  turned  out  by  the  pound  before;  a  race  in  which  the 
Allies  took  and  held  the  lead. 

With  the  greatly  increased  number  of  heavy  guns  it  be- 
came possible  to  develop  the  famous  curtain  of  barrage  fire, 
also  known  as  drum  fire,  with  this  type  of  ordnance,  as  well  as 
with  shrapnel. 

It  is  with  this  form  of  attack  that  the  Allies  blasted  their 
way  slowly  but  steadily  through  the  strongest  networks  of 
trenches  which  the  Germans  were  able  to  build. 

Along  a  given  section  of  the  front,  or  rather  just  behind 
it,  the  guns  were  placed  singly  or  in  pairs,  widely  scattered, 
some  close  to  the  line  and  some  well  back  from  it,  all  concealed 
as  far  as  possible  from  enemy  aviators.    There  were  also  many 


124  WAR'S  STJRANGE  DEVICES. 

dummy  batteries,  so  that  if  the  enemy  air  scout  saw  a  gun  or 
group  of  guns,  he  had  no  way  of  telling  whether  they  were 
real  or  imitation. 

In  such  an  instance  before  the  actual  advance  of  the  troops 
the  fire  of  all  these  guns  is  concentrated  along  parallel  lines 
to  the  enemy  trenches,  first,  second  and  sometimes  third.  Each 
gun  has  its  work  mapped  out  for  it  in  advance  on  a  map  cov- 
ered with  tiny  squares.  The  actual  point  may  be  well  beyond 
view  of  the  gunners.  The  shell  is  landed  in  its  appointed 
square  solely  on  mathematical  calculation.  The  commander 
of  each  gun  knows,  for  instance,  that  he  must  fire  into  this,  that 
or  the  other  square  for  so  many  minutes  or  hours,  and  exactly 
at  a  given  minute  change  his  fire  to  another  source. 

RAIN  OF  SHELLS  LIKE  STREAMS  OF  WATER. 

tin  effect  on  the  enemy  a  continuous  rain  of  shells,  com- 
parable to  streams  of  water  from  hundreds  of  hoses  is  poured 
in  a  line  right  down  the  trench.  At  the  same  time  a  parallel 
line  of  fire  is  concentrated  at  a  given  distance  back  of  the 
enemy's  first  trench  and  in  front  of  the  second,  or  in  it.  This 
means  that  the  troops  in  the  first  line  must  not  only  take  their 
bombardment  without  hope  of  retreat  or  escape,  but  that  it 
is  impossible  to  get  reinforcements  to  them  through  the  second 
curtain. 

When  it  is  calculated  that  the  first  line  has  been  destroyed 
or  demoralized,  the  troops  leap  from  their  trenches  and  advance 
strictly  according  to  schedule  over  the  ground  between  the 
opposing  trenches.  Their  arrival  at  the  enemy's  first  trench 
is  timed  to  the  second,  and  just  as  they  are  on  the  verge  of 
plunging  into  their  own  curtain  of  fire  this  latter  is  gradually 
thrown  forward,  forming  a  screen  between  the  newly  captured 
trench  and  the  enemy's  second  line.  This  means  two  curtains 
of  fire  through  which  the  enemy  would  have  to  advance  to  coun- 
ter-attack. 

Time  is  given  to  rout  out  what  remains  of  the  enemy  from 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  125 

the  first  line  dug-outs,  and  then  the  troops  advance  again.  In 
the  meantime  the  curtain  of  fire  has  preceded  them  as  before, 
moving  up  to  the  line  of  drum  fire  which  has  been  playing  on 
the  second  line  of  trenches  or  just  in  front  of  it.  If  any  of  the 
enemy  have  attempted  to  flee  before  the  attack  from  the  first 
line  they  are  caught  between  these  two  barrages  which  are 
gradually  brought  together. 

When  the  first  and  second  lines  of  fire  have  been  brought 
together  they  are  poured  with  redoubled  fury  into  the  second 
line  of  the  enemy  trenches,  and  then  moved  forward  again  just 
as  the  advancing  troops  reach  this  line. 

DEPENDING  ON  LOCAL  CONDITIONS. 

The  performance  is  made  continuous  so  far  as  possible 
under  the  conditions  peculiar  to  the  given  section  in  which  the 
attack  is  being  made.  Sometimes  it  is  possible  to  advance  over 
three,  four  or  five  trenches  in  a  single  attack.  At  others  it  is  as 
much  as  can  be  accomplished  to  capture  one,  which  must  be 
consolidated  before  further  advance  is  made.  It  depends  on 
the  strength  of  the  trenches,  the  nature  of  the  ground,  the  dis- 
tance apart  that  they  are,  and,  of  course,  the  amount  of  artil- 
lery fire  which  the  enemy  is  able  to  concentrate  in  return. 

When  a  sufficient  advance  has  been  made,  it  also  becomes 
necessary  to  suspend  operations  for  a  time  while  the  guns 
behind  the  lines  are  moved  forward  to  new  positions. 

This  is  always  the  period  of  the  counter-attack  in  force  by 
the  enemy,  who  seizes  the  opportunity  when  a  certain  propor- 
tion of  the  artillery  is  unable  to  fire  because  it  is  being  moved. 
And  it  is  during  this  period  that  the  infantry  have  to  do  their 
hardest  fighting,  which  consists,  not  in  making  the  advance 
over  no-man's  land  to  the  enemy  trench,  but  in  holding  that 
trench  afterward  when  the  bringing  up  of  their  own  artillery 
behind  them  to  more  advanced  positions  robs  them  of  some  of 
the  support  of  the  drum  fire. 

Still  another  factor  of  delay  at  this  period  is  the  time 


126  WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

required  by  the  air  scouts  to  find  the  rearranged  positions  of 
the  enemy  guns  after  the  advance,  for  these  must  be  taken 
care  of  also  before  a  new  advance  can  be  made. 

An  explanation  of  this  form  of  attack  shows  why  news 
dispatches  have  told  first  of  an  advance  of  the  British,  followed 
by  a  period  of  quiet,  during  which  an  attack  by  the  French  in 
some  other  section  of  the  line  was  in  progress.  Then  suddenly 
the  scene  of  action  switched  back  to  the  British  lines  again  while 
the  French  were  consolidating  their  new  positions  preparatory 
to  pushing  the  general  advance  a  step  farther. 

GERMAN  EQUIVOCATION. 

It  also  explains  just  what  has  happened  when  the  Ger- 
mans state  that  the  "enemy  penetrated  our  first  trenches  in  a 
small  sector,  but  his  attack  broke  down  before  our  second  line." 
When  the  next  attack  is  ready,  of  course,  the  former  second 
German  line  is  referred  to  as  the  "first,"  and  so,  on  paper,  as 
far  as  the  uninitiated  are  concerned,  the  German  publicity 
office  is  able  to  build  up  a  continuous  series  of  enemy  attacks 
which  "break  down,"  and  somehow  never,  never  "penetrate  our 
invincible  line."  Actually  an  advance  of  this  nature  is 
extremely  slow,  but  it  is  sure,  and  it  is  made  at  the  expense  of 
tons  upon  tons  of  ammunition  rather  than  at  the  expense  of 
lives,  for  ammunition  can  be  made  faster  than  soldiers. 

Even  the  old  battering  ram  of  feudal  times  with  which  the 
ancestors  of  Kaiser  William  used  to  knock  down  the  castles 
of  the  baron  robbers  has  been  approximated  by  his  warring 
tribes.  With  the  retreat  of  the  German  troops  from  Flanders 
the  Allied  forces  found  crude  battering  rams  such  as  have  been 
shown  in  the  stirring  "movies"  when  the  ancient  warriors 
stormed  the  gates  of  the  city. 

One  of  such  devices  was  in  the  form  of  an  upright  frame 
made  of  heavy  timbers.  An  immense  log  was  suspended  from 
the  cross-piece  by  a  heavy  chain.  An  iron  band  circled  one  end 
pf  the  log  which  was  used  for  battering  purposes  and  at  the 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  127 

opposite  end  were  handles,  used  by  the  operators  in  their 
nefarious  work.  The  ram  was  used  to  batter  in  the  doors  of 
houses  which  had  been  locked  or  barricaded  against  the  Ger- 
man soldiers.  In  their  most  destructive  moods,  it  is  charged 
that  they  used  these  devices  to  destroy  the  standing  walls  of 
houses  and  cottages  after  they  had  been  gutted  by  fire.  The 
Germans  would  not  permit  even  so  much  as  a  wall  to  stancj 
which  might  be  used  by  the  poor  peasant  in  rehabilitating  him- 
self and  building  a  new  home. 

NEW  METHOD  OF  WARFARE. 

The  new  method  of  warfare,  with  men  working  in  trenches 
and  dug-outs  and  millions  of  shells  breaking  over  head,  while 
missiles  rain  all  about,  necessitated  the  development  of  some 
device  to  protect  the  heads  of  the  fighters.  Therefore  the  steel 
helmet. 

It  has  been  shown  that,  due  to  trench  warfare,  about 
seventy-five  per  cent  of  the  wounded  on  the  western  front  had 
been  hit  with  shrapnel  or  pieces  of  shell  traveling  at  a  low 
velocity  and  therefore  had  torn  wounds  and  in  many  cases 
smashed  bones.  About  three  per  cent  of  the  wounds  were  in 
the  head  and  about  fifteen  per  cent  in  the  face  or  neck.  This 
led  to  the  adoption  by  the  French  of  a  steel  helmet  called 
after  its  inventor,  Adrian.  The  helmets  were  first  used  in 
May,  1915.  That  their  use  is  justified  is  shown  by  statistics. 
Among  fifty-five  cases  of  head  wounds,  forty-two  happened 
to  soldiers  without  helmets. 

Twenty-three  of  these  had  fractured  skulls,  while  the 
remaining  nineteen  had  bad  scalp  wounds.  Of  the  thirteen  who 
wore  helmets,  not  one  had  a  skull  fracture.  Five  had  slight 
wounds  only,  while  none  of  those  who  had  worn  a  helmet  died. 
Quite  a  number  of  those  who  had  not  did. 

In  the  Academy  of  Medicine  Dr.  Roussey  brought  up 
the  point  that  due  to  the  helmet  the  number  of  cases  of 
sudden  death  from  wounds  in  the  head  had  been  so  decreased 


128  WAB'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

that  the  number  of  wounded  with  head  injuries  treated  in  the 
hospitals  had  materially  increased. 

The  French  helmet  proved  such  a  success  that  Belgium, 
Serbia,  Russia  and  Roumania  equipped  their  troops  with  the 
same  model.  The  French  helmet  has  a  bursting  bomb  as  insig- 
nia on  its  front  and  is  light  blue  or  khaki  color,  depending  on 
whether  it  is  worn  by  the  metropolitan,  the  French  home  army 
or  the  French  colonial  army. 

THE  BELGIAN  HELMET. 

The  Belgian  helmet  is  khaki-colored,  with  the  Belgian  lion 
on  the  front;  the  Italian,  greenish  blue,  with  no  insignia;  the 
Serbian,  khaki-colored,  with  the  Serbian  coat  of  arms;  the 
Russian,  khaki-colored,  with  the  Russian  coat  of  arms,  and 
the  Roumanian,  blue-gray,  with  the  Roumanian  coat  of  arms. 

The  French  have  made  more  than  12,000,000  helmets, 
using  about  12,000  tons  of  steel.  In  other  words,  a  ton  of 
steel  will  make  1,000  helmets.  The  British  also  equipped  their 
troops  with  a  steel  helmet,  which  has  no  ridge  running  from 
front  to  rear,  as  has  the  Adrian,  no  decorations,  and  a  rather 
wide  brim,  which  runs  all  the  way  round,  lit  is  of  a  khaki 
color. 

The  Germans  issued  to  a  certain  number  of  their  men, 
generally  those  most  exposed  in  trench  fighting,  a  steel  helmet 
considerably  heavier  than  any  of  the  allied  helmets.  It  has  a 
much  higher  crown,  and  comes  down  more  over  the  eyes  and 
the  sides  and  back  of  the  head. 

All  these  helmets  are  supported  by  means  of  a  leather 
skull  cap  inside,  which  fitting  closely  to  the  head,  distributes 
the  weight  over  the  whole  of  the  skull,  instead  of  simply 
around  the  edge  of  it.  as  is  the  case  with  ordinary  headgear. 

Of  course,  these  helmets  will  not  protect  against  high 
velocity  projectiles.  However,  as  they  do  protect  the  wearer 
from  low  velocity  projectiles,  and  as  these  are,  because  of 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  129 

infection,  often  as  fatal  as  severe  wounds,  it  can  easily  be  seen 
how  much  good  has  been  accomplished. 

A  French  writer  in  La  Nature  shows  that  332  out  of  479 
abnormal  wounds  were  caused  by  shrapnel  and  pieces  of  shell 
having  a  low  velocity. 

In  13  out  of  15  cases  of  lung  wounds,  the  projectiles  did 
not  have  velocity  enough  to  completely  traverse  the  body  and 
come  out. 

In  71  cases  of  joint  wounds,  66  were  due  to  low  velocity 
shrapnel  and  only  5  to  high  velocity  bullets.  Practically  every 
one  of  these  wounds  could  have  been  prevented  by  breast  and 
body  pieces  and  knee  and  elbow  caps  of  armor. 

LOW  VELOCITY  MOST  EFFECTIVE. 

As  for  every  man  who  afterward  dies  from  a  wound  made 
by  a  high  velocity  bullet  there  are  about  ten  who  die  from 
wounds  made  by  the  low  velocity  shrapnel  and  shell  frag- 
ments, the  importance  is  seen  of  protection  against  these  low 
velocity  wounds  if  it  can  be  had. 

The  wearing  of  armor  means  the  lessening  of  the  mobility 
of  the  soldier.  In  the  open  field  lessening  of  mobility  means  a 
decrease  in  efficiency,  which  cannot  be  tolerated.  However,  in 
trench  warfare  the  mobility  of  the  individual  does  not  count 
for  so  much,  as  even  during  an  attack  he  does  not  have  to  go 
far,  and  generally  does  it  at  a  walk  in  the  rear  of  the  barrage 
fire  of  his  own  artillery. 

Efficiency  in  warfare,  as  indicated  by  the  keeping  of  such 
records,  has  set  the  brains  of  the  world  at  work,  and  armor  is 
used  to  a  limited  degree  for  the  protection  of  men  in  greatly 
exposed  fronts  or  open  positions. 

The  Japanese  in  modern  times  were  first  to  resort  to  the 
forerunner  of  armor.  They  used  shields  of  steel  and  in  the 
siege  of  Port  Arthur  such  shields  were  strapped  to  the  front 
of  the  body.  The  Germans  in  the  charges  have  frequently 
used  double  shields,  advancing  in  groups  of  four  behind  a  steel 

H  R— 9 


130  WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

protector  carried  by  two  men,  leaving  the  other  two  free  to 
fire  at  the  enemy  through  port  holes  in  the  armor  shields. 

None  of  the  armors  has,  however,  proved  its  resistance  to 
the  high  velocity  bullets  which  the  powerful  field  guns  rain 
against  it.  Experiments  are  being  made  continuously  along 
these  lines,  and  Guy  Otis  Brewster,  of  New  Jersey,  has  devel- 
oped a  bullet-proof  jacket  and  headgear  which  it  is  said  ap- 
proximates perfection. 

In  the  presence  of  ordinance  officers  from  the  Picatinny 
[Arsenal  he  invited  an  expert  military  marksman  to  fire  at  him 
from  a  distance  of  60  yards.  A  Springfield  rifle  was  used, 
with  regulation  ammunition.  The  steel  bullet  had  a  velocity  of 
2740  feet  a  second.  Only  one  shot  was  fired,  but  it  failed  to 
penetrate  the  armor. 

COMPOSITION  A  SECRET. 
The  composition  of  the  latter  is  a  secret,  beyond  the  fact 
that  it  consists  in  part  of  steel.  Jacket  and  headgear  weigh 
30  pounds ;  but  the  material  is  so  flexible  that  the  soldier  wear- 
ing such  an  outfit  can  kneel,  lie  down,  rise  and  run,  charge  from 
the  trenches,  use  the  bayonet,  or  throw  hand  grenades,  without 
impediment  to  his  movements. 

It  has  been  denied  that  dum-dum  bullets,  placed  under  ban 
by  all  civilized  nations,  have  been  used  by  the  Germans,  but 
there  is  no  doubt  that  explosive  bullets  have  been  used.  The 
report  of  the  Belgian  Commission,  which  investigated  the  hor- 
rors when  the  Germans  first  invaded  King  Albert's  country, 
contains  testimony  which  proves  conclusively  that  such  missiles 
were  used.  These  bullets  were,  in  effect,  small  shells  contain- 
ing an  explosive  chemical  which  was  set  off  by  contact.  Pho- 
tographs taken  of  wounds  show  the  effect  which  these  bullets 
produced. 

More  than  that,  the  Russians  charged  that  along  the  north- 
ern frontier  the  Germans  fired  glass  bullets,  although  there  is 
nothing  to  sustain  the  belief  that  such  missiles  were  generally 


WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES.  131 

used.  The  dum-dum  bullet  is  a  soft-nosed  missile  which,  when 
it  strikes  a  bone,  flattens  out  and  splatters,  creating  a  jagged 
wound  which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  treat  or  heal.  The  Ger- 
mans, in  ordinary,  use  a  steel  jacketed  bullet  which  possesses 
high  penetrative  powers,  while  the  French  at  the  beginning  of 
the  war  were  using  the  ordinary  lead  bullet. 

AN  AMERICAN  BULLET. 

Among  the  recent  developments  is  a  bullet  which  had  its 
origin  in  one  of  the  United  States  arsenals  for  manufacturing 
ammunition.  This  is  a  steel  bullet  covered  with  lead.  The 
effect  of  such  a  combination  on  the  penetrating  quality  of  the 
bullet  may  be  readily  understood  by  anyone  who  has  ever  tried 
the  experiment  of  driving  an  ordinary  needle  into  a  board 
through  a  cork.  If  the  cork  is  placed  on  the  board  and  the 
needle  pressed  down  through  the  cork  until  it  touches  the  board, 
a  powerful  blow  from  a  hammer  will  force  the  needle  into  the 
board  without  breaking.  In  the  application  of  this  principle 
to  the  manufacture  of  the  bullet,  experiments  proved  that  the 
soft  lead  acted  as  a  guide  or  sustainer  which  permitted  the  inner 
steel  to  penetrate  without  deviation. 

And  just  as  these  oddities  of  warfare  have  been  created 
to  meet  arising  situations,  others  have  been  created  to  care  for 
the  sick  and  injured — those  who  have  fallen  victims  of  the 
agencies  of  destruction.     Who  ever  heard  of  a  sand  sled? 

Such  sleds  have  been  used  effectively  on  the  Eastern  fronts 
to  carry  wounded  soldiers  to  the  hospitals.  They  are  long, 
staunchly  constructed  sleds  similar  to  those  used  on  the  farms 
in  America  for  hauling  plows,  cultivators  and  other  agricul- 
tural implements  across  the  fields  which  have  been  furrowed. 

The  sleds  have  broad  runners  which  do  not  sink  into  the 
sands  and  can  be  drawn  easily.  In  winter  these  same  sleds 
have  served  to  haul  the  wounded  and  sick  over  miles  of  snow 
and  ice  on  the  Russian  frontier. 

Then,  though  it  is  not  a  weapon  of  offense,  there  is  the 


132  WAR'S  STRANGE  DEVICES. 

tractor  plow  which  works  at  night.  It  is  a  war  device  to  the 
extent  that  as  England's  need  for  food  has  been  great  and  con- 
stant the  tractor  plow  has  been  used  to  solve  the  problem  of 
working  the  ground.  On  the  estate  of  Sir  Arthur  Lee,  the 
director-general  of  food  production  in  England,  great  agricul- 
tural motors  equipped  with  acetylene  searchlights  were  kept 
at  work  in  the  fields  day  and  night. 

Dogs  too  have  been  ushered  into  the  arena.  No  longer 
may  the  old  English  expression,  "Let  Slip  the  Dogs  of  War," 
be  regarded  as  a  mere  figure  of  speech.  The  war  dogs,  and  par- 
ticularly the  animals  used  by  the  Red  Cross  on  the  battlefields, 
have  assumed  a  regular  status  in  the  armies  of  the  world.  In 
the  European  armies  are  thousands  of  dogs  which  have  been 
trained  to  act  as  messengers  or  spies,  or  to  seek  out  on  the  bat- 
tlefields the  wounded.  The  Germans  use  a  canine  commonly 
known  as  "Boxers."  These  animals  are  a  cross  between  the 
German  mastiff  and  the  English  bulldog,  and  on  the  fields  of 
Europe  they  have  proved  to  be  "kings"  among  the  Red  Cross 
dogs.  The  animals  are  first  taught  to  distinguish  between  the 
uniforms  of  the  soldiers  of  their  own  country  and  those  of  the 
enemy.  Then  they  learn  that  the  principal  business  in  life  for 
them  is  to  find  and  aid  wounded  soldiers. 

The  animals  are  trained  to  search  without  barking  and  to 
return  to  headquarters  and  urge  their  trainers  to  follow  them 
with  stretcher  bearers.  Sometimes  the  dogs  bring  back  such 
an  article  as  a  cap,  tobacco  pouch  or  handkerchief.  The  dogs 
of  the  Red  Cross  carry  on  their  collars  a  pouch  containing  a 
first  aid  kit,  by  means  of  which  a  wounded  soldier  may  staunch 
the  flow  of  blood  or  help  himself  until  assistance  arrives. 

It  is  reported  that  one  of  these  dogs  rescued  fifty  men  on 
the  Somme  battlefield  in  France.  The  animal  known  as  Filax 
of  Lewanno,  is  a  typical  German  sheepdog.  Such  dogs  weigh 
from  50  to  65  pounds  and  are  very  powerful,  but  the  Irish  ter- 
riers and  Airedales  have  also  been  trained  to  do  effective  work, 
as  have  the  Great  Danes  and  St.  Bernards. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

WONDEEFUL  WAE  WEAPONS. 

The  Terrible  Eapid-fire  Gun — Armored  Automobiles  and  Automobile 
Artillery — Howitzers — Mounted  Forts — Armored  Trains— Observa- 
tion Towers— Wireless  Apparatus — The  Army  Pantry. 

IT  is  a  long  step  from  the  old,  smooth  bore,  flintlock  rifle  of 
the  Revolutionary  days  to  the  modern  magazine  gun,  with 
its  long-pointed  cartridges ;  and  it  is  almost  as  great  a  step 
from  the  crude  iron  cannons  and  smooth  bore  mortars  of  the 
Civil  War,  with  their  canister  and  grape  shot,  down  to  the 
huge,  42  centimeter  guns  which  have  boomed  their  way  through 
France  and  Belgium. 

The  patriotic  citizen  who  is  unfitted  for  military  service 
no  longer  sits  at  home  and  aids  the  armed  forces  of  his  country 
by  melting  pewter  spoons  into  bullets,  or  cutting  patches  of 
cloth  to  serve  as  wads  to  pack  down  into  the  muzzle  of  guns. 
The  powder  horn  and  the  bullet  mould  are  devices  of  the  past. 
The  whole  world  working  in  the  old-fashioned  way  could  not 
have  in  the  course  of  the  "war-of-nations"  made  sufficient  bul- 
lets to  supply  the  forces  for  a  single  week. 

Those  who  must  sacrifice  in  the  stress  of  war  now  turn 
their  silverware  and  precious  metals  into  nuggets  that  may  be 
sold  to  produce  revenue,  so  that  the  armed  forces  may  pur- 
chase the  machine-made  cartridges  and  weapons  required  to 
fight  the  enemy. 

Modern  warfare  has  developed  the  climax  in  armament 
and  the  world  has  learned  more  within  the  last  few  years  about 
the  devilish  instruments  of  destruction  which  human  ingenuity 
has  devised  than  was  known  in  all  the  ages  before.  Since  Ger- 
many and  Austria  were  the  first  into  action — actually  precipi- 
tated the  great  conflict — and  as  by  their  years  of  preparation 
they  were  ready  for  the  emergency,  it  best  serves  the  purposes 

of  those  who  seek  enlightenment  on  the  subject  of  armaments 

133 


134  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

and  weapons  to  deal  with  the  equipment  of  the  Teuton  forces, 
Other  nations — England,  France  and  the  United  States 
in  particular — have,  in  some  directions,  surpassed  the  Germans 
in  developing  efficient  weapons,  but  in  the  main,  when  Germany 
plunged  into  the  war,  she  had  all  around  what  was  conceded  to 
be  the  best  equipment  that  science  and  mechanics  could  supply. 

INFANTRY  AND  FIELD  ARTILLERY. 

While  stories  told  of  the  awful  havoc  wrought  by  the  Ger- 
man siege  guns  in  reducing  the  forts  and  fortifications  in 
France  and  Belgium  are  true,  it  is  also  true  that  the  bulwark 
of  the  military  organization  is  the  infantry  and  field  artillery. 
The  big  guns  may  level  the  forts  and  reduce  them  to  powder, 
driving  off  the  opposing  forces,  but  the  infantry  must  advance 
and  the  small  arms  and  rapid-fire  guns  must  keep  the  oppos- 
ing forces  from  resuming  the  position  which  they  had  aban- 
doned. 

The  difficulty  of  handling  the  big  guns  has  always  been  a 
problem,  except  in  fortifications  and  at  fixed  points  of  defense, 
and  it  has  only  been  within  a  few  years  that  a  solution  of  the 
trouble  has  been  found.  The  solution  lay  in  the  use  of  tractors, 
or  the  tractor  principle,  which  every  person  familiar  with  farm- 
ing and  the  "traction  engine"  can  recognize. 

Germany  and  Austria,  as  in  many  other  matters,  solved 
the  problem  by  building  mortars  for  field  service  which  out- 
classed the  heaviest  artillery  of  the  old  type,  and  mounting  them 
on  tractors.  It  would  require  a  team  of  probably  forty  horses 
to  pull  one  of  the  German  42-centimeter  guns  over  the  rough 
ground,  and  then  a  relay  would  be  required  every  few  hours. 
An  immense  number  of  horses  would  be  required  and  the  trans- 
portation would  be  slow,  and  not  certain  at  best. 

Early  in  the  war  Austria  sent  to  the  front  a  battery  of 
30-centimeter  howitzers,  and  from  the  famous  Erupp  gun 
works  there  were  21  and  28-centimeter  howitzers.  Later  came 
the  42-centimeter  guns,  which  are  classed  as  automobile  field 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  135 

artillery.     These  are  the  weapons  which  leveled  the  forts  at 
Liege  and  were  used  to  bombard  Fort  Maubeuge. 

The  immense  howitzers,  with  their  caterpillar  wheels,  are 
taken  apart  and  transported  to  the  scene  of  action  in  sections, 
or  units.  An  automobile  tractor  carries  the  artillery  crew  and 
tools  and  furnishes  the  motive  power.  The  second  car  carries 
the  platform  and  turntable  on  which  the  gun  is  mounted,  and 
the  third  hauls  the  barrel,  or  gun  proper. 

THE  MOVING  OF  HEAVY  WEAPONS. 

The  weapons  can  be  moved  anywhere,  though  they  weigh 
as  much  as  forty  tons  in  some  cases.  Sometimes  it  is  necessary 
to  build  special  roads  where  fields  must  be  crossed,  but  on  the 
highways  there  is  little  trouble.  The  big  howitzers  are  built  on 
the  principle  of  the  large  caliber  guns  used  on  battleships — - 
that  is,  there  is  a  system  of  recoil  springs  and  air  cushions  to 
take  up  the  shock  when  the  gun  is  fired,  so  that  the  terrific 
energy,  when  the  charge  is  exploded,  shall  not  be  borne  by  the 
breech  of  the  gun.  The  howitzers  can  be  turned  in  any  direc- 
tion, and  the  gearing  attached  to  the  mounting  is  such  that  the 
barrels  can  be  pitched  at  any  angle. 

Such  guns  fire  an  explosive  shell  weighing  from  500  to 
1000  pounds,  and  because  of  their  form  of  construction — they 
have  shorter  barrels  than  the  naval  guns — which  reduces  the 
surface  of  the  barrel  subject  to  erosion,  they  are  longer  lived 
than  the  long  guns.  The  endurance  of  the  guns  is  a  factor 
because  it  is  difficult  to  get  repairs  for  such  great  weapons  on 
the  field  of  battle. 

At  the  outbreak  the  contending  forces  are  said  to  have  had 
4,000  guns  in  the  field  artillery.  Among  the  devices  of  inter- 
est identified  with  the  artillery  is  the  armored  automobile,  which 
has  been  described  as  the  "cavalry"  of  motor  driven  artillery. 
The  advent  of  the  armored  automobile  in  the  war  changed  many 
features  of  campaigning  and  helped  to  revolutionize  military 


136  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

methods.    The  armored  automobile  is  an  ordinary  chassis  with 
a  body  made  of  chilled  steel. 

Many  types  have  been  devised,  including  turreted  auto- 
mobile, mounting  one  or  two  rapid  fire  guns  which  can  be 
turned  in  any  direction.  The  armored  motors  have  high- 
powered  engines,  and  the  chassis  chosen  for  these  new  instru- 
ments of  war  are  of  the  heaviest  types.  Some  have  been  con- 
structed especially  for  the  purpose.  One  of  these,  used  by  the 
Germans,  had  a  "barbette"  top,  which  looked  like  the  shell  of 
a  tortoise,  fitted  down  over  the  chassis.  Guns  protruded  from 
holes  in  the  front,  back  and  sides. 

VALUE  OF  ARMORED  CARS. 

The  armored  cars  have  proved  extremely  valuable  for 
scouting  purposes.  They  can  sneak  through  and  complete 
scouting  where  mounted  men  would  be  detected,  and  besides, 
are  better  able  to  protect  themselves  against  attack.  The  cars 
also  possess  the  ability  to  speed  away  out  of  range  of  enemy 
detachments. 

The  army  officer,  too,  has  taken  to  the  armored  automobile, 
and  put  aside  his  horse.  You  cannot  kill  an  automobile;  and 
the  armor  laughs  at  the  bullets  from  small  caliber  guns.  The 
officers  can,  with  the  high-speed  armored  cars,  travel  from  one 
end  of  a  line  to  the  other  and  in  a  few  hours  make  surveys  and 
complete  observations  which  would  take  days  were  horses  used. 

Very  few  of  the  light-armored  cars  used  by  the  officers  are 
armed,  the  attache  or  aide  of  the  officer  carrying  a  rifle.  Some 
of  the  armored  cars  used  for  scouting  and  by  the  officers  have, 
in  the  case  of  Germany,  been  provided  with  sharp  knives  at- 
tached to  the  front  of  the  machine.  These  are  steel  blades 
vertically  attached  to  the  frame  and  hood,  and  are  designed  to 
cut  wires  which  the  enemy  may  have  stretched  across  highways 
or  passages  to  hinder  progress. 

The  armored  covering  on  some  of  these  cars  is  little  more 
than  a  steel  box,  with  "port"  holes  all  around.     There  is  no 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  137 

hood,  «teme  or  cupola,  and  the  men  are  supposed  to  protect 
themselves  by  keeping  their  heads  below  the  sides  of  the  box. 
Besides  the  driver,  some  of  the  cars  carry  two  or  three  men, 
who  are  further  protected  against  the  bullets  of  the  enemy  and 
the  chance  missile  from  the  sharpshooter  by  steel  headpieces  or 
helmets. 

The  Belgians  have  a  type  of  car  of  heavy  design,  equipped 
with  huge  headlights,  as  well  as  a  searchlight  to  operate  at 
night.  The  car  has  a  rapid  fire  gun  mounted  in  a  cupola- 
formed  revolving  turret.  In  the  matter  of  automobiles  in  the 
army,  Italy  outranked  Germany  at  the  beginning  of  the  war. 
While  Germany  had  Mercedes  and  Opel  trucks,  mounting  five 
to  seven  rapid  fire  guns,  which,  with  their  steel  armor  and  solid 
tire  disc  wheels,  were  actually  miniature  forts,  the  Italians  had 
more  formidable  mounted  creations  of  the  same  sort. 

ITALY'S  SINGULAR  POSITION. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  Italy's  position  in  regard  to  motors  is 
unique  among  the  other  countries  in  the  war.  Not  only  are  the 
transportation  conditions  different,  but  the  motorcar  industry 
in  the  country  is  on  a  different  basis.  It  is  said  to  have  been  the 
only  one  of  the  countries  which  was  able  to  meet  the  demand 
put  upon  it  for  motors  without  going  into  some  other  land  to 
augment  its  supply.  Italy  did  not  buy  a  single  American 
motor  vehicle  for  war  purposes.  There  are  cars  of  foreign 
makes  in  the  army  and  with  the  Red  Cross,  but  these  vehicles 
were  in  the  country — purchased  for  private  use — when  the  war 
broke  out  and  were  requisitioned. 

The  big  guns  of  the  army  are  handled  by  motor  tractors, 
95  per  cent  of  the  army  mail  service  is  motorcar  service  and  95 
per  cent  of  the  drinking  water  for  the  fighting  forces  is  deliv- 
ered by  motortruck.  Profiting  by  the  lessons  of  the  other 
countries  called  to  war,  Italy  had  time  in  which  to  prepare  for 
emergencies,  and  when  the  order  for  mobilizing  forces  was 
issued  the  motorcar  factories  were  speeded  up  and  the  workers 


138  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

were  permitted  to  stay  on  the  job,  instead  of  being  called  out  to 
fill  up  the  ranks  of  the  army. 

Compared  with  the  resources  of  America,  the  Italian  motor 
industry  is  not  large ;  but  the  product  is  uniform  and  practically 
all  of  the  factories  are  conveniently  located  for  distributing  the 
machines  to  the  army  on  the  frontier  and  readily  providing 
repairs  and  parts.  The  physical  conditions  of  the  country 
necessitated  the  use  of  certain  types  of  trucks  and  motors  and 
the  dropping  of  some  of  the  practices  of  other  countries  in 
motor  usage. 

The  rugged,  irregular  country,  with  its  narrow  roads, 
makes  impracticable  the  use  of  trucks  larger  than  three  and 
one-half  tons,  and  "trailers,"  largely  employed  by  the  French, 
German  and  Belgian  armies,  were  found  not  satisfactory. 
What  is  described  as  the  Isotta  Fraschini  heavy  model  armored 
artillery  car  of  Italy  is  considered  one  of  the  most  effective  of 
the  "motor  forts"  or  "land  cruisers"  developed  during  the  war. 

THE  WHEELED  FORT. 

The  wheeled  fort  has  a  battery  of  four  rapid  fire  guns  and 
a  revolving  turret.  Besides  being  full  armored  and  turreted, 
the  car  has  steel  wheels  of  the  disc  type,  and  is  as  formidable  in 
appearance  as  it  has  proven  in  practice.  France  has  a  type  of 
the  completely  enclosed  armored  motorcar  which  affords  its 
crew  unobstructed  view  on  all  sides  through  lattice  panels. 
Even  the  windshield  is  made  on  this  plan.  This  car  also  has  a 
revolving  turret  and  carries  a  5-centimeter  rapid  foe  gun  and 
possesses  high  speed. 

All  of  the  powers  have  armored  automobiles,  and  in  Ger- 
many, England  and  France  the  exigencies  of  conflict  impelled 
the  Governments  to  practically  commandeer  all  of  the  auto- 
mobiles in  the  countries  for  war  purposes.  Many  of  these  cars 
were  turned  into  armored  cars  of  the  lighter  type,  and  the  num- 
ber of  such  automobiles  in  use  runs  far  into  the  thousands.    The 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  139 

United  States  has  not  made  much  fuss  about  it,  but  has  had 
armored  cars  in  the  regular  army  for  several  years. 

The  experience  gained  in  the  campaign  in  Europe  indi- 
cates that  the  military  authorities  believe  the  high-powered, 
speedy  cars,  clad  with  armor  of  medium  weight  and  mounting 
one  or  two  machine  guns,  are  the  most  valuable  of  all  the 
"sheathed"  cars.  They  can  appear «  suddenly,  maintain  a 
withering  fire  for  a  short  period  and  then  disappear  suddenly. 

As  an  instance  of  what  the  armored  car  accomplishes,  it  is 
recited  that  when  the  German  troops  sought  to  invade  the  Bel- 
gian town  of  Alost  a  detachment  was  sent  through  the  streets 
in  armored  cars.  The  houses  were  barricaded  and  the  Germans 
feared  snipers.  There  were  no  snipers  when  the  motorcars 
returned.  More  than  a  thousand  Belgians  were  mowed  down 
in  the  streets  by  the  rapid  fire  guns  of  the  armored  cars. 

IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  AUTOMOBILE. 

Evidence  of  how  greatly  the  automobile  is  appreciated  in 
its  relation  to  the  modern  army  service  is  found  in  the  fact  that 
when  America  entered  the  war  and  began  the  mobilization  of 
its  forces  and  resources,  the  Quartermaster  at  Chicago  was 
ordered  to  obtain  bids  for  the  delivery  of  35,000  motortrucks  of 
one  and  one-half  tons  capacity  and  35,000  trucks  of  three  tons 
capacity.  Bids  were  also  asked  on  1000  five-passenger  auto- 
mobiles, 1000  runabouts,  1000  automobiles,  in  price  'ranging 
from  $1500  to  $2000,  several  hundred  motortrucks  of  half, 
three-quarter  and  one  ton  capacity  and  5000  motorcycles,  and 
the  same  number  of  motorcycles  with  auxiliary  passenger 
capacity,  or  side  cars. 

The  motortruck,  too,  in  modern  warfare  is  a  shoeshop. 
The  care  of  the  feet  is  an  important  matter  in  the  army,  and 
the  men,  besides  being  provided  with  good  footwear,  must  have 
that  footwear  kept  in  serviceable  and  comfortable  condition. 
It  is  some  job  to  keep  the  shoes  of  half  a  million  or  more  men 
in  repair,  and  the  United  States  Quartermaster  Department, 


140  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

in  connection  with  their  mobilization,  included  in  its  equipment 
portable  motor-power  machines  to  nail  on  half  soles  for  troops 
in  garrison  and  campaign.  Such  a  machine  will  nail  on  a  pair 
of  soles  in  five  minutes.  It  weighs  but  27  pounds  and  can  be 
transported  with  the  troops  on  a  motorcar,  and  may  be  used 
anywhere  to  keep  the  shoes  in  serviceable  shape  until  the  troops 
can  reach  permanent  camps,  where  new  footwear  can  be 
provided. 

FRANCE'S  TRANSPORTATION  RESOURCES. 

At  the  outset  of  the  war  France  is  said  to  have  had  100,000 
passenger  cars,  25,000  motorbuses,  taxicabs  and  motorcycles 
and  10,000  motortrucks  available  for  military  use,  and  was  able 
to  give  the  various  departments  of  her  military  organization 
excellent  transportation  service.  Besides  this,  she  had  squads 
of  automobile  aeroplane  cannon,  and  about  84  12-centimeter 
and  15  5-centimeter  Rimailho  howitzers  of  the  armored  artillery 
type.  Russia  is  said  to  have  been  weak  in  automobile  equip- 
ment, having  less  than  a  thousand  trucks  in  the  Empire  avail- 
able for  military  use;  but  this  number  was  rapidly  increased, 
upward  of  half  a  thousand  having  been  purchased  within  a  short 
time, 

Austria  and  Germany  together  are  said  to  have  had  some- 
thing like  1500  trucks  and  about  20,000  passenger  cars  avail- 
able for  army  use.  At  the  start  Germany  alone  had  250 
armored  automobiles,  several  score  of  searchlight  automobiles, 
or  night  scout  cars,  probably  8000  motorcycles  and  more  than 
500  motor-driven  field  guns,  besides  the  big  tractors  used  to 
draw  the  heavy  howitzers.  Aside  from  this,  practically  all  the 
motor  vehicles  in  the  country  were  commandeered,  numbering 
upward  of  75,000. 

While  they  are  stationary  devices,  the  forts  which  were 
stormed  by  the  Germans  at  Liege  and  Antwerp  are  properly 
part  of  the  military  equipment  used  in  the  war.  These  forts, 
known  as  turret  forts,  are  described  on  preliminary  inspection 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  141 

as  looking  like  a  row  of  huge  tortoise  or  turtle  shells  rising  a 
few  feet  above  the  ground.  The  shell  is,  however,  a  shell  of 
chilled  steel.  Through  it  the  guns  protrude  and  are  operated 
very  much  like  the  guns  on  a  battleship,  the  turret  revolving. 
Under  the  dome  are  vaults  and  the  compartments  of  concrete, 
containing  the  mechanism  for  moving  the  turrets,  operating 
the  guns,  lifting  the  big  shells  and  handling  the  ammunition 
generally. 

The  fortifications,  which  at  Antwerp  included  nine  in- 
trenched sections,  were  regarded  as  almost  impregnable;  but 
when  they  were  built  there  were  no  such  field  guns  as  the 
famous  42 -centimeter  guns  which  the  Germans  brought  to  the 
atack.  The  forts  themselves  had  no  guns  larger  than  a  7-inch 
caliber. 

FRANCE'S  ARMORED  FIGHTING  MACHINES. 

In  the  matter  of  movable  guns,  the  French  and  Germans 
both  had  them  mounted  on  armored  trains.  One  such  train 
used  by  the  French  included  armored  locomotive,  flat  cars  on 
which  were  mounted  the  guns  in  ' 'barbettes,"  or  steel  turrets, 
and  completely  protected  armored  cars,  used  to  transport 
troops  or  detachments  of  men. 

A  feature  of  the  train  was  the  observation  tower.  It  was 
mounted  upon  what  would  ordinarily  be  the  cab  of  the  locomo- 
tive. Such  towers  have  in  one  form  or  another  become  very 
common  in  the  war.  One  type  resembles  the  motortruck  ladder 
and  platform  devices  used  by  the  man  who  repairs  electric  lights 
and  wires  in  our  city  streets.  Another  is  patterned  after  the 
hook  and  ladder  truck  of  the  fire  department.  The  tower,  or 
ladder,  is  raised  after  the  fashion  of  the  ladders  in  fighting  a 
fire.  A  couple  of  soldiers  turn  a  crank,  and  the  ladders  are 
raised  to  a  perpendicular  position  and  extended  high  into  the 
air  on  the  sliding  or  telescope  principle. 

The  German  and  Austrian  engineers  also  utilise  observa- 
tion ladders  of  a  less  complicated  mechanical  nature.    In  use, 


142  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

and  with  a  soldier  perched  on  top  of  them,  they  remind  one  of 
the  toy  devices  with  which  we  played  as  children,  using  the 
slotted  acrobats  to  do  wonderful  things  atop  the  "ladders." 
The  ladders  are  carried  in  short  sections,  which  may  be  fastened 
together  in  a  variety  of  ways,  but  a  good  idea  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  ladders  are  used  may  be  obtained  if  you  can  imagine 
a  letter  Y"  made  of  ladders  and  turned  upside  down,  with  a 
soldier  standing  on  top  of  it. 

THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  OBSERVATIONS. 

And  making  observations  is  a  highly  important  matter  in 
modern  warfare;  more  important  than  it  was  in  the  old  days. 
The  long-range  guns  are  aimed  and  their  fire  directed  by  obser- 
vation and  calculation.  The  gunner  cannot  see  the  target  he 
is  required  to  hit.  His  job  is  a  mechanical  one — perhaps  it 
would  be  better  to  say  scientific — for  lie  must  read  mathematical 
calculations  and  interpret  them  into  accurate  gun  action.  The 
guns  may  be  on  one  side  of  a  hill  and  the  enemy  on  the  other, 
and  they  may  be  miles  apart,  yet  the  gunner  must  be  able  to 
get  the  range.  His  efforts  are  directed  by  observers  in  aero- 
planes or  balloons,  and  the  range  is  established  by  calculations, 
so  that  the  gunner  must  be  proficient  in  geometry,  trigo- 
nometry and  mathematics  generally. 

Not  all  the  great  guns  in  the  war  when  it  started  were 
owned  by  the  Germans,  for  England  had  100-ton  Armstrong 
pieces  which  were  capable  of  hurling  a  2,200-pound  projectile; 
but  it  was  the  modification  of  the  design  of  the  large  caliber 
guns  and  the  method  of  mounting  them,  which  permitted  them 
to  be  drawn  wherever  needed,  that  gave  Germany  such  an 
advantage. 

Most  of  the  big  guns  are  in  the  navy — on  the  huge  dread- 
noughts and  batleships — and  therefore  the  fortifications  at 
Helgoland,  which  are  designed  to  resist  the  bombardment  of 
the  heaviest  naval  guns,  must  be  regarded  as  equipment.  Hel- 
goland is  the  protecting  fort  of  Germany's  most  vulnerable 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  143 

point.  It  is  the  Gibraltar  of  Germany,  and  protects  the 
entrance  to  the  Kiel  Canal  from  the  North  Sea.  If  the  British 
could  get  past  the  fortifications  to  the  Kiel  Canal,  it  could 
establish  a  close-in  blockade  which  would  render  Germany  help- 
less in  a  short  time. 

Helgoland  is  an  island  fortress  in  the  North  Sea,  in  the 
center  of  which  is  a  mortar  battery  mounting  11-inch  and 
16-inch  guns,  capable  of  puncturing  the  decks  of  the  battleship 
which  comes  within  range ;  and  these  batteries  have  a  range  of 
from  six  to  eight  miles.  The  batteries  are  ranged  in  tiers,  one 
above  the  other,  to  a  height  of  almost  180  feet  above  the  sea 
level,  the  heavy  guns  and  pieces  being  placed  below  and  the 
lighter  ordnance  in  the  upper  tiers.  The  guns  range  from 
17.7-inch  caliber  down  to  8.2-inch.  Germany  calls  Helgoland 
the  "fortress  impregnable,"  and  the  developments  of  the  war 
seem  to  indicate  that  the  description  fits. 

SMALL  GUNS  OF  VARIED  INTERESTS. 

In  the  smaller  guns  used  in  warfare  there  are  many  varie- 
ties of  interest.  The  United  States  prior  to  and  with  their 
entrance  into  war,  particularly  during  the  period  of  the  trouble 
along  the  Mexican  border,  experimented  with  almost  every 
known  make  of  rapid  fire  machine  and  field  gun,  and  there 
was  for  a  time  much  criticism  because  the  government  did  not 
adopt  for  army  use  the  Lewis  gun,  which  was  adopted  by  some 
of  the  foreign  countries. 

The  German  army  rifle  carried  by  all  the  infantry  is  of  the 
Mauser  type,  first  introduced  in  1888  and  gradually  improved 
until  1898.  The  weapon,  because  of  the  adoption  of  the  im- 
proved model  in  1898,  has  come  to  be  known  as  the  "ninety- 
eight  gun."  It  is  a  quick-firing  weapon,  from  which  20  to  30 
shots  a  minute  may  be  projected  by  the  soldier.  The  gun  is 
universally  used  and  has  a  caliber  of  7.9  millimeters,  which  pro- 
vides for  the  use  of  the  smallest  bullet  which  will  work  suffi- 
cient injury  on  the  enemy  to  make  its  use  profitable. 


144  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

Experienee  in  the  Russian-Japanese  war  proved  to  the 
military  authorities  that  the  use  of  a  smaller  caliber  was  not 
advisable.  It  was  found  that  the  smaller  bullet  could,  and  in 
many  cases  did,  pass  through  a  man's  body  without  actually 
rendering  him  useless,  and  that  in  a  large  percentage  of  cases — 
more  than  one-third — the  wounded  were  back  with  their  troops 
within  a  few  months. 

In  the  United  States  all  of  the  forces  are  now  provided 
with  standard  arms  or  weapons.  The  army,  the  Marine  Corps 
and  the  organized  militia  of  the  States,  absorbed  into  the  body 
proper  of  national  troops,  have  the  same  firearms — the  same 
service  rifles,  the  same  machine  guns  and  field  guns  and  the 
same  automatic  pistols.  One  kind  of  cartridge — containing  a 
cylindro-conical  bullet  of  copper-nickel,  with  a  lead  core — 
serves  for  all  rifles  and  for  the  machine  guns  as  well. 

OLD  FLINTLOCK  IN  WAR. 

Many  people,  perhaps,  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  the 
Mexican  war  was  fought  mainly  with  the  antiquated  flintlock 
muskets.  When  the  trigger  was  pulled  the  flint  came  down 
hard  upon  a  piece  of  steel,  and  the  resulting  spark  was  thrown 
into  the  "pan,"  igniting  a  pinch  of  powder.  The  fire  ran  into 
the  powder  charge  and  the  gun  went  off.  Round  balls  were 
used,  and  the  loading  was  done  with  the  help  of  a  ramrod. 

There  were  already  percussion  rifles  in  those  days,  but 
General  Winfield  Scott,  who  bossed  the  Mexican  war,  declared 
that  he  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  those  new-fangled 
weapons.  The  old  smooth-bore  flintlock  was  good  enough  for 
him.  In  truth,  the  percussion  gun  of  that  period  was  not  as 
reliable  as  might  have  been  wished.  The  cap  was  liable  to  get 
wet  and  to  fail  to  go  off,  whereas  a  good  flint  could  be  counted 
upon  to  yield  a  spark  every  time. 

It  was  not  until  1858  that  the  percussion  rifle,  still  a  muz- 
zle-loader, was  generally  used  by  the  United  States  army.  The 
Springfield,  which  was  the  first  breech-loader  (one  cartridge 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'q. 
THE  STARS  AND  STRIPES  IN  FLOWERS. 
Miss  Columbia  standing  beside  a  four  by  six  feet  American  flag  containing  1300  red  and   white 
carnations  for  the  stripes  and  900  cornflowers  for  the  blue  field. 


Puoto  American  Press  Ass'n. 
HEARING  THE  NEWS. 

A  British  soldier  reading  the  latest  news  to  the  inhabitants  of  a  village  in  France  just  evacuated 

by  the  Germans. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
FOOD  PREPAREDNESS  AT  LONG  ISLAND  FARM  SCHOOL. 
Girls  learn  how  to  farm  at  the  New  York  State  Agricultural  School.    This  photo  shows  a  girl 
working  tractor  and  bottom,  gang  plow  at  School  Farm. 


©Underwood  «fe  Underwood. 
ENGLAND  PLOWS  BY  NIGHT. 
Scene  on  a  large  farm  near  Wendover,  where  men  and  especially  women  worked  day  and 
nigfct  preparing  the  land  for  crops.  The  motor  tractor  and  acetylene  gas  generator  enable  the 
farmer  to  run  day  and  night  shifts  so  that  the  work  goes  along  in  the  very  darkest  of  nights. 
Every  foot  of  land  in  England,  no  matter  how  historic,  sacred  or  valuable,  is  utilized  for  the 
production  of  food  to  help  toward  victory. 


ft  o 

ft  © 

w  § 

CO  £ 

£  o 

g  S 


C 


©Underwood  &  Underwood. 
ARMY  OF  ENGLISH  WOMEN  IN  THE  MAKING. 
Members  of  the  Women's  Volunteer  Reserve  marching  through  London.    The  object  of  the 
Corps  is  to  train   a  body  of  women  in  first-aid,  cooking,  signalling,  riding,,  marksmanship,  etc. 


)Auiericau  Tress  Ass'n. 
FEMALE  CAVALRY  DRILLING  IN  CITY  STREETS. 
The  American  Women's  League  for  Self-Defense,  of  New  York,  has  organized  a  cavalry  troop. 


©  o  ej 

£3  ~  © 

■u  *»  OQ 

+a  U  *■« 

«8  «  ® 

-a  £  ^ 

03  c3  to 

en  ©  © 

*"  O  £~ 

■o  a  -° 

a  s  i 

o  ce  g 

a#  £• 

►>.  DO  © 

B  iJ  o 


03    S3 
©    B 

CD 

?3  d 

a 


<y     t-c 


3     03    9  ^ 


.9  a 
n  o3 

03  S 


O  .5 

♦^  i-H          . 

•>  a  o3 

£  a  o 

5  e3  A 


Sol-og 

©  «  3  «H  ^ 

9.2  O  £cc(3 
S  rt       S3  ^  o3 

P<  ©       ©  Vh  .« 

©    SrQ    S   °   ® 

§5®oUa'Q 

03        S-tJ2— i  © 

d  ©  +j  — '  ^. 
O  At*  ©  o3  j 


w  £ 


eJ      43 


O  U  5  c3  ©3 
c  aeogs^a, 


O  ©  ®  ©  e3  - 
o3  ~  ©  ^  ©J? 

2  t-    ©  ©-a 
©s  ®  ©  © 

52  ?  C  ~i  ii 


WHEN  ON  AN  INSPECTION  TOUR  IN  FRANCE. 

In  this  picture  we  see  General  Kitchener  (at  right,  saluting).    On  extreme  left  is  M.  Milleraud,  the 
French  War  Minister,  and  at  left  of  the  doorway  is  General  Joffre. 


kj 

**" 

....  ^             , , 

1 

::::::::.:.■ 

i 

1 

ft 

r     ^H 

y 

-   M 

^Wk 

il«. 

">' 

"""'  ^j  Jj 

^-^j^ 

i 

V.            -1  > 

1 

iiHiiiiniiiHlBB 

*  -rS 

^m. 

1?   ^ 

fflr 

ftf 

1*  '■ 

^1 

.3  * 

L. 

i,:'*^'.                                '    --.'...- 

^^J 

"« 

|B9/^P 

vgBfi  jH|     ~*  .  ~*5 

* 

.■ 

Photo  Press  Illustrating  Co. 
BELGIAN  REFUGEES  AT  THE  ALEXANDRIA  PALACE. 
Petrus  Verhceven,  with  his  wife  and  nine  children,  who  lost  everything  in  the  hurning  of 
Louvain.    The  members  of  the  family  are  seen  wearing  their  destination  labels. 


©American  Press  Ass'n 
SUPPLIES  FOR  THE  ARMY. 
This  photograph  shows  a  general  view  of  a  wharf  on  which  may  be  seen  necessities  of  various  kinds 

that  are  required  for  the  conduct  of  war. 


©International  Film  Service. 
GUARDING  INTERNED  GERMAN  STEAMERS. 
Photograph  of  one  of  the  machine  guns  on  hoard  an  Uncle  Sam  destroyer,  which  is  keeping  watch 

on  the  vessels  at  the  piers  in  Hohoken,  N.  J- 


Photo  International  Film  Service. 
STRONG  MEN  REQUIRED  FOR  THE  NAVY. 
This  photograph  shows  the  examination  of  volunteers  at  the  San  Francisco  recruiting  station. 


SAILORS'   KNOTS. 
The  men  of  the  U.  S.  S.  Georgia  are  being  taught  all  the  different  knots.    This  picture  shows  the 
officers  teaching  the  various  knots,  and  on  the  board  shown  in  the  foreground  are  all  the  knots  used 
in  the  navy. 


A    so 


o3 

a 
n 

o3  S 
PS 

h  °   . 

a) 

<  as 

8 

w      ca 

<3   o  o 

,_]   a  d 

«!    ©    v, 

co  S  S3 

5°§ 

cJ    oa    P 

CO    5    p 

H   © 

SS 

o 

■a. 

0Q 

in 

•fH 

£3 

H 

Pnoto  Underwood  &Underwood 
NOVEL  WAY  OF  GETTING  A  BATH. 

French  soldier,  in  a  tub  that  just  managed  to  fit,  is  awaiting  in  joyful  anticipation  the  bath.    The 
water  is  cold,  but  the  soldiers  have  a  gay  time. 


Uniernational  Film  Service. 
WAITING  FOR  NIGHT. 
The  skyrockets  shown  in  the  picture  will  be  sent  up  as  soon  as  darkness  falls  upon  this  Serbian 
trench.    Dazzling  lights  are  kept  going  all  night  between  the  hostile  trenches. 


eg  9  a 

■    p< 
»  g  S 


a 
P 
© 


£  w  a 


fl.2  * 

•ih         05 

^  on  £ 

o     el 
d  oTcd 

ffl-pft 

03  <D 


5     O 

■e!     525 


o> 


CO 


05   O 


03  t* 

+3    >'© 

3  -  ,*  <K 

y  O      <« 

o         *» 
£•3  2® 

C3+^>  P,g 

©+»  ^  2 

®    a-a 

S   >   fe  H 

■3*3      2 

©=3  03 

oxu  S 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH  TA.KEN  ON  THE  WESTERN  FRONT. 
One  of  the  British  monster  guns  in  action. 


©American  Press  Ass'n. 
ARMORED  MOTOR  BATTERY. 
This  picture  represents  a  protected  motor  car  that  is  used  by  the  New  York  National  Guard, 


<  Photo  Underwood  &  Underwood. 
TORPEDO  STARTING  ON  ITS  DESTRUCTIVE  [FLIGHT. 
Wonderful  photograph  of  a  torpedo  leaving  the  tube,  probably  headed  for  an  enemy  craft    It  is  not 
often  that  the  camera  catches  the  torpedo  just  barely  out  of  the  tube. 


©International  Film  Service. 
TORPEDO  CATCHING  NET. 
This  photograph  illustrates  the  new  invention  that  it  is  hoped  will  render  the  torpedo  harmless. 
It  consists  of  an  arrangement  of  heavy  wire  in  net  form  supported  by  a  steel  frame.    When  the  head 
of  the  torpedo  hits  this  the  rear  comes  out  of  the  water  and  the  propeller  spins  harmlessly  in  the  air. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 

BREWSTER-HELLER  ARMORED  PROTECTOR  FOR  INFANTRYMEN. 

This  invention  was  submitted  to  the  U.  S.  government  with  the  possibility  of  its  being  accepted. 
The  weight  is  slightly  over  25  pounds  and  can  withstand  machine  gun  and  high  power  rifle  fire. 


©International  Film  Service. 
THE  LEWIS  MACHINE  GUN. 
Col.  Dooley  is  explaining  to  officers  of  the  U.  S.  Marine  Corps  how  simple  it  is  to  work  it. 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  145 

inserted  at  a  time)  came  along  in  1870.  In  1892  it  was  re- 
placed by  the  first  of  our  magazine  rifles,  the  Krag,  and  simul- 
taneously we  adopted  smokeless  powder,  a  European  invention. 

The  regulation  United  States  service  rifle  is  a  great  im- 
provement on  the  Krag.  It  is  loaded  with  "clips,"  holding  five 
cartridges  each.  The  velocity  of  the  bullet  is  greater,  and  the 
accuracy  and  rapidity  of  fire  are  superior. 

FIGHTING  RANGE  800  YARDS. 

In  the  Mexican  war  the  ordinary  fighting  range,  with  the 
smooth-bore  flintlock,  was  about  250  yards.  In  the  Civil  War, 
with  the  percussion  muzzle-loader,  it  was  350  to  400  yards. 
With  the  new  service  rifle,  the  fighting  range  is  700  to  800 
yards,  and  the  infantryman  is  able  to  fire  at  least  twenty  times 
as  many  shots  in  a  given  number  of  minutes  as  was  possible 
fifty  years  ago. 

The  field  artilleryman  carries  no  rifle,  but  is  provided  with 
a  45-caliber  automatic  pistol  and  twenty-one  cartridges.  The 
men  who  compose  the  machine-gun  platoons  have  no  rifles,  but 
each  one  of  them  is  armed  with  the  same  sort  of  service  pistol 
and  a  bolo.  The  latter  is  a  weapon  new  to  our  army,  adopted 
as  a  result  of  military  experience  in  the  Philppines.  It  is  in 
effect  a  machete  (a  sugar  cane  chopping  knife) ,  shortened  and 
made  heavier.    At  close  quarters  it  is  a  formidable  weapon. 

The  bolo  embodies  the  best  principles  of  the  various  razor- 
edged  fighting  blades  of  the  Filipinos,  and  was  first  adopted  as 
a  side  arm  of  the  Marine  Corps  officers.  The  bolo,  which  is 
much  heavier  than  an  ordinary  sword,  measures  24  inches  from 
tip  of  handle  to  tip  of  blade-  and  is  forged  from  a  piece  of  file 
steel. 

For  many  years  the  Marine  Corps,  except  upon  dress 
occasions,  has  had  no  cutting  weapon.  It  is  not  strange,  there- 
fore, that  many  of  the  officers  of  the  corps,  while  on  duty  in  the 
Philippines,  adopted  for  use  in  the  field  that  weapon  of  the 
Moro  tribesmen. 

H  R— 10 


146         WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

The  introduction  of  the  bolo  as  the  field  arm  of  the  Marine 
Corps — the  sword  having  given  place  to  the  pistol  several  years 
ago  in  this  branch  of  the  service — robs  the  time-tried  and  tradi- 
tional Mameluke  saber  of  the  corps  of  the  distinction  of  being 
the  only  cutting  weapon  in  the  equipment  of  this  division  of  the 
Government's  sea  fighters. 

The  Mamelukes  are  inseparably  associated  with  the  mili- 
tary history  of  Egypt,  the  first  country  in  which  a  regular  mili- 
tary organization  was  established,  and  a  country  in  which  the 
fighting  element  was  the  most  honored  and  powerful  of  all 
classes.  This  type  of  blade  was  adopted  by  our  Marine  Corps 
in  1825,  and  later  by  the  officers  of  the  Royal  Horse  Artillery 
of  England. 

Until  recently  the  allowance  of  machine  guns  in  our  army 
has  been  two  to  a  regiment,  but  aboard  four  to  six  are  used. 
AUTOMATIC   MACHINE   RIFLES. 

These  guns  are  automatic  machine  rifles,  firing  ordinary 
rifle  cartridges,  which  (in  the  Benet-Mercie  weapon,  a  French 
invention  which  we  have  adopted)  are  supplied  in  brass  clips  of 
thirty.  A  small  part  of  the  gas  generated  by  the  explosion  of 
the  individual  cartridge  operates  the  mechanism,  discharging 
the  bullet,  throwing  out  the  empty  shell  and  making  ready  for 
the  next  shot. 

A  machine  gun  is  designed  to  enable  one  man  to  fire  the 
equivalent  of  a  volley,  or  series  of  volleys,  discharged  by  an 
entire  platoon  (one-third  of  a  company)  of  infantrymen.  As 
at  present  developed,  it  represents  a  step  toward  the  evolution 
of  a  shoulder-rifle  that  will  throw  a  continuous  stream  of 
bullets. 

The  latest  government  rifle — the  weapons  of  the  individual 
soldiers — are  manufactured  at  the  Springfield  (Mass.)  Arm- 
ory, which  is  the  government's  great  small-arms  factory,  and  at 
the  Rock  Island  ( 111. )  Arsenal — the  facilities  of  the  latter  hav- 
ing hitherto  been  held  in  reserve  for  emergency  purposes.    The 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  147 

rifle  cartridges  are  turned  out  at  the  Frankford  Arsenal,  in 
Philadelphia,  and  at  private  plants  in  Lowell,  New  Haven, 
Bridgeport  and  Cincinnati.  These  concerns  and  another  near 
St.  Louis  also  make  the  cartridges  for  the  automatic  pistols. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  world  war  we  had  150  batteries  of 
light  field  guns  and  45  batteries  of  heavy  artillery  (four  guns 
to  each  battery) ,  including  cannon  provided  for  by  Congress, 
and  since  then  delivered.  There  was  an  inadequate  supply  of 
ammunition  for  the  heavy  guns. 

MUNITION  SUPPLY  AUGMENTED. 

The  ammunition  supply  was  immediately  augmented  and 
field  guns  of  various  calibers  turned  out  as  fast  as  possible, 
including  9-inch  howitzers. 

A  3-inch  field  gun  fires  projectiles  weighing  15  pounds, 
with  a  muzzle  velocity  of  1700  feet  per  second. 

A  4.7-inch  field  gun  fires  projectiles  weighing  60  pounds, 
with  the  same  velocity. 

A  6-inch  howitzer  fires  projectiles  weighing  120  pounds, 
with  a  muzzle  velocity  of  900  feet  per  second. 

The  principal  difference  between  the  field  gun  and  the 
howitzer  is  that  the  latter  can  be  pointed  at  a  high  angle,  to 
assail  infantry  protected  by  intrenchments,  or  for  other  pur- 
poses. 

While  reference  has  been  made  to  siege  guns,  which  were 
used  by  the  Germans  in  their  attacks  on  the  Belgian  and 
French  forts,  the  fact  is  that  the  large  caliber  mortars  and 
howitzers  are  what  wrought  the  havoc. 

The  large  caliber  howitzers  and  mortars  throw  shells  con- 
taining huge  charges  of  explosives,  and  are  more  adaptable  in 
their  application  than  the  ordinary  siege  guns  or  cannons. 

One  novelty  which  had  not  been  used  up  to  the  entrance  of 
the  United  States  into  the  war  is  a  device  invented  by  a  Los 
Angeles  man,  which  makes  a  "periscope  gun"  of  any  ordinaiy 
service  piece. 


148  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS 

In  trench  warfare,  as  developed  abroad,  the  periscope  has 
been  used  by  the  men  in  the  trenches  to  observe  the  movements 
of  the  opposing  forces  and  watch  for  scouts  without  exposing 
themselves  to  the  fire  of  "snipers"  or  sharpshooters,  who  are 
always  looking  for  a  head  or  mark  to  aim  at. 

The  new  device  comprises  two  mirrors  attached  to  the  gun 
by  a  metal  frame  in  such  manner  that  one  mirror  is  above  the 
range  of  vision  and  reflects  the  image  to  be  fired  at  upon  the 
other  mirror  below  the  stock  or  butt  of  the  gun.  The  attach- 
ment enables  the  soldier  sitting  in  a  trench  or  shelter  to  ac- 
curately aim  his  gun  and  conveniently  shoot  while  his  head  is 
kept  below  the  safety  line,  or  top  of  the  parapet,  or  properly 
built  trench. 

THE  TRENCH  PERISCOPE. 

With  this  attachment,  approved  by  the  United  States 
Ordnance  Department,  a  rifleman,  from  his  concealed  point  of 
vantage,  can  survey  a  30-foot  field  at  200  yards.  The  attach- 
ment can  be  removed  at  will  and  the  metal  bars  and  parts  can 
be  easily  carried.  The  device  adds  about  one  and  one-half 
pounds  to  the  weight  of  the  gun. 

In  the  same  category  with  the  aeroplane,  the  automobile, 
the  submarine,  the  torpedo,  in  their  effect  upon  the  method  of 
waging  modern  warfare  are  the  telephone  and  the  wireless 
telegraph.  There  were  no  telephones  and  no  wireless  instru- 
ments in  the  days  of  our  own  Civil  War,  and  the  stories  re- 
lated of  the  bravery  and  astuteness  displayed  by  orderlies,  mes- 
sengers and  scouts  of  those  days  will  not  be  repeated. 

Today  the  army  carries  a  complete  telephone  system  and 
wonderful  wireless  apparatus.  The  commander  sits  in  his 
headquarters  and  communicates  with  his  officers  in  all  parts  of 
the  field,  reaching  points  miles  distant.  Wires  are  strung 
through  trenches,  along  fences  and  wherever  needed,  and  tele- 
phone "booths"  are  set  up  wherever  it  is  found  necessaiy. 
Switchboards  are  mounted  on  motor  cars  and  encased  in  armor 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.         149 

plate.    The  "repair"  wagons  are  motor  vehicles,  and  lines  cut 
or  destroyed  are  quickly  repaired  or  replaced. 

Aerial  stations  for  the  wireless  are  carried,  and  are  of 
many  varieties.  Some  of  them  are  similar  to  the  observation 
towers  and  ladders.  The  French  army  regulations  provide  for 
wireless  service  between  the  general  staff  headquarters  and  the 
army  corps,  connecting  these  with  the  heavy  cavalry  divisions 
and  lines  of  communication.  The  wireless  companies  in  the 
French  army  are  made  up  of  10  officers  and  293  men. 

Nearly  all  of  the  other  nations  have  patterned  their  wire- 
less companies  after  the  French.  The  company  carries  302 
miles  of  wire  and  cable  and  about  96  sets  of  instruments.  The 
rate  of  operation  is  more  than  400  words  a  minute.  The  mast 
for  the  aerial  station  is  made  in  sections,  on  the  telescope  plan, 
and  can  be  erected  by  a  trio  of  men  in  a  few  minutes.  The 
whole  outfit  for  a  station  weighs  about  750  pounds  and  the 
range  of  service  is  about  200  miles. 

"KNAPSACK"   STATIONS. 

There  are,  in  addition  to  the  fiejd  stations,  "knapsack" 
stations,  which  are  divided  into  sections  so  that  four  soldiers 
can  carry  an  outfit.  The  sections  weigh  about  20  pounds  each. 
The  small  station  set  up  with  this  apparatus  has  a  range  of 
from  5  to  10  miles  and  in  service  replaces  the  orderlies  and  such 
visual  signs  and  signalling,  as  was  used  before  the  wireless 
came  into  existence.  Such  an  outfit  can  forward  more  informa- 
tion in  a  few  minutes  than  a  whole  squadron  of  orderlies  could 
riding  at  full  speed. 

The  aeroplanes  carrying  a  wireless  outfit  can  communicate 
with  the  field  stations,  and  have  rendered  wonderful  service  on 
the  battlefields.  The  cavalry  also  carry  wireless  outfits,  and 
in  the  Allied  armies  the  second  regiment  of  every  cavalry  bri- 
gade has  a  wireless  detachment  of  4  troopers,  1  cyclist  and  3 
horses,  besides  a  wagon.  There  is  also  a  division  with  tools  and 
material  for  both  destroying  and  repairing  lines. 


150  WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS. 

The  French  army  also  has  automobile  wireless  stations. 
The  automobile  outfit  is  complete  in  every  particular  and  is  not 
augmented.  It  carries  its  own  crew  and  has  a  traveling  radius 
of  several  hundred  miles.  The  car  containing  the  station  is 
completely  enclosed  and  the  walls  are  deadened  so  that  the 
noise  made  by  the  apparatus  may  not  betray  the  presence  of  the 
station  to  the  enemy  scouts. 

The  practical  application  of  portable  wireless  outfits  to 
military  usage  is  probably  less  than  four  years  old,  but  the 
portables  can  transmit  messages  over  a  radius  of  200  to  250 
miles.  Expressed  in  technical  terms,  the  portable  stations  have 
a  capacity  of  about  200  mile  wave-lengths. 

The  one  weakness  of  the  wireless  is  that  the  enemy  can 
purloin  secrets,  though  adroitness  in  manipulation  can  over- 
come some  of  this  difficulty. 

A  WORD  ABOUT  "HEAVY  ARTILLERY." 
It  would  not  do  to  mention  armaments  and  weapons  with- 
out a  word  about  the  "heavy  artillery"  of  the  commissary  de- 
partment, for  this  branch  of  the  army  service  is  represented  by 
formidable  field  kitchens,  which  are  again  carried  on  trucks  or 
motor  cars.  The  officers'  field  kitchen  follows  the  adyance  of 
the  officers  to  the  field  of  action.  Some  of  these  kitchens,  par- 
ticularly those  of  the  Kaiser  and  the  Crown  Prince  in  the  Ger- 
man army,  are  described  as  almost  luxurious.  They  contain 
complete  equipment — range,  bake-oven,  pantry,  ice-box,  china 
closet  and  every  device  needed  for  preparing  a  complete  meal. 
Supplies  are  hurried  after  the  troops  in  motor  trucks  from 
stations  where  the  supplies  are  delivered  by  rail  and  soups  and 
sturdy  meals  are  prepared  which  were  lacking  in  the  cam- 
paigns through  which  the  soldiers  of  the  Civil  War  passed. 
The  pioneer  mobile  military  field  kitchen  which  has  been  the 
subject  of  widespread  comment  was  developed  by  the  German 
army. 

It  consists  of  a  four-wheeled  vehicle  drawn  by  two  horses, 


WONDERFUL  WAR  WEAPONS.  151 

though  motors  have  supplanted  the  horses  in  some  cases.  The 
front  carriage  is  detachable  from  the  rear  and  is  actually  a 
separate  contrivance.  On  the  rear  truck  is  a  200-quart  copper, 
double,  or  jacketed  vat.  Also  a  70-quart  coffee  tank.  Both 
receptacles  have  separate  fireboxes  and  ash  pits.  One  section 
carries  extra  rations  for  the  men,  the  daily  quota  of  provisions, 
extra  rations  for  horses,  folding  canvas  water  pails  and 
utensils. 

The  actual  food  is  cooked  within  the  vat  or  caldron  inside 
the  water  jacket,  so  that  the  heat  does  not  come  in  contact  with 
the  food  direct,  thus  preventing  burning.  The  food  will  cook 
slowly  for  hours  when  once  the  water  is  heated,  and  will  remain 
hot  for  a  long  time.  The  men  can  get  water  in  an  emergency 
and  hot  coffee  is  always  ready  for  the  sentries  and  men  on 
guard  duty  to  carry  with  them  at  night.  Of  course  a  bottle 
of  the  thermos  type  is  used  by  these  men  so  that  they  can  have 
hot  coffee  when  on  the  line  of  duty.  The  kitchen  outfits  are 
complete  and  so  arranged  that  they  can  be  rushed  over  rough 
ground  without  spilling  their  contents. 

Electric  flash  lights,  batteries  for  setting  off  dynamite  and 
other  explosives  used  for  blowing  out  trenches  and  other  forti- 
fications, searchlights,  mirror  signaling  devices,  illuminating 
bombs,  which  are  shot  high  in  the  air  to  explode  and  illuminate 
the  field  for  hundreds  of  yards,  signal  bombs,  and  many  in- 
genious contraptions  never  dreamed  of  are  part  of  the  army's 
equipment  used  on  the  battlefields  of  the  greatest  war  that  the 
world  has  ever  known. 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  WORLD'S  AEMIES. 

The  Efficient  German  Organization — The  Landwehr  and  Landsturm — ■ 
General  Forms  of  Military  Organization — The  Brave  French  Troops — 
The  Picturesque  Italian  Soldiery — The  Peace  and  War  Strength — 
Available    Fighting    Men — Fortifications. 

NO  one  scoffs  at  the  military  organization  which  Germany 
has  developed  through  the  years— yes,  almost  centuries 
— of  moulding  and  training,  for  Germany  has  proved 
herself  efficient,  even  if  egotistical  and  domineering.  She  built 
up  what  at  the  beginning  of  the  war  was  recognized  as  the 
most  powerful,  most  efficient  and  well  balanced  military  or- 
ganization the  world  has  ever  known.  And  it  was  not  an  army 
in  the  sense  that  America  has  been  taught  to  think  of  armies. 
It  was  a  trained  nation  for  war — a  nation  armed — rather  than 
a  small,  compact  fighting  machine. 

The  strength  of  the  German  army  on  October  1,  1913, 
has  been  given  in  fairly  authentic  reports  as  790,788  men  and 
157,916  horses.  Of  the  men  30,253  were  officers  and  2,483 
sanitary  officers.  There  were  104,377  non-commissioned  offi- 
cers and  641,811  common  soldiers.  The  general  divisions  were 
515,216  infantry  and  85,593  cavalry,  126,042  artillery,  and  the 
rest  in  the  general  service,  including  the  commissary  and  quar- 
termasters' departments,  as  these  are  known  in  America.  The 
estimated  army  on  a  war  footing  is  more  than  four  times  this 
number  and  approximates  about  4,000,000,  while  the  entire 
available  force  was  given  at  probably  8,000,000. 

The  infantry  is  designated  as  the  main  body  of  the  army. 
The  infantrymen  carry  the  "98"  gun,  already  referred  to, 
which  is  an  improved  Mauser,  and  the  non-commissioned  offi- 
cers and  ambulance  drivers  carry  revolvers.    There  are  several 

classes  of  infantrymen,  a  distinction  being  made  between  the 
152 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  153 

sharpshooters,  and  some  of  the  others,  variously  known  as 
grenadiers,  musketeers  and  fusileers. 

The  cavalry  is  armed  with  lance,  saber  and  carbine.  There 
are  distinctions  in  this  branch  of  the  service,  too,  among  the 
cavalry  units  being  cuirassiers,  hussars,  uhlans  and  dragoons. 
The  field  artillery  carries  batteries  of  cannon  and  light  howit- 
zer, and  the  drivers  are  armed  with  a  sword  and  revolver. 
The  cannoneers  have  a  short  knife  or  dagger  as  well  as  the 
revolver. 

The  communication  troops  are  what  parallel  the  engineers 
in  the  United  States  army.  They  build  the  roads,  put  up  the 
telegraph  lines  and  telephone  service,  construct  bridges  and 
make  the  travel  possible. 

STRENGTH  OF  GERMAN  ARMY. 

While  the  full  strength  of  the  German  army  is  given  at 
4,000,000  on  a  war  footing,  the  total  availables  from  the  na- 
tion's reserve  is  double  that  sum.  These  forces  are  gathered 
from  three  sources :  the  first  line,  with  an  estimated  strength  of 
1,750,000;  the  Landwehr  1,800,000,  and  the  Landsturm 
4,500,000. 

All  who  enter  the  service  pass  into  the  Landsturm  after 
19  years  and  remain  until  they  are  45.  The  cavalry  service  is 
three  years  with  the  colors  and  four  years  in  the  army  reserve. 
The  horse  artillery  are  subject  to  the  same  service,  while  those 
in  other  branches  serve  two  years  with  the  colors  and  five  with 
the  army  reserve.  The  soldier  passes  from  the  army  reserve 
into  what  is  described  as  the  Landwehr,  where  artillerymen  and 
cavalrymen  remain  three  years ;  those  of  other  branches  of  the 
military  five  years.  The  soldier  passes  from  the  first  division 
or  class  of  Landwehr  to  the  second,  where  he  remains  until  his 
39th  birthday. 

The  Landsturm  of  the  first  class  includes  those  between 
the  ages  of  17  and  39,  who  have  not  reached  the  age  of  service, 
and  those  who  have  not  been  called  into  active  service  because 


154  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

the  ranks  were  full  and  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  reg- 
ular army.  The  second  class  includes  those  who  have  passed 
through  the  other  branches  and  whose  ages  are  between  39  and 
45. 

There  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  military  organiza- 
tions of  the  different  countries.  Whereas  the  United  States 
army  regiment  approximates  1500  men,  the  German  army 
regiment  contains  almost  3000.  In  the  German  army  six  bat- 
talions form  an  infantry  regiment.  Two  regiments  form  a  bri- 
gade, two  brigades  a  division,  and  two  divisions  an  army  corps. 
There  are  10  divisions  composed  of  3  brigades  each,  but  of 
course  the  whole  organization  was  augmented  when  war  broke 
out.  Adding  the  necessary  auxiliary  troops,  viz:  an  artillery 
brigade  of  12  batteries  composed  of  6  guns  each — or  4  in  the 
case  of  the  horse  batteries — a  regiment  of  cavalry  of  4  squad- 
rons, an  engineer  battalion,  sanitary  troops,  etc.,  a  German 
3-brigade  division  at  war  strength  numbers  about  21,000,  and 
an  army  corps — to  which  are  further  attached  4  batteries  of 
howitzers  and  a  battalion  of  rifles — about  43,000  combatants. 
The  cavalry  division  is  composed  of  3  brigades  of  2  regiments 
each  and  2  or  3  batteries  of  horse  artillery,  a  total  of  24  squad- 
rons and  8  to  12  guns. 

In  a  general  way  it  may  here  be  interpolated  that  the  or- 
ganization of  an  army  is  given  in  the  military  manuals  as 
follows : 

INFANTRY. 

A  squad  is  8  men  under  the  command  of  a  corporal. 
A  section  is  16  men  under  the  command  of  a  sergeant. 
A  platoon  is  from  50  to  75  men  under  a  lieutenant. 
A  company  is  3  platoons,  200  to  250  men,  under  a  captain. 
A  battalion  is  4  or  more  companies  under  a  major. 
A  regiment  is  3  or  more  battalions  under  a  colonel,  or  a 
lieutenant-colonel. 

A  brigade  is  2  or  3  regiments  under  a  brigadier-general. 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  155 

A  division  is  2  or  more  brigades  under  a  major-general. 

An  army  corps  is  2  or  more  brigades,  supplemented  by 

cavalry,  artillery,  engineers,  etc.,  under  a  major-general  or 

lieutenant-general. 

CAVALRY. 

A  section  is  8  men  under  a  corporal. 

A  platoon  is  36  to  50  men  under  a  lieutenant,  or  junior 
captain. 

A  troop  is  3  to  4  platoons,  125  to  150  men,  under  a  captain. 
A  squadron  is  3  troops  under  a  senior  captain,  or  a  major. 
A  regiment  is  4  to  6  squadrons  under  a  colonel. 
A  brigade  is  3  regiments  under  a  brigadier-general. 
A  division  is  2  or  3  brigades  under  a  major-general. 

AR 1  ILLrfJcLjRY. 

A  battery  is  130  to  180  men,  with  4  to  8  guns,  under  a 
captain. 

A  group  or  battalion  is  3  or  4  batteries  under  a  major. 

A  regiment  is  3  or  4  groups  (battalions)  under  a  colonel. 

When  regiments  are  combined  into  brigades,  brigades  into 
divisions,  and  divisions  into  army  corps,  cavalry,  artillery,  and 
certain  other  auxiliary  troops,  such  as  engineers,  signal  corps, 
aeroplane  corps,  etc.,  are  joined  with  them  in  such  proportions 
as  has  been  found  necessary.  Every  unit,  from  the  company 
up,  has  its  own  supply  and  ammunition  wagons,  field  hospitals, 
etc. 

THE  UNITED  STATES  ARMY. 

Prior  to  1915  the  regular  United  States  army  was  a  mere 
police  body  as  compared  with  the  armed  forces  of  other  coun- 
tries. It  was  concededly  highly  efficient,  but  for  the  purpose  of 
entering  into  conflict  with  such  forces  as  those  presented  by 
Germany,  France  and  some  of  the  other  European  countries  it 
was  admittedly  inadequate. 

The  entire  force  consisted  of  5,004  officers  and  92,658  men. 
The  forces  were  divided  into  15  regiments  of  cavalry  and  765 


156  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

officers  and  14,148  men;  6  regiments  of  field  artillery,  with 
252  officers  and  5,513  men;  the  coast  artillery  with  715  officers 
and  19,019  men,  and  30  regiments  of  infantry,  with  1,530  offi- 
cers and  35,008  men.  The  Philippine  scouts  had  182  officers 
and  5,733  men;  the  Military  Academy  7  officers  and  6,266  men 
and  the  Porto  Rico  regiment  of  infantry  with  32  officers  and 
591  men. 

The  signal  corps  had  106  officers  and  1,472  men,  and  the 
engineer  corps  237  officers  and  1,942  men.  There  were  also 
about  6000  recruits  in  the  various  branches  of  the  service  under 
training. 

The  marine  corps,  under  the  direction  of  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy,  had  346  officers  and  9,921  enlisted  men. 

THE  REGULAR  ARMY. 

The  regular  army  was  supplemented  by  the  National 
Guards  of  the  various  States  which  had  7,578  regiments  with 
9,103  commissioned  officers  and  123,105  enlisted  men,  or  a 
total  organization  of  132,208.  The  "reserve  militia,"  which  was 
in  fact  little  more  than  a  name,  consisted  of  the-availables  for 
service  between  the  ages  of  18  and  45  years,  and  estimated  on 
the  basis  of  population,  numbered  about  20,000,000. 

Before  there  was  any  real  indication  that  the  country 
would  become  actively  involved  in  the  world  war  steps  were 
taken  to  reorganize  and  develop  an  efficient  army,  and  under 
the  Act  which  became  effective  on  July  1, 1916,  and  which  pro- 
vides for  the  establishment  of  basic  units  for  the  army,  the  War 
Department  orders  and  regulations  fixed  the  basis  of  the  or- 
ganization as  follows: 

Sixty-four  infantry  regiments,  25  cavalry  regiments,  21 
regiments  of  artillery,  a  coast  army  corps,  the  brigade  division, 
army  corps,  and  army  headquarters,  with  their  detachments 
and  troops.  A  general  staff  corps,  adjutant  general's  depart- 
ment, inspector  general  department,  judge  advocate  general 
department,  quartermaster  corps,  medical  department,  corps 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  157 

of  engineers,  and  ordnance  department,  signal  corps,  officers 
of  the  bureau  of  insular  affairs,  militia  bureau  and  detached 
officers. 

The  law  specifies  that  the  total  armed  force  shall  include 
the  regular  army,  volunteer  army,  officers'  reserve  corps,  en- 
listed reserve  corps,  and  the  National  Guard  of  the  various 
States,  subject  to  call  for  duty  within  the  borders  of  the  United 
States. 

The  reorganization  of  the  army  was  being  effected  at  the 
time  Uncle  Sam  was  called  to  fight  for  humanity,  and  only  an 
approximation  of  the  condition  can  be  made,  for  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  National  Guard  had  been  taken  into  the  regular 
service  incident  to  the  trouble  with  Mexico,  when  the  Guards- 
men were  summoned  to  the  border  to  protect  the  country,  and 
recruiting  was  proceeding  in  all  branches  of  the  service  to  bring 
all  the  regiments  up  to  a  war  footing. 

UNITS  ON  WAR  FOOTING. 

The  various  units,  on  a  war  footing,  are:  Infantry  regi- 
ment, 1,800  men;  cavalry  regiment,  1,250  men;  field  artillery, 
light  regiment,  1,150;  field  artillery,  horse  regiment,  1,150; 
field  artillery,  heavy  regiment,  1,240 ;  field  artillery,  mountain 
regiment,  1,100;  engineers,  pioneer  battalion,  490;  engineers, 
pioneer  battalion,  mounted,  270 ;  engineers,  pontoon  battalion, 
500;  signal  troops,  field  battalion,  160;  signal  troops,  field 
(cavalry)  battalion,  170;  signal  troops,  aero  squadron,  90  men. 
Trains — infantry  division:  ammunition,  260;  supply,  190;  sani- 
tary, 530;  engineer,  10.  Cavalry:  ammunition,  60;  supply, 
220 ;  sanitary,  300. 

A  division  of  infantry  consists  of  3  brigades  of  infantry, 
1  cavalry  regiment,  1  artillery  brigade,  1  regiment  of  engi- 
neers, 1  field  signal  battalion,  1  aero  squad,  1  ammunition 
train,  1  supply  train,  1  engineer's  train  and  1  sanitary  train, 
and  comprises  approximately  22,000  men  and  7,500  horses  and 
mules,  and  900  vehicles,  including  guns.     The  latter  figures 


158  THE  WOKIXD'S  ARMIES. 

are,  however,  changed  by  reason  of  the  introduction  of  motor 
trucks,  and  automobiles,  there  being  a  consequent  reduction  in 
the  number  of  horses  and  mules  and  a  slight  increase  in  the 
number  of  men. 

A  cavalry  division  consists  of  3  cavalry  brigades,  1  regi- 
ment of  field  artillery,  1  battalion  of  mounted  engineers,  1  field 
signal  battery,  mounted;  1  aero  squadron,  1  ammunition,  1 
supply,  1  engineer  and  1  sanitary  train. 

A  brigade,  in  the  main,  consists  of  three  regiments,  the 
infantry  having  5,500  men,  cavalry  brigade  2,500  and  artillery 
brigade  2,500  men. 

Under  the  reorganization  plan  the  United  States  army 
would  have  about  293,000  in  the  service,  but  with  the  advent  of 
the  country's  entrance  into  the  conflict  of  world  powers  Con- 
gress passed  the  Conscription  bill  authorizing  the  drafting,  for 
military  purposes,  all  young  men  between  the  ages  of  21  and  31 
in  the  country. 

MILLIONS  not  in  the  country's  service. 

The  registration  of  those  subject  to  call  under  this  bill 
showed  that  there  were  about  11,000,000  men  in  the  country, 
not  in  the  army,  navy  or  supporting  branches,  available.  The 
bill  designed  to  produce,  within  a  year  from  the  time  of  the 
signing  of  the  law  by  President  Wilson,  of  a  national  army  of 
more  than  1,000,000  trained  and  equipped  men,  backed  by  a 
reserve  of  men  and  supplies  and  by  an  additional  500,000 
under  training. 

Meantime  the  State  authorities  were  authorized  to  fill  up 
the  National  Guard  units  and  regiments  to  full  war  strength, 
so  that  with  the  regular  army  there  would  be  a  total  of  622,954 
— 293,000  regular  and  329,954  guardsmen,  to  be  taken  over  by 
the  War  Department.  This  was  the  physical  state  of  the  army 
when  the  country  found  it  necessary  to  ship  men  into  France 
to  assist  the  Allies  in  their  fight  against  the  German  and  Aus- 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  159 

trian  forces,  and  General  Pershing  was  sent  to  command  the 
American  troops. 

The  United  States  army  and  all  of  the  military  branches 
are  armed  with  the  Springfield  magazine  rifle,  which  holds  five 
cartridges.  It  shoots  a  pointed  bullet  of  tin  and  lead  and  is  of 
.30  inch  caliber.  The  Colt  automatic  pistol  is  used  as  the  serv- 
ice weapon  by  officers  and  those  requiring  this  sort  of  arm. 
It  is  a  .45  caliber  pistol  with  a  magazine  holding  seven  cart- 
ridges, which  can  be  fired  successively  by  simply  holding  the 

trigger  back. 

THE  FRENCH  ARMY. 

Military  spirit  in  France  has  had  an  almost  incredible 
resurrection  within  the  past  few  years.  The  increase  in  the 
standing  army  of  Germany  was  watched  closely,  and  as  new 
units  were  added  to  the  standing  army  of  the  latter  country 
France  retaliated  by  lengthening  the  term  of  military  service 
from  two  to  three  years.  This  accomplished  practically  the 
same  purpose  without  causing  a  ripple  of  excitement,  and  as 
France  determined  to  recover  her  lost  provinces  of  Alsace  and 
Lorraine  her  fight  is  to  the  limit  of  her  endurance. 

There  were,  at  the  outbreak  of  war,  869,403  men  in  the 
National  Army  of  France,  which  was  composed  of  the  Metro- 
politan army,  having  a  total  of  753,403  men,  of  the  Colonial 
army,  numbering  116,000  men.  These  figures  do  not  include 
the  personnel  of  the  Gendarmerie,  or  military  police,  which 
numbered  25,000  men. 

Military  service  is  compulsory  in  France  and  all  males  be- 
tween the  ages  of  20  and  48  years  must  serve  three  years  in  the 
army,  the  only  cause  for  exemption  being  physical  disability. 
Following  the  active  service  the  soldier  passes  to  the  reserve 
for  11  years,  after  which  he  is  seven  years  in  the  Territorial 
army  and  seven  years  in  the  Territorial  reserve.  The  training 
in  the  active  reserve  consists  of  two  periods  of  training  and 
maneuvers  which  last  for  four  weeks  each,  in  the  Territorial 


160  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

army  one  period  of  two  weeks,  and  in  the  Territorial  reserve,  no 
fixed  period.  There  are  more  than  2,000  reservists  per  bat- 
talion produced  by  the  length  of  the  reserve  service,  and  when 
the  troops  are  mobilized  the  active  units  can  be  easily  main- 
tained at  full  war  strength.  The  number  available  in  this  way 
gives  enough  men  for  each  battalion  and  regiment  in  the  field 
with  enough  men  left  over  for  routine  home  guard  work. 

FRENCH  MILITARY  DIVISIONS. 

There  are  two  infantry  regiments,  composed  of  from  six 
to  eight  battalions,  to  the  brigade,  in  the  French  army,  with  two 
brigades  to  a  division  and  two  divisions  to  an  army  corps.  A 
field  artillery  regiment,  consisting  of  nine  batteries  of  four 
guns  each,  is  attached  to  each  division.  With  nine  field  and 
three  howitzer  batteries  and  six  reinforcing  batteries  added 
under  mobilization,  each  corps  on  a  war  footing  has  144  guns. 
There  is  also  added  to  every  army  corps  in  the  field  one  cavalry 
brigade  of  two  regiments,  one  cavalry  battalion,  engineer  com- 
panies and  sanitary  and  service  troops.  The  cavalry  divisions 
are  composed  of  three  brigades  of  two  regiments  each — to- 
gether with  three  batteries  of  horse  artillery.  There  is  in  an 
army  corps,  when  mobilized,  approximately  33,000  combatants, 
and  in  a  cavalry  division  4,700  men.  An  aeronautical  corps  in 
the  French  army  consists  of  334  aeroplanes  and  14  dirigibles. 

In  the  Reserve  army  at  the  time  of  mobilization  there  were 
two  divisions  in  each  region,  corresponding  to  those  in  the  active 
army.  When  they  were  mobilized  the  36  reserve  divisions  con- 
tained virtually  the  same  organization  and  strength  as  the 
troops  of  the  line.  There  were  a  large  number  of  troops  for 
garrisoning  the  various  fortresses  when  the  regional  regiments, 
engineers  and  foot  artillery  were  utilized  for  this  work. 

The  Territorial  army  also  consists  of  36  divisions  and 
garrison  troops.  When  the  remaining  men  of  the  Reserve  and 
Territorial  armies  were  summoned  to  the  depots  they  were 
available  to  maintain  the  field  army  at  full  strength. 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  161 

In  the  French  field  army  there  were  20  army  corps,  a  bri- 
gade consisting  of  14  battalions,  and  10  divisions  of  cavalry; 
when  war  was  declared.  When  this  was  raised  to  its  full  war 
strength  the  active  army  numbered  1,009,000  men,  the  re- 
serves and  depots  1,600,000,  the  Territorial  army  818,000, 
and  the  Territorial  Reserve  451,000,  a  grand  total  of  3,878,000 
soldiers.  At  this  critical  time,  therefore,  France  had  at  her 
command  about  5,000,000  trained  men. 

Lebel  magazine  rifles  of  .315  inches  caliber  are  used  by  the 
infantry,  while  the  cavalry  uses  the  Lebel  carbine.  The  field 
piece  is  a  rapid-fire  gun  of  7.5  centimeters,  or  2.95  inches,  of 
the  model  of  1907,  and  is  provided  with  a  shield  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  gunners.  A  howitzer  of  12  or  15.5  centimeters 
is  the  type  used  by  the  French  army. 

The  French  artillery  is  generally  admitted  to  be  in  a  class 
by  itself,  and  the  commissariat  is  excelled  by  none  other.  The 
infantry  is  most  deceptive  in  appearance,  but  the  ability  of  the 
French  to  march  and  attack  has  never  been  surpassed. 

THE  RUSSIAN  ARMY. 
There  are  1,284,000  men  in  the  Russian  army  in  times  of 
peace,  while  the  war  strength  is  5,962,306.  The  young  man  of 
Russia  is  compelled  to  enter  the  army  at  the  age  of  20  years, 
the  military  service  being  compulsory  and  universal,  terminat- 
ing at  the  age  of  43  years.  The  period  of  service  in  the  active 
army  is  three  years  in  the  case  of  the  infantry  and  artillery, 
and  four  years  in  other  branches  of  the  service.  The  soldier 
then  passes  to  the  reserve,  where  he  serves  for  14  or  15  years, 
during  which  period  he  receives  two  trainings  of  six  weeks 
each.  After  18  years  in  the  active  and  reserve  armies  he  is 
transferred  to  the  Territorial  army  for  five  years.  There  also 
exists  a  modified  system  of  volunteers  for  one  year  who  sup- 
ply the  bulk  of  officers  required  for  the  reserve  upon  mobiliza- 
tion. 

The  Russian  army  is  divided  into  three  forces,  the  army 
H  R— n 


162  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

of  the  European  Russia,  the  army  of  the  Caucasus  and  the 
Asiatic  army.  There  are  1,000  men  in  a  Russian  battalion, 
4  battalions  constituting  a  regiment,  2  regiments  a  brigade 
and  2  brigades  a  division. 

RUSSIAN  FIELD  BATTERIES. 

The  field  batteries  are  composed  of  8  guns,  the  horse  bat- 
teries of  6.  The  ordinary  army  corps  is  made  up  of  2  divisions, 
a  howitzer  division  and  one  battalion  of  sappers,  and  has  a 
fighting  strength  of  approximately  32,000  men.  The  rifle 
brigades  form  separate  organizations  of  8  battalions  with  3 
batteries  attached.  The  Cossacks,  who  hold  their  lands  by 
military  tenure,  are  liable  to  service  for  life,  and  provide  their 
own  equipment  and  horses.  At  19  their  training  begins;  at  21 
they  enter  the  active  regiment  of  their  district;  at  25  they  go 
into  what  is  termed  the  "second  category"  regiment,  and  at  29 
the  "third  category"  regiment,  followed  by  5  years  in  the  re- 
serve. After  25  years  of  age,  their  training  is  3  weeks  yearly. 
In  European  Russia  the  field  army  consists  of  the  Imperial 
Guard  and  Grenadier  Corps,  27  line  army  corps  and  20  cav- 
alry divisions ;  in  the  Caucasus  of  3  army  corps  and  4  cavalry 
divisions.  The  Asiatic  army  is  composed  of  Russians  with  a 
few  Turkoman  irregular  horse,  and  is  mainly  stationed  in  East 
Siberia.  Since  the  Russian-Japanese  war  these  forces  have 
been  increased  and  re-organized  into  a  strong  army  which,  at 
the  outbreak,  was  capable  of  mobilizing,  together  with  aux- 
iliary troops,  more  than  200,000  men. 

The  small-arm  of  the  infantry  is  the  "3-line"  rifle  of  the 
1901  model.  It  has  a  magazine  holding  five  cartridges,  a 
caliber  of  .299  inches,  a  muzzle  velocity  of  2,035  foot  seconds, 
and  is  sighted  to  3,000  yards.  The  arm  of  the  cavalry  and 
Cossacks  has  a  barrel  2%  inches  shorter,  but  uses  the  same 
ammunition,  and  is  provided  with  a  bayonet  which  no  other 
mounted  troops  use.     The  field  piece  is  a  Krupp  rapid-fire, 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  163 

shielded  gun,  of  the  1902  model,  with  a  muzzle  velocity  of 
1,950  foot  seconds,  the  shell  weighing  13%  pounds. 
AUSTRIA-HUNGARIAN   ARMY. 

There  are  472,716  men  in  the  army  of  Austria- Hungary 
during  times  of  peace,  with  a  war  strength  of  1,360,000  sol- 
diers. Military  service  is  universal  and  compulsory,  begin- 
ning at  the  age  of  19  years,  and  ending  at  the  age  of  43  years. 
The  term  of  service  in  the  common  or  active  arm  of  the  serv- 
ice is  for  two  years  in  the  case  of  the  infantry  and  three  years 
in  the  cavalry  and  horse  artillery. 

There  is  a  Landwehr,  or  first  reserve,  in  which  the  term 
of  service  is  10  years  in  the  infantry,  and  seven  for  the  cavalry 
or  horse  artillery,  which  service  is  followed  by  that  in  the  Land- 
sturm,  or  second  reserve,  in  which  the  soldier  serves  until  his 
forty-second  birthday.  Hungary  possesses  a  separate  and  dis- 
tinct Landwehr  and  Landsturm,  which  constitute  the  Hun- 
garian National  army.  There  is  also  a  supplementary  reserve 
intended  to  maintain  the  units  of  the  common  army  at  full 
strength. 

The  Empire  is  divided  into  16  army  corps  districts,  each 
presumed  to  furnish  a  complete  army  corps  of  two  divisions  to 
the  active  army.  Every  infantry  division  is  composed  of  two 
brigades  of  8  battalions  each,  1  artillery  brigade  and  10  bat- 
teries of  six  guns,  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  a  rifle  battalion. 
The  army  corps  also  contains  a  regiment  of  field  artillery  or 
howitzers,  a  pioneer  battalion  and  a  pontoon  company,  and 
numbers  about  34,000  combatants. 

There  are  6  permanent  cavalry  divisions,  each  made  up  of 
2  brigades — 24  squadrons,  3  batteries  of  horse  artillery  and  a 
machine-gun  detachment  numbering  about  4,000  men.  It  is 
estimated  that  the  war  strength  is,  active  army,  1,360,000; 
Austrian  Landwehr,  240,000;  Hungarian  Landwehr,  220,000; 
Landsturm,  2,000,000  and  reserve  of  500,000,  or  a  grand  total 
of  4,300,000. 


164  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

The  infantry  carries  the  Mannlicher  magazine  rifle,  .315- 
caliber  and  a  cavalry  carbine  of  the  same  make.  The  field  gun 
is  a  Krupp  which  uses  a  l^A/i-pound  shrapnel  and  the  field 
howitzer  is  a  10.5  centimeter  piece  which  fires  a  30-pound  shell. 
The  Hungarian  cavalry  is  accounted  fine,  but  the  main  force 
is  not  regarded  as  efficient  as  the  German  or  French. 

THE  ITALIAN  ARMY. 

The  army  of  Italy  on  a  peace  footing  is  only  about  250,- 
860  men,  exclusive  of  the  troops  in  Africa,  but  the  country  is 
able  to  mobilize  a  large  force,  and  some  of  its  branches  of  serv- 
ice are  the  most  efficient  in  the  world.  Service  is  compulsory 
and  general,  beginning  at  the  age  of  20  years.  After  two 
years  in  the  standing  army  there  are  six  years  in  the  reserve, 
four  years  in  what  is  known  as  the  mobile  militia  and  seven 
years  in  the  territorial  militia. 

There  is  compulsory  training  in  both  the  reserve  and  the 
territorial  militia,  ranging  from  two  weeks  to  six  weeks.  In 
organization  each  division  of  the  army  consists  of  2  brigades 
composed  of  2  regiments,  comprising  3  battalions,  together 
with  a  regiment  of  field  artillery,  with  5  batteries.  The  division 
has  a  war  strength  of  14,156  officers  and  men  and  30  guns. 
The  cavalry  division  comprises  2  brigades  of  4?  regiments  and 
2  horse  batteries.  Each  army  corps  has  two  divisions  in  which 
are  included  a  regiment  of  field  artillery,  3  heavy  batteries,  a 
regiment  of  cavalry  and  one  of  light  infantry. 

There  is  available  for  army  service  the  military  police, 
known  as  the  Carabinieri,  besides  the  aeronautical  corps,  with 
half  a  dozen  or  more  companies,  30  aeroplanes  and  a  dozen 
airships.  There  are  also  the  frontier  troops  organized  for  de- 
fense of  the  mountains,  and  which  troops  waged  heroic  and 
picturesque  warfare  in  the  mountain  passes.  There  are  in  these 
troops  8  regiments  of  Alpine  infantry,  comprising  26  bat- 
talions, and  2  regiments  of  36  mountain  batteries. 

The  army  strength  approximates  2^600,000,  made  up  of 


THE  WOKLD'S  ARMIES.  165 

700,000  active  army,  400,000  mobile  militia,  which  is  the  sec- 
ond line  of  defense,  and  the  territorial  militia,  about  1,500,000. 
The  infantry  is  armed  with  a  magazine  rifle  of  6.5  millimeters 
caliber  known  as  the  Mannlicher  Carcano,  but  up  to  the  begin- 
ning of  the  war  the  territorials  used  a  different  type. 

GREAT  BRITAIN'S  ARMY. 

The  military  establishment  of  Great  Britain  consists  of 
the  Regular  army  and  the  Territorial  army,  aside  from  the 
Indian  army  and  the  local  forces  in  the  various  colonies.  These 
armies  are  recruited  from  youth  between  the  ages  of  18  and  25 
years,  who  are  recruited  by  voluntary  enlistment.  The  enlist- 
ment period  is  for  12  years,  although  it  can  be  prolonged  under 
certain  circumstances  to  21  years. 

Three  to  nine  years  is  the  period  with  the  colors,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  enlistment  is  with  the  Army  Reserve.  Many 
men  elect  to  serve  seven  years  with  the  colors  and  five  with  the 
reserve.  Recruits  are  subjected  to  five  months'  training,  and 
each  year  are  called  out  for  six  weeks,  supplemented  by  six 
days'  musketry  practice  for  the  infantry. 

The  Home  army  consists  of  9,740  officers  and  172,610 
men,  the  Army  Reserve  of  147,000  and  the  Special  Reserve  of 
80,120,  and  the  Territorial  army  of  313,485,  a  total  of  724,955 
men.  Raised  to  war  strength,  these  forces  would  number  29,- 
330  officers,  772,000  men  and  2,072  guns,  the  batteries  being  of 
six  guns,  except  the  heavy  batteries  and  those  of  the  Territorial 
army,  which  have  four.  During  the  Boer  War  England  put 
more  than  1,000,000  men  in  the  field. 

The  United  Kingdom  is  divided  into  seven  "commands," 
and  the  London  district,  all  of  which  include  from  two  to  three 
territorial  divisions,  and  one  to  four  territorial  cavalry  bri- 
gades, in  addition  to  detachments  of  varying  size  from  the 
Regular  army.  Two  nearly  full  divisions  are  stationed  at  Al- 
der shot  and  in  Ireland,  one  complete  division  in  the  Southern 


166  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

and  one  in  the  Eastern  "command."  There  are  also  six  aero- 
plane squadrons,  each  with  18  aeroplanes. 

The  Lee-Enfield  rifle,  caliber  .303,  is  the  arm  of  the  in- 
fantry and  cavalry.  In  the  Regular  army  the  field  artillery 
has  an  18-pounder  Armstrong  gun,  the  horse  artillery  a  13- 
pounder,  the  field  howitzers  are  40-pounders,  and  the  heavy 
batteries  are  armed  with  60-pounders. 

The  Territorial  army  was  organized  along  the  lines  of  the 
American  militia,  and  could  scarcely  be  expected  to  distinguish 
itself  when  pitted  against  the  German  regulars. 

BELGIAN  ARMY  PEACE  FOOTING. 

The  Belgian  army  peace  footing  is  3542  officers  and 
44,061  men,  with  a  war  strength  estimated  at  from  300,000  to 
350,000.  The  infantry  is  armed  with  the  Mauser  rifle,  the  artil- 
lery with  a  shielded  Krupp  quick-fire  piece  of  7.5-centimeter 
caliber. 

In  1913  the  Netherlands  had  in  its  standing  army  1,543 
officers  and  21,412  men  and  152  guns.  On  m  war  footing  it 
could  probably  be  raised  to  270,000  men.  The  small  arm  is  the 
Mannlicher  rifle  and  carbine,  the  field  gun  is  the  same  as  that 
of  Belgium. 

Servia  has  10  divisions,  divided  into  4  army  corps.  The 
peace  footing  is  160,000,  and  the  war  strength  about  380,000. 
The  rifle  is  the  Mauser  model  of  1899,  and  the  field  piece  a 
quick-firing  gun  of  the  French  Schneider- Canet  system. 

Bulgaria  has  a  peace  army  of  about  3,900  officers  and 
56,000  men.  It  is  armed  with  the  Mannlicher  magazine  rifle, 
the  Mannlicher  carbine,  the  Schneider  quick-fire  gun  and  a 
light  Krupp  for  the  mountain  batteries.  On  a  war  footing  the 
country  musters  4  army  corps  and  550,000  men. 

Roumania's  army  is  about  5,460  officers  and  98,000  men. 
On  a  war  footing  it  has  5  army  corps  and  580,000  men.  The 
infantry  uses  the  Mannlicher  magazine  rifle  and  the  cavalry 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  167 

the  Mannlicher  carbine.  The  field  and  horse  batteries  are  armed 
with  the  Krupp  quick-fire  gun  of  the  model  of  1903. 

In  1912  Greece  had  a  peace  establishment  of  1,952  officers 
and  23,268  men,  but  the  recent  war  has  caused  her  to  augment 
them  to  3  army  corps,  and  her  war  footing  is  not  far  from 
250,000  men.  The  infantry  is  armed  with  the  Mannlicher- 
Schonauer  rifle  of  the  1903  model  and  the  field  artillery  with 
Schneider- Canet  quick-fire  guns. 

Japan  has  a  peace  strength  of  250,000  men,  with  a  reserve 
of  1,250,000,  and  a  total  war  strength  of  1,500,000  men,  out  of 
a  total  available  force  capable  of  fighting  of  approximately 
8,239,372  men. 

SPAIN'S  STANDING  ARMY. 

The  standing  army  of  Spain  is  132,000  men.  The  reserves 
are  estimated  at  1,050,000,  and  the  total  war  strength  at  1,182,- 
000.    The  total  available  unorganized  force  is  2,889,197  men. 

The  army  of  Denmark  on  a  peace  footing  is  13,725  men, 
with  a  reserve  of  71,609.  The  total  war  strength  is  a  little  more 
than  85,000  men,  and  the  total  fighting  population  is  approxi- 
mately 470,000. 

Sweden  has  a  peace  strength  in  excess  of  75,000  men,  and 
a  reserve  of  more  than  500,000,  giving  an  estimated  war 
strength  of  600,000  men.  The  total  available  unorganized 
force  is  about  500,000. 

Norway  has  a  standing  army  a  little  larger  than  that  of 
Denmark — about  18,000  men — with  90,000  reserves,  giving  a 
total  war  strength  of  about  110,000  men.  The  unorganized 
force  available  is  about  360,000  men. 

Portugal  has  a  peace  strength  of  30,000  men,  with  a  re- 
serve of  225,000,  making  a  total  war  strength  of  more  than 
one-quarter  of  a  million.  The  unorganized  fighting  material 
is  more  than  800,000. 

Turkey,  which  reorganized  its  forces  within  recent  years, 
has  a  peace  strength  of  210,000  men,  about  800,000  reserves, 


168  THE  WORLD'S  AEMIES. 

giving  a  war  strength  of  over  a  million,  and  has  a  total  avail- 
able unorganized  force  to  call  upon  of  more  than  3,000,000. 

The  little  army  of  Montenegro  is  a  permanent  body  of 
about  35,000  men.  There  are  no  trained  reserve  forces,  but 
there  is  an  available  righting  population  of  68,000,  outside  of 
the  army,  to  call  upon. 

CHINA'S  MILITARY  RESOURCES. 

Recent  events  throw  some  doubt  on  the  figures  regarding 
China's  military  resources,  but  the  last  available  figures  cred- 
ited the  great  Republic  of  the  East  with  a  force  of  400,000 
men,  augmented  by  300,000  reserves.  With  this  total  war 
strength  of  700,000  soldiers,  estimates  of  the  available  unor- 
ganized fighting  material  reaches  the  stupendous  figure  of 
63,000,000. 

Brazil  has  a  peace  strength  of  33,000,  with  more  than 
500,000  reserves,  with  more  than  4,000,000  unorganized  avail- 
able material. 

As  relating  to  the  armed  strength  of  the  nations  abroad, 
some  reference  to  the  system  of  fortifications  which  protect  the 
various  countries  is  interesting  at  this  point.  Following  years 
* — in  fact,  centuries — of  study,  Central  Europe  has  been 
strongly  fortified  with  a  system  of  embattlements  which  have 
reached  the  limits  of  human  ingenuity. 

In  the  east  of  France,  along  the  frontier  where  France, 
Switzerland  and  Germany  meet,  there  are  the  first-class  fort- 
resses of  Belfort,  Epinal,  Toul  and  Verdun  in  the  first  line, 
reinforced  by  Besancon,  Dijon,  Langres,  Rheims,  La  Fere  and 
Maubeuge  in  the  second  line,  with  smaller  fortifications  close 
to  the  German  frontier  at  Remirement,  Luneville,  Nancy  and 
other  points.  Along  the  Italian  frontier  the  fortresses  are  situ- 
ated at  Grenoble,  Briancon  and  Nice,  with  Lyons  in  the  rear. 
There  are  strong  forts  at  all  naval  harbors,  the  defense  of 
Paris  consisting  of  97  bastions,  17  old  forts  and  38  forts  of  an 


THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES.  169 

advanced  type,  the  whole  forming  entrenched  camps  at  Ver- 
sailles and  St.  Denis. 

On  that  line  of  the  German  frontier  which  faces  France 
there  are  the  fortresses  of  Neu-Breisach,  Strassburg,  Metz  and 
Diedenhofen,  in  the  first  line,  with  Rastatt,  Bitsch  and  Saar- 
louis  in  the  second  line,  and  Germershein  in  the  rear.  Situated 
opposite  Luxemburg  is  Mainz,  with  Coblentz  and  Cologne 
opposite  Belgium  and  Wesel  opposite  Holland. 

All  along  the  northern  coast,  from  Wilhelmshafen  to 
Memmel,  the  German  coast  is  strongly  fortified.  Memmel  is 
the  pivot  point  of  the  northern  and  eastern  frontier,  the  latter 
frontier  being  protected  by  Konigsberg  and  Allenstein,  of  the 
first  line,  and  Danzig,  Dirschau,  Graudenz,  Thorn  and  the  Vis- 
tula Passages,  of  the  second  line.  South  of  this  point  are 
Posen,  Glogau  and  Breslau,  which  face  Poland,  while  begin- 
ning at  Neisse  the  strong  defense  against  Austria  consists  of 
fortifications  at  Glatz,  Ingolstadt  and  Ulm,  the  approaches  to 
Berlin  being  guarded  by  Magdeburg,  Spandau  and  Kustrin. 
POLISH  QUADRILATERAL. 

Along  the  line  of  the  Russian  frontier  which  guard  that 
country  from  attacks  by  the  Germans  are  the  fortresses  of 
Libau,  on  the  Baltic;  Kovna,  Ossovets  and  Ust-Dvinsk,  in  the 
Vilna  district,  and  in  Poland  there  are  situated  Novo-Geor- 
gievsk,  Warsaw  and  Ivangorod,  on  the  Vistula,  and  Brest- 
Litovsk,  on  the  Bug — four  strongholds  known  as  the  Polish 
Quadrilateral.  Guarding  Petrograd  are  the  smaller  fortifica- 
tions of  Kronstadt  and  Viborg,  with  Sweaborg  midway  down 
the  Gulf  of  Finland  near  Helsingfors.  Sebastopol  and  Kertch, 
in  the  Crimea,  and  Otchokov,  near  Odessa,  are  the  fortifications 
which  guard  the  Black  Sea. 

Along  the  Austrian  frontier  are  the  strong  embattlements 
of  Cracow  and  Przemysl,  on  the  road  to  Lemberg  in  Galicia. 
These  forts  face  Poland.  In  Hungary  there  are  Gyula-Feh- 
ervar  and  Arad,  on  the  Maros  River,  and  which  guard  the 


170  THE  WORLD'S  ARMIES. 

approach  from  the  angle  of  Roumania.  On  her  frontier  facing 
Servia  there  are  Alt-Orsova  and  Peterwardein,  on  the  Danube, 
and  Sarajevo,  in  Bosnia,  with  Temesvar  and  Komorn  blocking 
the  approach  to  Vienna  from  the  southeast.  On  the  Adriatic 
are  Cattaro,  on  the  edge  of  Montenegro,  and  the  naval  arsenals 
of  Pola  and  Trieste.  All  the  Alpine  passes  of  the  Tyrol  are 
fortified,  but  neither  Vienna  nor  Budapest  has  any  defenses. 
The  fortifications  of  Italy,  aside  from  those  on  her  coasts, 
extend  in  a  line  from  Venice,  through  Verona,  Mantua  and 
Piacenza  to  Alessandria  and  Casale,  which  face  the  French 
frontier. 


CHAPTER   X. 

THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

Germany's  Sea  Strength — Great  Britain's  Immense  War  Fleet — Immense 
Fighting  Craft — The  United  States'  New  Battle  Cruisers — The  Fastest 
and  Biggest  Ocean  Fighting  Ships — The  Picturesque  Marines  :  the 
Soldiers  of  the  Sea. 

JUST  as  Germany  at  the  outset  of  the  war  had  the  most 
efficient  and,  broadly  speaking,  the  greatest  army  in  the 

world,  so  England  had  the  greatest  navy  in  the  world. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  Great  Britain's  domination  of  the  seas  was 
very  largely  responsible  for  the  development  of  the  super- 
submarine  by  Germany,  and  the  putting  into  effect  of  the  sub- 
marine warfare  which  proved  so  disastrous  to  the  Allies.  This 
for  the  reason  that  Germany,  having  sought  for  means  to  offset 
Great  Britain's  power  and  control  of  the  seas,  turned  to  the 
underseas  craft. 

Up  to  the  accession  of  Emperor  William  II — the  Kaiser 
i — Germany's  navy  was  little  more  than  a  joke.  In  1848  the 
National  Parliament  voted  six  million  thalers  for  the  creation 
of  a  fleet,  and  some  boats  were  constructed.  But  the  attempts 
to  weld  Germany,  then  little  more  than  a  federation,  into  a 
nation  having  failed,  the  fleet  was  put  up  at  auction,  and  actu- 
ally sold  in  1852.  Prussia,  a  separate  state,  had  started  a  fleet 
of  her  own  and  purchased  the  German  boats. 

This  fleet,  just  before  the  American  Civil  War,  consisted 
of  four  cruisers,  carrying  28  cannon,  and  one  cruiser  having  17 
cannon,  besides  which  there  were  21  "cannon  boats,"  carrying 
two  and  three  cannons  each.  The  Prussian  fleet  merged  into 
the  North  German  Confederation  in  1867,  and  in  turn  became 
part  of  the  fleet  of  the  new  German  Empire  in  1871. 

In  the  war  with  France  the  German  fleet  played  no  part. 
There  were  one  or  two  clashes  between  French  and  German 
small  boats,  but  that  was  all.    Even  the  successful  outcome  of 

171 


172  THE   WORLD'S   NAVIES. 

the  war  did  not  inspire  Germany  to  build  up  a  navy.  Plans 
for  the  greater  navy  were  first  outlined  about  1882,  but  for  a 
period  of  seven  years  not  a  battleship  was  built,  concentration 
being  placed  upon  the  torpedo  boat.  The  idea  of  developing 
the  torpedo  boat  fleet  belong  to  the  present  Grand  Admiral 
von  Tirpitz,  then  a  young  officer.  The  fleet  became  the  best  in 
the  world,  but  its  usefulness  was  soon  checked  by  the  new 
inventions,  searchlights,  gatling  guns,  etc. 

Germany's  fleet  legislation  of  1898  for  the  first  time 
looked  ahead  and  established  rules  for  future  building.  The 
Spanish- American  and  the  Boer  wars  disquieted  Germany,  and 
about  1900  the  fleet  was  doubled  by  legislation.  In  1906  the 
campaign  of  submarines,  torpedo  boats  and  greater  battleships 
began.  Part  of  the  program  required  that  12  torpedo  boats  be 
built  each  year.  Additional  legislation  for  the  construction  of 
cruisers  and  battleships  was  effected  in  1908,  and  in  1912,  until 
at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  Germany  had  38  ships  of  the  line, 
14  armored  cruisers,  38  protected  cruisers,  224  torpedo  boats 
and  30  submarines.  There  were  no  torpedo-boat  destroyers, 
the  small  cruisers  taking  their  places.  The  naval  organization 
contained  73,000  officers  and  men.  The  largest  boats  are  the 
dreadnoughts,  which  are  divided  into  several  classes.  One  of 
the  last  of  these  built  by  Germany  was  the  Derfflinger,  which 
had  a  displacement  of  28,000  tons. 

The  personnel  of  the  German  navy  prior  to  the  war  was 
79,197  officers  and  men. 

THE  BRITISH  NAVY. 
Because  of  the  fact  that  the  territory  of  Great  Britain  is 
scattered  over  the  face  of  the  globe  and  that  it  is  necessaiy  to 
use  the  highways  of  the  sea  for  reaching  her  various  posses- 
sions, the  navy  of  that  country  is  undoubtedly  the  greatest 
collection  of  fighting  ships  ever  gathered  together  under  one 
flag. 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  173 

In  order  to  take  care  of  her  population  of  1,625,000,000 
she  has  gathered  together  a  navy  consisting  of  60  modern  bat- 
tleships, 9  battle  cruisers,  34  armored  cruisers,  17  heavy  pro- 
tected cruisers,  70  light  cruisers,  232  destroyers,  59  torpedo 
boats  of  the  latest  type,  75  submarines,  together  with  50  sea- 
going auxiliaries  of  the  fleet,  which  are  used  as  mother  ships  to 
destroyers,  mine-layers,  distilling  ships,  oil  ships,  repair  and 
hospital  ships,  with  145,000  officers  and  men. 

The  first  group,  completed  between  1895  and  1898,  in- 
cludes six  battleships,  all  of  14,900  tons  displacement,  12,000 
horsepower  and  2,000  tons  coal  capacity.  The  speed  is  17.5 
knots,  the  armor  belt  being  from  10  to  14  inches  at  the  big  guns 
and  with  a  mean  armor  belt  of  9  inches.  The  armament  con- 
sists of  4  12-inch  guns,  12  6-inch  rapid  fire,  16  3-inch  rapid  fire, 
12  3-pounder  rapid  fire,  2  light  rapid  fire  and  2  machine  guns. 
They  have  one  torpedo  tube  above  water  and  two  under  water. 

MONSTERS  OF  THE  SEA. 

A  later  group  of  six  was  built  in  1900  and  1902.  These 
monsters  of  the  sea  are  of  12,950  tons  displacement,  13,500 
horsepower  and  have  2,300  tons  coal  capacity.  They  have  a 
speed  of  18.25  knots,  6  inches  of  armor  belt  and  from  8  to  12 
inches  protection  for  her  big  guns.  The  armament  consists  of 
4  12-inch  rapid  fire  guns,  12  6-inch  rapid  fire,  10  3-inch  rapid 
fire  and  2  light  rapid  fire  and  2  machine  guns.  There  are  four 
torpedo  tubes. 

Gradually  England  developed  larger  and  larger  vessels 
from  this  point,  increasing  the  displacement  in  each  group 
from  16,350  tons  in  1906  to  20,000  in  1911,  and  finally  to 
25,700,  when  the  Queen  Elizabeth  and  Warspite  were  com- 
pleted in  1915.  These  boats — England's  super  dreadnoughts — 
are  of  58,000  horsepower  (turbine),  4,000  tons  oil  capacity. 
They  have  a  speed  of  25  knots,  13.5  inches  of  armor  belt  and 
from  8  to  13.5  inches  protection  for  the  big  guns.  The  arma- 
ment consists  of  8  15-inch,  16  6-inch  and  12i  3-inch  rapid  fire 


174  THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

guns.     They  have  five  torpedo  tubes.     There  were  150,609 
officers  and  men  in  the  navy  when  England  entered  the  war. 

THE  FRENCH  NAVY. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  war  the  French  navy  ranked 
fourth  among  the  navies  of  the  world.  She  had  18  battleships 
of  the  older  types,  and  which  ranged  in  date  of  launching  from 
1894  to  1909.  There  were  building  at  that  time  eight  ships  of 
about  23,095  tons  displacement.  Although  France  had  no 
battle  cruisers,  she  had  19  armored  cruisers.  The  heavier  of 
these  ships  had  a  designed  speed  of  23  knots,  and  carried  from 
2100  to  2300  tons  of  coal.  Their  main  batteries  consisted  of 
2  7.6-inch  rapid  fire  and  8  6.4-inch  rapid  fire  guns. 

Two  protected  cruisers,  the  D'Entrecasteaux  and  the 
Guichen,  and  10  light  cruisers  of  no  fighting  importance  com- 
pleted the  list  of  French  ships. 

France  was,  however,  strong,  so  far  as  numbers  go,  in 
destroyers,  torpedo  boats  and  submarines,  there  being  84  de- 
stroyers, with  displacements  of  276  to  804  tons  and  speeds  of 
28  and  31  knots.  She  possessed  135  torpedo  boats  and  78  sub- 
marines, but  many  of  these  were  of  small  size.  One  hundred 
and  one  of  her  torpedo  boats  had  displacements  of  about  95 
tons,  and  20  of  the  submarines  had  displacements  of  67  tons. 

Of  the  submarines,  there  were  33  which  had  a  displace- 
ment of  390  tons,  2  of  410  tons,  6  of  550  tons,  2  of  785  tons 
and  7  of  830  tons.  This  displacement,  which  was  surface,  is 
usually  70  per  cent  of  the  submerged.  The  larger  submarines 
carry  from  six  to  eight  torpedo  tubes.  In  the  early  part  of 
1916  the  French  Government  had  12  submarines  building, 
these  latter  having  surface  displacement  of  520  tons  and  having 
Diesel  motors  of  2000  horsepower.  The  speed  of  these  sub- 
marines is  17%  knots  on  the  surface  and  8  knots  submerged. 

Attached  to  the  French  fleet  are  16  auxiliaries,  used  as 
mine-layers,  submarine  destroyers  and  aeroplane  mother  ships, 
of  from  300  to  7,898  tons. 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  175 

There  were  61,240  officers  and  men  in  the  navy  of  France 
when  war  was  declared. 

THE  RUSSIAN  NAVY. 

With  the  ending  of  the  Russo-Japanese  war  the  Russian 
navy  was  given  an  overhauling.  There  were  but  three  of  the 
old  battleships  of  the  Russian  navy  left  after  this  fateful  strug- 
gle, these  being  the  Tri  Sviatitelia,  the  Panteleimon  and  the 
Czarevitch.  The  Russian  Government  labored  diligently  to 
build  up  her  navy,  and  is  still  doing  her  utmost  to  readjust  that 
branch  of  her  service. 

With  the  outbreak  of  the  great  war  she  had  six  armored 
cruisers,  none  of  which  was  in  the  Black  Sea.  These  averaged 
in  tonnage  from  7,900  to  15,170  tons  displacement.  There 
were  eight  cruisers  of  from  3,100  to  6,700  tons,  and  of  no  fight- 
ing value  whatever. 

Russia  had  but  14  torpedo  boats,  all  small  and  of  little 
value.  She  had  a  fairly  good  fleet  of  destroyers  and  subma- 
rines, having  91  of  the  former  and  55  submarines. 

There  were  36,000  officers  and  men  in  the  service  when 
hostilities  opened. 

THE  AUSTRIAN  NAVY. 

When  the  war  was  declared  Austria,  Germany's  sup- 
porter, had  nine  battleships  ready.  These  were  completed 
since  1905,  as  follows:  In  1906  and  1907  there  were  finished 
three  battleships  which  displaced  10,433  tons,  had  14,000  horse- 
power and  1315  tons  coal  capacity.  They  had  a  speed  of  19.25 
knots,  6  to  8.25  inches  of  side  armor  and  9.5  inches  protection 
for  the  big  guns.  The  armament  consisted  of  4  9.4-inch,  12 
7.6-inch  rapid  fire,  14  3-inch  rapid  fire  and  16  smaller  guns. 
They  had  two  torpedo  tubes. 

In  1910  three  other  ships  were  added  to  the  navy.  These 
were  slightly  larger  than  those  described  just  above,  having  a 
displacement  of  14,268  tons,  with  engines  of  20,000  horse- 
power.   They  had  three  torpedo  tubes. 


176  THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

Three  ships  of  20,000  tons  displacement  were  launched  in 
1912  and  1913.  They  had  a  speed  of  20  knots  and  four  tor- 
pedo tubes.  Three  other  battleships  had  been  built  up  until 
1906,  and  these,  together  with  10  light  cruisers,  were  in  the 
Austrian  navy  at  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities. 

The  torpedo  boat  destroyers,  of  which  there  were  18,  must 
not  be  forgotten.  Twelve  of  these  were  of  384  tons,  capable 
of  making  28%  knots.  These  carried  4  12-pounders  and  2 
21-inch  torpedo  tubes.    They  were  built  for  oil  fuel. 

There  were  six  submarines  in  this  navy,  these  being  of 
moderate  size,  ranging  from  216  to  235  tons  displacement  on 
the  surface. 

THE  JAPANESE  NAVY. 

There  were  9  first-class  battleships  in  the  Japanese  navy 
at  the  beginning  of  the  world  war.  Of  battle  cruisers  there 
were  5,  while  of  the  older  battleships  13  were  ready  for  orders. 
Twelve  first-class  cruisers  were  ready  for  duty,  and  there  were 
9  second-class  cruisers  and  9  third-class  cruisers.  Of  gunboats 
there  were  5,  60  destroyers,  37  torpedo  boats  and  15  subma- 
rines. The  personnel  of  the  Japanese  navy  consisted  of  47,000 
officers  and  men. 

THE  ITALIAN  NAVY. 

Italy  was  ready  for  her  part  on  the  seas  with  7  first-class 
battleships,  8  of  the  older  type,  9  first-class  cruisers,  5  second- 
class  cruisers,  10  third-class  cruisers,  5  gunboats,  46  destroyers, 
75  torpedo  boats  and  20  submarines.  There  were  36,000 
officers  and  men  to  handle  these  ships. 

THE  TURKISH  NAVY. 

When  hostilities  were  declared  Turkey  had  a  navy  con- 
sisting of  2  first-class  battleships,  3  battleships  of  an  older  type, 
2  first-class  cruisers,  2  second-class  cruisers,  4  third-class 
cruisers,  8  gunboats,  2  monitors,  10  destroyers  and  8  torpedo 
boats.  The  officers  and  men  in  the  Turkish  navy  numbered 
30,000. 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  177 

UNITED  STATES  NAVY. 

The  United  States  navy,  which  has  made  an  enviable 
reputation  for  itself  wherever  and  whenever  the  boats  and  men 
have  been  engaged,  ranked  third  at  the  beginning  of  the  war. 
While  not  of  the  heaviest  type,  the  boats  were  of  the  most 
improved  models,  and  maintained  on  a  basis  that  justified  the 
belief  that  they  would  stand  up  in  the  face  of,  the  severest 
opposition. 

There  were  12  modern  battleships,  30  of  an  older  type, 
10  armored  cruisers,  5  first-class  cruisers,  4  second-class 
cruisers,  16  third-class  cruisers,  30  gunboats,  9  monitors,  74 
destroyers,  19  torpedo  boats  and  73  submarines,  manned  by 
55,389  officers  and  men.  The  California,  Idaho,  Arizona,  Mis- 
sissippi and  Pennsylvania  are  the  latest  battleships  of  the  navy, 
and  are  of  the  super- dreadnought  type.  All  of  these  battle- 
ships have  a  displacement  of  more  than  31,000  tons,  and  have 
the  most  complete  equipment  that  it  is  possible  to  command. 
The  batteries  consist  of  4  13-inch  and  14  6-inch  guns,  4 
6-pounders,  together  with  4  21-inch  torpedo  tubes.  There  is  a 
variation  in  the  batteries,  but  all  have  approximately  the  same 
kind  of  armament. 

One  of  these  huge  vessels  is  about  625  feet  long,  and  has 
a  speed  of  from  21  to  23  knots.  The  Pennsylvania,  one  of  the 
largest,  is  of  31,500  horsepower,  and  cost  approximately 
$7,250,000.  In  addition  to  this,  Congress  had  authorized  the 
construction  of  what  is  designed  to  be  the  supreme  type  of 
fighting  vessel.  The  plans  for  these  vessels  call  for  the  con- 
struction of  vessels  aproximately  875  feet  long  and  nearly  90 
feet  wide.  Some  idea  of  what  enormous  vessels  these  must  be 
may  be  gained  when  it  is  seen  that  the  cruisers  are  250  feet 
longer  than  the  super-dreadnought. 

The  battle  cruisers  have  six  decks,  extending  from  end  to 
end,  and  are  so  extensive  that  they  almost  constitute  a  battle- 
front. 

H  R— 12 


178  THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

This  comparison  to  a  battlefront  on  land  becomes  interest- 
ing when  consideration  of  it  is  further  pursued.  There  are 
even  railroads  to  fetch  ammunition  to  the  guns,  though  they 
run  vertically  instead  of  horizontally.  The  general  headquar- 
ters is  in  the  conning  tower,  to  which  all  lines  of  "field  com- 
munication" lead — telegraphs,  telephones,  etc. 

The  "observation  posts,"  for  directing  and  correcting  the 
range  and  aim  of  artillery,  are  at  the  tops  of  the  two  wire 
"bird-cage"  masts.  This  work  is  helped  (as  on  land)  by  kite 
balloons  and  aeroplanes,  which,  as  part  of  its  fighting  equip- 
ment, the  battle  cruiser  carries.  To  blind  the  enemy  ships, 
under  suitable  circumstances,  the  big  guns  create  a  "barrage" 
of  water,  by  directing  their  fire  at  the  sea  in  front  of  the  hostile 
vessels,  throwing  over  them  a  mass  of  spray. 

AMPLE  PROVISION  FOR  THE  WOUNDED. 

On  board  the  battle  cruiser  is  a  fully  equipped  field  hos- 
pital, supplemented  by  battle  dressing  stations  near  the  guns, 
for  the  emergency  treatment  of  the  wounded.  To  the  musi- 
cians of  the  ship's  band  is  assigned  the  duty  of  carrying  wound- 
ed men  to  the  dressing  stations  and  the  hospital,  the  latter 
being  on  one  of  the  lower  decks,  beneath  the  water  level. 

The  battle  cruiser,  built  long  and  narrow,  has  a  great 
speed.  The  four  monster  propellers  are  driven  by  electricity, 
which  is  generated  by  engines  fed  with  fuel  oil.  The  speed 
attained  is  35  knots  an  hour,  which  means  the  same  speed  as  a 
train  traveling  at  the  rate  of  40  miles  an  hour,  since  the  sea 
mile,  or  knot,  is  longer  than  the  land  mile. 

In  order  to  obtain  this  enormous  speed  it  was  necessary 
for  the  designers  of  the  battle  cruisers  to  sacrifice  armor  pro- 
tection. The  armor  on  these  ships  is  but  an  eight-inch  belt. 
The  real  object  of  the  battle  cruiser  is  to  use  its  superior  speed 
and  overwhelming  gun  power  to  overtake  and  destroy  the 
enemy's  ships  of  the  second  line,  the  auxiliaries  and  scouts. 

Each  of  these  vessels  has  a  displacement  of  34,800  tons — ■ 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  179 

meaning,  in  plain  language,  that  they  weigh  that  much,  hence 
displace  that  much  water  when  launched.  The  biggest  British 
battle  cruiser,  which  is  the  largest  battle  cruiser  afloat,  is  the 
British  Tiger,  which  has  a  displacement  of  28,500  tons,  and  is 
less  in  length  by  150  feet  than  these  mighty  battle  cruisers. 
The  Tiger  is  much  less  formidably  armed,  carrying  eight 
13%-inch  guns.  The  largest  German  battle  cruiser  is  the 
Derfflinger,  of  26,200  tons,  and  armed  with  eight  12-irich  rifles. 
Our  latest  commissioned  dreadnought,  the  Arizona,  has 
engines  of  31,400  horsepower.  The  engines  of  that  monster 
passenger  steamship,  the  ill-fated  Lusitania,  were  of  70,000 
horsepower.  Those  of  the  Tiger  boast  120,000  horsepower. 
But  each  of  our  six  battle  cruisers  has  180,000  horsepower  to 
drive  her  through  the  water. 

HUGE  FIGHTING  CRAFT. 

These  huge  fighting  craft  are  the  most  expensive  ships 
ever  built.  Each  of  them  cost  about  $20,000,000,  the  money 
outlay  being  something  like  $16,500,000,  exclusive  of  armor 
and  guns.  And  for  each  battle  cruiser  must  be  provided,  in 
the  way  of  personnel,  1,153  enlisted  men,  64  marines  and  58 
officers. 

While  the  American  Navy  had  but  55,389  men  when  the 
war  opened  it  was  quickly  increased,  and  under  the  Army  bill, 
which  provided  for  the  reorganization  and  increasing  of  the 
land  forces,  the  naval  forces  were  also  increased. 

The  bill  increasing  the  authorized  enlisted  strength  of  the 
navy  to  150,000  did  not  provide  for  any  additional  officers 
above  the  rank  of  lieutenant.  The  increase  in  the  enlisted  force 
amounts  to  57,000,  the  authorized  strength  at  the  time  of  the 
law's  passage  being  93,000.  Based  on  the  increase,  the  allow- 
ance of  officers  would  be  747  lieutenants  and  954  lieutenants 
junior  grade  and  ensigns. 

The  increase  in  the  enlisted  strength  of  the  Marine  Corps 
from  17,400  to  30,000,  or  by  12,600,  also  gives  an  additional 


180  THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

allowance  of  504  officers  to  the  corps,  which,  under  the  bill,  are 
distributed  among  the  grades  of  major,  captain,  first  lieuten- 
ant and  second  lieutenant. 

The  Marine  Corps  is  one  of  the  most  picturesque  military 
organizations  in  the  world.  There  is,  probably,  no  other  such 
body  of  trained  soldiery.  While  they  are  under  the  control  of 
the  Navy  Department,  they  can  be  detached  from  that  branch 
of  the  service  and  assigned  for  duty  with  any  other  branch  of 
the  military  forces  of  the  country. 

POLICEMEN  OF  THE  SEA. 

They  are  the  policemen  of  the  sea;  they  are  artillerymen, 
infantrymen,  cavalry,  engineers,  and  soldiers,  first,  last  and  all 
the  time.  They  are  the  first  troops  in  action,  and  there  is  no 
restriction  as  to  the  kind  of  military  duty  they  are  called  upon 
to  perform. 

The  Marines  served  on  shore  and  on  board  vessels  of  the 
navy  throughout  the  Revolutionary  War,  two  battalions  hav- 
ing been  authorized  by  the  Continental  Congress  November 
10,  1775.  The  present  organization  really  dates  from  July, 
1798,  when  Congress  passed  an  act  approving  the  establish- 
ment of  an  organization  to  be  known  as  the  Marine  Corps, 
consisting  of  1  major,  4  captains,  16  first  lieutenants,  12  second 
lieutenants,  48  sergeants,  48  corporals,  32  drums  and  fifes  and 
720  privates. 

Every  one  of  the  15,000  men  who  composed  the  more  than 
a  century  old  Marine  Corps  when  the  war  broke  out  was  ready 
and  on  his  toes  when  the  call  for  action  came.  There  was  noth- 
ing in  the  way  of  scientific  preparedness  that  got  by  them.  In 
the  matter  of  trench  helmets,  for  instance,  when  it  was  time  for 
the  American  nation  to  come  to  the  front  in  the  great  world 
war,  the  Marines  had  a  helmet  so  much  of  an  improvement  on 
the  one  used  by  the  Allies  that  there  was  no  comparison. 

Armored  motorcars,  likewise,  of  the  most  improved  type, 
belonged  to  the  Marine  Corps  when  the  call  for  action  came. 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  181 

These  cars  are  capable  of  making  45  miles  an  hour,  and  there 
were  plenty  of  them  for  service  in  the  Marine  Corps.  Some 
interesting  equipment  never  used  before  the  big  war  composed 
part  of  the  quartermasters'  stores  in  the  Marine  Corps. 

It's  a  marvel  what  these  chaps  can  do  with  a  big  naval 
gun — one  of  those  big  brutes  which  are  bolted  down  to  the  deck 
of  a  warship.  It  doesn't  look  like  a  thing  to  be  picked  up  and 
carted  around  the  country.  That's  precisely  wThat  the  heavy 
artillery  companies  do,  however.  It  takes  them  but  a  few  min- 
utes to  sling  one  of  these  five-inchers  over  the  side  of  a  ship, 
land  it,  and  take  it  wherever  it  is  needed.  They  do  this  with 
the  aid  of  a  single-spar  derrick,  some  little  narrow-gauge 
trucks  and  a  portable  narrow-gauge  railroad. 

TRANSPORTATION  OF  BIG  GUN. 

The  method  is  to  lay  down  the  railroad — it  can  be  done 
very  swiftly  by  men  carefully  trained  in  the  art  of  laying  tracks 
over  all  kinds  of  ground — put  the  gun  and  its  mount,  with  a 
specially  prepared  base  of  extremely  heavy  timbers,  on  the 
tracks,  and  trundle  it  to  the  place  where  it  is  needed  to  pour 
a  rapid  fire  into  the  enemy. 

Here  a  pit  has  been  dug,  in  which  is  laid  down  the  heavy 
timber  base,  riveted  together  with  heavy  steel  bolts.  Then  it 
is  well  packed  with  dirt  and  stone,  and  the  gun  carriage  made 
fast  ingeniously.  The  single-stick  derrick  has  been  erected 
alongside,  guyed  out  in  four  directions  with  heavy  ropes,  which 
are  made  fast  to  the  ground  by  means  of  "dead  men,"  and 
manipulated  by  very  live  gangs  of  husky  marines.  A  chain 
block  of  powerful  type  is  used  to  pick  up  the  gun  carriage  and 
put  it  in  place,  and  afterwards  to  swing  the  gun  into  its  sockets 
on  the  carriage. 

Later  the  breech  locks  and  sights  are  added,  and  the  big 
five-inch,  40-caliber  naval  gun  is  ready  to  go  into  action.  These 
big  and  heavy  guns,  suitable  for  long  range  work  with  high 
explosive  shells,  can  be  taken  a  quarter  of  a  mile  or  so  from  the 


182  THE  WOELD'S  NAVIES. 

ship  which  carried  them,  over  rough  ground,  set  up  and  put  in 
operation  in  a  few  days'  time. 

But  the  heavy  artillery  base  is  only  one  of  the  Marines' 
work.  They  have  big  howitzers,  of  the  more  modern  type, 
most  of  which  are  kept  at  Annapolis,  where  they  can  be  loaded 
aboard  ship  in  short  order.  Men  and  machines  can  be  mobilized 
at  the  strategic  points  in  a  very  short  time. 

EVERY  MANS  SERVICE. 

The  Marine  service  is  unique  in  many  respects.  For  one 
thing,  it  is  every  man's  service.  The  proportion  of  officers  who 
have  risen  from  the  ranks  or  who  have  been  commissioned 
from  civilian  life  is  higher  in  the  Marine  Corps  than  in  either 
the  Army  or  the  Navy.  This,  of  course,  makes  for  democracy 
in  the  corps.  An  enlisted  man,  who  does  not  wait  until  he  is 
too  far  up  in  the  20's  to  enlist,  has  a  very  fair  chance  of  earning 
his  commission.  Another  thing — and  this  is  of  prime  import- 
ance to  the  ambitious  fellow — promotion  goes  by  merit.  In  the 
army  and  navy  the  young  officer  is  promoted  by  seniority. 

Things  are  a  bit  different  in  the  Marine  Corps.  In  this 
organization  a  man  doesn't  absolutely  have  to  wait  for  his  num- 
ber to  come  around.  If  he  distinguishes  himself  above  his  fel- 
lows, he  may  be  promoted  without  much  regard  for  age  or 
length  of  service.  He  goes  up  as  he  is  able  to,  by  his  active 
ability  and  his  readiness  to  work  hard  and  effectively  for  Uncle 
Sam.  There  are  advocates,  of  course,  of  both  systems.  There 
are  merits  which  both  systems  can  justly  claim.  But  it  goes 
without  saying  that  this  possibility  of  promotion  keeps  every- 
body in  the  Marine  Corps  on  the  jump. 

Even  the  enlisted  men  who  are  too  old  to  get  commissions 
have  something  to  work  for.  Not  very  long  since  Congress 
authorized  the  appointment  of  "warrant  officers"  in  the  Marine 
Corps.  The  Navy  had  this  grade  for  many  years.  It  is  new 
in  the  Marine  Corps,  and  is  an  added  incentive  to  hard  work. 

Another  incentive — and  perhaps  the  strongest  one — that 


THE  WOKLD'S  NAVIES.  183 

draws  young  fellows  of  the  up-and-doing  sort  into  the  Marine 
Corps  is  that  of  active  service.  The  Marines  boast  that  they 
are  always  on  the  job;  that  no  matter  how  peaceful  the  time, 
the  Marines  are  sure  to  see  "something  stirring"  right  along. 
It  is  a  saying — and  a  true  one — in  the  Marine  Corps  that  every 
marine  who*  lias  served  the  ordinary  enlistment  in  the  corps 
since  the  Spanish- American  war  has  smelt  powder.  Ever  since 
the  fuss  with  Spain  the  marines  have  been  covering  themselves 
with  glory.  In  that  little  war  of  1898  the  Marines  were  the 
first  to  land  in  Cuba.  They  held  Guantanamo  for  three 
months.  In  1890  they  saw  service  in  the  Philippines;  the  next 
year  in  China.  In  1902  the  Marines  took  part  in  the  fighting 
against  Aguinaldo,  the  wily  Filipino  leader.  In  1903  they  put 
down  the  rebellion  in  Panama,  captured  Colon  and  opened  up 
the  Panama  railroad.  In  1906  they  helped  quiet  the  uprising 
of  that  summer  in  Cuba.  They  were  in  Nicaragua  in  1909. 
From  1911  to  1913  they  did  more  duty  in  Cuba,  with  a  whirl 
in  Nicaragua  again  in  1912.  They  helped  hold  Vera  Cruz 
for  three  months  in  1914.  Next  year  they  went  to  Haiti,  where 
they  have  been  moderately  busy  from  time  to  time  since.  Santo 
Domingo  saw  them  in  1916. 

AN  UNAPPROACHABLE  RECORD. 
Neither  the  army  nor  the  navy  can  claim  anything  to  beat 
it — you  couldn't  tell  a  marine  that  the  rival  branches  of  the 
service  can  claim  anything  to  equal  it.  And  as  for  the  modern 
implements  of  warfare — the  European  armies  have  no  advan- 
tage over  the  marines  for  testing  out  new  devices.  They  had 
armored  cars,  for  instance,  as  far  back  as  1906;  they  began  to 
use  motor  trucks  for  military  purposes  as  early  as  1909.  Every 
marine  expedition  is  equipped  with  its  quota  of  armored  trucks. 
They  would  as  soon  think  of  voyaging  over  the  seas  to  put 
down  an  incipient  revolution  without  their  armored  cars  and 
motor  trucks  as  they  would  of  going  to  meet  the  enemy  without 
their  rifle. 


184  THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES. 

There  used  to  be  an  old  joke  about  "Horse  Marines."  A 
sailorman  on  a  horse  is  an  incongruous  thing — a  sight  to  make 
you  hold  your  sides.  But  the  marines  are  not  plain  sailormen. 
They  are  "soldier  and  sailor,  too,"  and  as  soldiers  they  have 
turned  the  joke  on  the  old  saw  about  "horse  marines."  There 
are  "horse  marines"  these  days,  and  mighty  good  cavalry  they 
make. 

The  marine  can  ride  with  the  best  of  the  cavalrymen.  And 
in  the  fracas  in  Domingo  there  were  two  cavalry  companies  of 
marines  organized. 

THE  MANY-SIDED  MARINE. 

It  takes  a  bit  longer  to  make  an  efficient  marine  than  to 
make  an  infantryman.  This  because  the  marine  is  a  man  of 
many  specialties.  He  is,  of  course,  in  season  and  out  of  season, 
an  international  policeman.  That's  his  job  in  time  of  peace. 
But  when  he  fares  abroad  to  fight  his  country's  battles  he  may 
be  called  upon  to  do  almost  any  kind  of  work.  He  may  be  an 
artilleryman;  a  signalman;  an  airman.  He  may  be,  and 
usually  is,  anything  that  his  country  needs  at  that  particular 
time.    And  he  is  trained  to  meet  the  emergency. 

The  new  recruit,  in  ordinary  times,  is  sent  for  his  first  in- 
struction to  Port  Royal,  down  in  Georgia.  There  he  has 
nothing  to  do  but  drill,  drill,  drill,  until  he  can  do  the  infantry 
evolutions  in  his  sleep.  He  learns  to  drill,  he  learns  to  keep 
clean — the  Marines  are  something  of  a  dandy  corps — and  he 
learns  to  take  care  of  himself  no  matter  what  happens.  He  is 
taught  to  be  a  soldier  and  a  man.  He  learns  to  walk  straight, 
shoot  straight,  think  straight.  And  then  he  goes  for  a  spell  to 
sea — for  after  all,  he  needs  sea  legs  as  well  as  land  legs. 

But  these  two  tricks  of  duty  by  no  means  end  the  marine's 
schooling.  When  he  has  become  an  efficient  all-around  man  he 
may  specialize.  He  may,  if  he  chooses,  go  into  the  signal  corps 
and  learn  the  multitude  of  details  connected  with  this  ultra- 
modern arm  of  the  service.     He  learns  to  send  messages  by 


THE  WORLD'S  NAVIES.  185 

every  possible  means.  He  learns  to  operate  a  radio.  And,  it 
might  be  mentioned  in  passing,  the  Marine  Corps  is  equipped 
with  the  very  finest  of  radio  apparatus.  They  have  big  trucks 
which  carry  the  outfit  and  supply  the  power  for  either  sending 
radio  messages  or  operating  huge  electric  searchlights.  Or  he 
may  go  into  aviation. 


Reproduced  by  permission  of  N.  Y.  Evening  Post. 
INTERNATIONAL  BOUNDARIES  BEFORE  THE  WAR. 
This  map  shows  the  boundary  lines  between  nations  as  they  were  at  the 
beginning-  of  the  war,  as  also  the  coast  lines  of  Europe.     The  latter  are  brought 
out  in  bold  relief. 


186 


CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

Unexpected  Developments — How  the  War  Flames  Spread — A  Score  of  Coun- 
tries Involved — The  Points  of  Contact — Picturesque  and  Hugged  Bul- 
garia, Roumania,  Servia,  Greece,  Italy  and  Historic  Southeast  Europe. 

THE  real  history  of  the  greatest  war  of  all  times  is  the 
history  of  the  entire  world,  touching  every  phase  of 
existence  in  a  manner  that  has  never  been  approxi- 
mated by  any  other  conflict.  The  motives  and  ramifications 
are  so  great  that  it  is  almost  impossible  for  the  human  mind  to 
grasp  the  significance  of  many  things  of  importance  which,  at 
a  glance,  seem  to  be  but  incidents. 

The  world  looked  on  expectantly  when  the  war  started, 
because  there  was  a  general  knowledge  of  the  conditions  exist- 
ing in  Europe  and  the  undercurrent  was  felt  by  students  of 
international  affairs.  But  that  Russia  would  revolt  and  the 
Czar  abdicate,  as  he  did  in  March,  1917,  and  the  iron-ruled 
country  would  set  up  a  government  of  its  own — would  join 
the  circle  of  democracies — was  not  even  hinted  at.  Neither 
was  it  intimated  that  Constantine  I,  King  of  Greece,  would 
abdicate  in  favor  of  his  son,  Prince  Alexander,  as  he  did  in  the 
following  June,  under  pressure,  because  of  his  sympathy  for 
Germany. 

Neither  was  there  a  suspicion  that  the  fire  started  by  the 
flash  of  a  pistol  and  the  bursting  of  a  bomb  in  Bosnia  would 
spread  until  sixteen  countries  were  arrayed  against  Ger- 
many and  Austria,  supported  by  the  Bulgarians  and  the 
Turks.  And  to  these  must  be  added  the  entrance  into  the  con- 
flict of  Canada,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  possessions  of  Great 
Britain,  and  smaller  possessions  of  other  countries.  The  flames 
swept  over  the  face  of  the  earth  in  this  fashion: 

Starting  with  the  movement  of  Austria  against  Servia, 
after  the  assassination  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  there  lined 

187 


188  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

up  as  a  consequence  of  the  alliances  formed  between  the  pow- 
ers, the  countries  referred  to  in  preceding  chapters.  The  triple 
alliance  was  originally  an  agreement  between  Germany,  Aus- 
tria-Hungary and  Italy,  to  strengthen  their  positions,  and  the 
Triple  Entente  consisted  of  agreements  between  France,  Eng- 
land and  Russia. 

INVASION  OF  BELGIUM. 

Briefly,  the  invasion  of  Belgium  by  Germany,  and  her 
ambitions  in  the  southeast,  where  Russia  had  what  amounted 
to  protectorate  relations,  drew  first  France,  England  and 
Russia  into  the  strife,  and  step  by  step  there  became  involved 
nation  after  nation.  The  steps,  marked  by  the  declarations  of 
war,  were  as  follows:  On  July  28,  1914,  Austria  declared  war 
on  Servia,  and  on  August  1  Germany  made  the  declaration 
against  Russia.  Next  Germany  turned  upon  France,  on  the 
third  day  of  August,  and  also  on  Belgium,  whereupon,  on  the 
following  day,  Great  Britain  declared  war  on  Germany;  a  day 
later  Austria-Hungary  issued  the  mandate  against  Russia, 
and  two  days  later,  or  on  August  8,  Montenegro  declared  war 
on  Austria.  Austria  accepted  the  challenge,  and  then  Servia 
took  up  the  cudgel  against  Germany.  France  made  formal 
declaration  of  war  on  Austria-Hungary  and  by  the  end  of 
August  Montenegro  had  declared  against  Germany;  Great 
Britain  on  Austria;  Japan  on  Germany;  Austria  on  Japan; 
Austria  on  Belgium.  Later,  or  early  in  November,  Russia 
declared  herself  against  Turkey,  as  did  France  and  Great 
Britain. 

For  six  months  the  battle  raged  and  the  rest  of  the  world 
regarded  the  result  with  grave  concern  until  in  May  of  1915 
Italy,  having  renounced  her  alliance  with  Germany  and  Aus- 
tria, declared  war  first  on  Austria,  then  on  Turkey.  In  the 
fall  of  1915  Servia  took  up  arms  against  Bulgaria,  as  did 
Great  Britain,  France,  Italy  and  Russia.  Then  Germany  de- 
clared against  Portugal,  whose  government  replied  in  kind; 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  L89 

Austria  followed  Germany  in  the  alignment  and  finally,  in 
August,  1916,  there  were  exchanges  of  sharp  "courtesies" — 
the  complete  severance  of  all  diplomatic  relations  and  open 
warfare — between  Roumania  and  Austria-Hungary;  then  be- 
tween Bulgaria  and  Roumania,  with  the  consequent  alignment 
of  the  Central  Powers.  Italy  had  also  made  her  declaration 
against  Germany  specific.  So  for  nine  months  the  war  waged 
with  terrible  bitterness  until  on  April  6,  the  United  States,  by 
the  proclamation  of  President  Wilson,  was  finally  at  war  with 
Germany. 

IN   THE   NATURE  OF  MERE   FORMALITIES. 

These  steps  were,  in  many  instances,  in  the  nature  of  for- 
malities, for  the  relationships  of  some  of  the  countries  involved 
placed  them  in  the  position  of  practically  being  at  war  before 
formal  announcement  was  made.  The  position  then,  was  that 
Germany,  Austria-Hungary  and  Turkey  were  supported  by 
Bulgaria,  who  was  anxious  to  get  redress  for  having  been 
cheated  out  of  what  she  regarded  as  her  rightful  possessions  in 
the  settlement  of  the  Balkan  war  question.  Those  aligned  on 
the  other  side  were  England,  France,  Russia,  Montenegro, 
Italy,  Belgium  (which  had  been  making  defensive  warfare  in 
keeping  with  her  desire  to  be  true  to  her  neutral  pledges;  : 
Servia,  Roumania,  Japan,  Portugal,  the  United  States,  the 
little  principality  of  Monaco,  which  is  best  known  as  the  seat 
of  Monte  Carlo,  the  great  gambling  center  of  Europe,  and 
San  Marino,  a  similar  "patch"  on  the  map  of  Europe.  Brazil, 
Guatemala,  and  the  little  Republic  of  Cuba  also  aligned  them- 
selves against  Germany  in  support  of  the  Allies,  though  there 
was  no  actual  engagement  of  their  forces.  Thus  there  could 
be  counted  as  at  war  against  the  Central  Powers  in  June,  1917, 
sixteen  countries. 

Most  interesting  of  all  the  countries  involved  were  those 
belonging  to  the  Balkan  group  and  centering  in  southeastern 
Europe.    The  Balkan  nations,  Bulgaria,  Servia,  Montenegro, 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  191 

with  Greece,  paved  the  way  for  their  entrance  into  the  conflict 
when  they  formed  an  alliance,  in  1912,  for  common  protection, 
particularly  for  the  enforcement  of  one  of  the  provisions  of 
the  Berlin  Treaty,  guaranteeing  local  government  to  the  Bul- 
gar  and  Serbian  colonies  in  Macedonia.  Montenegro  began 
war  on  Turkey  in  October,  and  Bulgaria,  Servia  and  Greece 
joined  and  drove  the  Turks  out  of  many  of  their  strongholds. 

"COMIC  OPERA"  SOLDIERS. 

In  a  month  of  fighting  the  little  countries,  in  the  pictur- 
esque southeastern  section,  whose  soldiers  have  been  depicted 
as  "comic  opera"  soldiers,  had  rent  Turkey;  Greece  had  cap- 
tured the  famous  Macedonian  city  of  Salonica,  once  known  as 
Thessalonica,  where  was  located  the  church  in  which  was  ad- 
dressed St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians ;  while  the 
Servians  had  captured  Monastir,  one  of  the  most  important 
centers  in  Macedonia,  and  the  Bulgarians  had  driven  the  Turks 
almost  to  the  famed  city  of  Constantinople.  The  Servian  sol- 
diers finally  marched  to  the  Adriatic  sea,  and  Albania  raised 
a  flag  of  its  own  and  asked  Austria-Hungary  and  Italy  to 
recognize  its  independence  and  grant  it  protection. 

Within  little  more  than  two  months  Turkey  had  been  de- 
prived of  the  greater  portion  of  her  possessions  in  Europe  and 
a  treaty  of  peace  was  signed  between  the  allied  countries  and 
the  Turks.  By  this  agreement  Albania  became  in  effect  a  su- 
zerainty, protected  by  Austria.  But  the  agreement  between 
Germany,  Austria-Hungary  and  Italy — the  Triple  Entente — 
gave  those  countries  a  combined  power  which,  when  it  came  to 
fixing  the  terms  of  peace,  left  the  small  allied  countries  of 
victory  at  a  disadvantage,  and  while  Montenegro  and  Greece 
gained  some  territory,  as  did  Servia,  Bulgaria  lost  what  she 
had  gained  in  the  war.  Turkey  lost  90  per  cent  of  her  Empire 
in  Europe,  which  so  aroused  the  country  that  the  rising  of 
the  young  Turks  followed  and  the  government  was  reorgan- 


192  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

ized.    The  enforced  terms  of  settlement,  however,  set  the  little 
countries  at  each  other's  throats. 

The  field  of  the  Balkan  battles  is  the  very  center  of  the 
world's  history.  Along  the  Adriatic,  Ionian  and  Agean  seas 
are  lands  and  territories  peopled  with  races  that  mark  their 
ancestry  back  to  the  very  darkest  ages.  The  protected  country 
of  Albania,  with  its  rocky  surface,  numbers  among  its  peoples 
descendants  of  the  Arnauts,  whose  very  origin  is  a  mystery. 
They  were  present  before  the  days  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The 
Ottoman  Turks,  the  Bulgars  from  the  plains  of  the  Volga  and 
the  Ural  Mountains,  the  Serbs,  the  Roumanians,  Russians, 
Italians,  the  Slavs,  Tartars. 

A  REGION  OF  MOUNTAINS. 

Albania  is  a  mountainous  region  along  the  Adriatic  coast, 
peopled  with  descendants  of  the  ancients  who  maintain  their 
characteristics.  They  are  said  to  be  descendants  of  the  Pelas- 
gian  races,  which  inhabited  the  territory  before  the  Greeks 
builded  their  Athens. 

The  Albanians  are  wild,  daring  mountaineers,  and  though 
the  people  have,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  been  under  Turk- 
ish rule  for  centuries,  they  have  never  recognized  the  sov- 
ereignty of  the  Sultan.  It  was  originally  part  of  the  Turkish 
Empire  in  Europe,  having  been  taken  by  Turkey,  in  1467,  and 
is  a  fertile,  but  wild  country. 

The  same  picturesque  people  that  make  up  the  popula- 
tion of  Albania  constitute  the  populace  of  the  little  country 
of  Montenegro,  which  was  once  part  of  the  Turkish  posses- 
sion. Montenegro  contained  about  3486  square  miles  of  terri- 
tory before  its  acquisitions  in  the  Balkan  wars.  Aided  by 
Russia,  the  country  obtained  its  independence  from  Turkey  in 
1878,  and  in  1910  became  a  kingdom.  Its  present  area  is  about 
5650  square  miles  and  the  population  52'0,000.  The  capital  is 
Cettinje. 

Bulgaria  was  also  once  a  part  of  the  Turkish  possessions, 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  193 

and  under  the  Treaty  of  Berlin,  in  1878,  became  a  suzerainty. 
It  is  a  famous  pastoral  country,  inhabited  by  a  people  for 
years  held  under  the  Ottoman  heel.  They  are  racially  Tura- 
nians, and  kin  of  the  Tartar  and  Huns,  who  came  into  their 
present  fertile  country  from  the  vast  plains  of  eastern  Russia. 
They  made  their  way  thither  more  than  a  thousand  years  ago, 
and  battling  at  the  very  gates  of  Constantinople,  by  their  fierce 
crusades,  secured  the  grants  from  the  Byzantine  Empire  of 
the  territory,  which  constitutes  the  Bulgaria  of  today.  The 
population  is  nearly  5,000,000,  and  the  country  contains  about 
43,000  square  miles. 

WHY  ITALY  ENTERED  THE  WAR. 

Italy's  reasons  for  entering  the  war,  aside  from  her  de- 
mands for  territory,  in  exchange  for  continuance  of  neutrality, 
have  to  do  with  matters  of  years  gone  by,  when  she  began  the 
struggle  for  her  liberation  from  the  Austrian  domination. 
Italy  desired,  among  other  things,  to  acquire  Trentino,  Goritz, 
and  other  adjacent  territory  controlled  by  Austria,  but  Italian 
in  every  attribute.  Trentino  is  a  rocky  region,  and  strategically 
valuable  to  the  country  possessing  it,  which  was  proved  by  the 
terrible  struggle  which  the  Italians  were  forced  to  make  in 
their  attacks  against  the  Austrian  forces. 

The  city  of  Trent  is  the  capital  of  Trentino,  famous  in 
history,  and  the  seat  of  the  long  church  council  in  1545-46.  It 
was  in  turn  controlled  by  Roman,  Goth,  Hun,  Lombard  and 
Holy  Roman  Empire.  It  is  the  site  of  many  historic  buildings, 
notably  the  cathedral  of  Trent,  which  is  a  fine  example  of 
Lombard  architecture,  and  the  church  of  Santa  Maria  Mag- 
gorie,  where  the  famous  Council  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church  was  held.  There  are  old  towers,  and  libraries  rich  in 
manuscripts. 

Trentino  is  famous  for  its  mountain  passes,  over  which 
the  Italians  have  been  compelled  to  drag  their  heavy  artillery 
and  implements  of  war.    The  Alpini,  the  mountaineer  soldiers 

H  R— 13 


(D 

h 

<v 

t 

>> 

<v 

A 

■H 

xn 

cd 

09 

P 

O 

bn 

-♦^ 

c3 

CO" 

0 

g> 

O 

p 

1— ' 

c3 

P"-* 

"<3 ' 

13 

A 

P 

■*■» 

- 

m 

TJ 

m 

Ph 

P 

<v 

M 

ri 

+s 

s 

0 

.p 
"ft 

1-1 

CO" 

p 
0 

fcj 

g 

+^> 

s 

H 

P 

p 

d 

10 

>> 

!< 

■+j 

p 

be 

1=1 

•i-i 

P 

<1 

ca 

«H 
O 

h- 1 

d 

n 

& 

t>> 

H 

H 

M 

w 

0 

ri 

P 

0 

p 

<1 

09 

4) 

0 
0 

N 

W 

P 

c3 

H 

> 
O 

•m 

O 

ft 

m 

'a 

5! 

H 

s 

| 

P 

E 

O 

rP 
OS 

<T> 

H 

P 

H 
P 

C 

,P 
0 

o 

1— 1 

a 

b) 

•1-1 
0 

P 

P- 
m 

P 

P 

<v 

fafl 

<v 

Q) 

A 

A 

p 

+= 

v 

a 

rd 

P 

a 

c3 

(-1 

P 

194 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  195 

of  Italy,  are  among  the  most  picturesque  in  the  world.  They 
have  scaled  the  almost  perpendicular  faces  of  the  Alps,  climb- 
ing from  crag  to  crag  with  their  bodies  roped  together,  drag- 
ging machine  guns  in  pieces  strapped  to  their  shoulders.  Tol- 
mino,  Trieste,  Istria,  Dalmatia,  Avlona,  the  prime  harbor  of 
Albania  (seized  by  Italy  in  the  fall  of  1916) .  These  are  little 
spots  in  the  territory  logically  Italian,  which  Italy  covets. 

DIVIDED  INTO  SIXTEEN  DEPARTMENTS, 
Italy,  since  its  consolidation  into  one  kingdom  in  1870, 
has  been  divided  into  sixteen  departments  comprising  sixty- 
nine  provinces.  The  country  has  a  total  area  of  110,623  square 
miles,  and  a  population  of  a  little  more  than  35,000,000.  The 
Roman  Catholic  Church  is  irrevocably  linked  to  the  history  of 
Italy  and  Rome,  its  capital,  marked  the  farthest  advance  of 
civilization  in  the  ancient  days.  It  possesses  four  distinct  zones, 
ranging  from  the  almost  arctic  cold  of  the  mountain  belts  to  an 
almost  tropical  heat  in  the  southern  lowlands.  It  is  one  of  the 
picturesque  countries  of  the  world,  a  center  of  art,  industry 
and  travel. 

Servia,  which  is  separated  from  Austria-Hungary  by  the 
Danube,  is  of  precisely  the  same  character  as  the  other  rich, 
mountainous  region.  The  country  was  subjugated  by  the 
Turks,  who  retained  possession  of  it  until  1717.  Austria  then 
wrested  control  from  the  Turks,  and  held  it  until  1791,  when 
Turkey  again  dominated  it.  In  1805  the  Servians  revolted, 
and  secured  temporary  independence,  only  to  again  come  un- 
der the  Ottoman  rule.  Again  it  secured  freedom  in  1815,  and 
by  the  Treaty  of  Paris,  independent  existence  was  secured  for 
it.  Turkey  became  only  a  nominal  authority.  It  became  a 
kingdom  in  1882,  after  having  become  absolutely  independent 
with  the  Berlin  Treaty. 

The  people  are  Slavonic,  and  kin  to  the  Croats  of  ancient 
history.  They  are  described  as  having  come  from  Poland  and 
Galicia,  moving  down  the  Danube,  into  what  is  the  present 


196  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

kingdom.  In  the  fourteenth  century  the  Servian  empire  com- 
prised the  whole  Balkan  peninsula,  from  Greece  to  Poland, 
and  from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  Adriatic.  But  Servia  warred 
with  Turkey,  and  her  troops  were  defeated  in  the  great  battle 
at  Kossovo,  and  the  Ottoman  power  became  supreme.  The 
country  has  an  area  of  about  34,000  square  miles  and  a  popula- 
tion of  4,600,000. 

LITTLE  BOSNIA'S  FUTURE. 

Bosnia,  where  was  assassinated  the  Archduke  Francis 
Ferdinand,  of  Austria,  was  a  Turkish  province,  west  of  Servia, 
and  under  the  treaty  of  Berlin  was  to  be  administered  for  an 
undefined  period  by  the  Austrian  government.  The  little  sec- 
tion contains  about  16,000  square  miles  and  has  a  population  of 
about  1,750,000,  largely  of  Slavonic  origin.  They  are  partly 
Mohammedans,  partly  Roman  Catholics  and  Greek  Catholics. 
In  the  middle  ages  Bosnia  belonged  to  the  Eastern  Empire. 
Later  it  became  a  separate  kingdom,  dependent  upon  Hun- 
gary, only  to  be  conquered  by  the  Turks.  It  is  the  mountain- 
ous, rugged  country  of  the  Julian  and  Dinaric  Alps,  but  has 
many  fertile  valleys,  and  is  well  watered  by  the  river  Save,  and 
its  numerous  tributaries. 

Greece,  the  modern  kingdom,  is  one  of  the  countries  that 
for  centuries  were  politically  included  within  the  limits  of  the 
Turkish  Empire.  In  its  present  form  it  represents  but  a  por- 
tion of  that  country,  famous  in  history,  as  the  Greece  of  the 
Ancients — that  classic  land  which  holds  the  most  conspicuous 
place  in  the  pages  of  ancient  history — but  still  it  is  inclusive  of 
the  greatest  names  belonging  to  the  glorious  past.  It  is  the 
country  of  Athens,  Sparta,  Corinth,  Thebes  and  Argos.  It  is 
separated  from  Turkey  by  a  winding  boundary,  extending 
from  the  Gulf  of  Art  a  on  the  west  to  the  Gulf  of  Salonica  on 
the  east. 

The  earliest  settlers  were  the  Pelasgi,  who  were  in  course 
of  time  replaced  by  the  Hellenes.     The}',  in  turn,  were  sue- 


THE   NATIONS  AT   WAR.  197 

ceeded  by  the  Phoenicians,  who  swayed  the  country.  Athens, 
Sj)arta,  Thebes  and  Corinth  came  into  existence  and  became 
the  centers  of  political  government,  of  the  most  progressive 
advancement  in  civilization.  Civil  discords  brought  on  first 
the  Peloponnesian  War,  about  434  B.  C,  and  made  them  prey 
to  the  Macedonians.  Successively  invaded  by  Goths,  Vandals 
and  Xormans  the  country  came  into  the  possession  of  the  Turks 
in  1481,  though  for  two  centuries  the  power  of  the  Turk  was 
questioned  by  the  Venitians.  Revolt  was  had  from  the  Otto- 
man yoke  in  1821,  and  independence  was  secured  by  the  inter- 
ference of  foreign  powers  after  the  defeat  of  the  Turk  at  the 
Xavarino,  in  1827.  Through  the  succeeding  years  it  has  been 
a  protected  monarchy. 

ONE  OF  THE  BALKAN  GROUP. 

Roumania,  the  largest  of  the  Balkan  group,  lying  be- 
tween Russia  on  the  north,  and  Bulgaria  on  the  south,  is  the 
home  of  the  Gacians,  descendants  of  the  warlike  tribes  who  for 
years  held  their  own  against  Greek  and  Roman.  After  the 
fall  of  Rome  the  province  became  a  melting  pot,  through  which 
the  hordes  of  invaders,  passing  from  Russia  to  Asia,  were  in  a 
sense  made  one  people.  The  Goths,  the  Huns,  the  Lombards, 
the  Bulgars  and  the  Magyars  traversed  the  region,  leaving 
many  settlers.  It  became  divided  into  two  provinces,  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia,  known  as  the  Danubian  provinces. 

Both  provinces  were  conquered  by  the  Turks  in  the  fif- 
teenth and  sixteenth  centuries,  and  under  Peter  the  Great  the 
Russians  attempted  the  conquest  of  the  provinces.  In  1859 
the  two  provinces  were  united  under  a  prince  whose  indepen- 
dence both  Turkey  and  Russia  recognized,  and  in  1881  the 
country  declared  itself  a  kingdom.  The  province  of  Wallachia 
derives  its  name  from  the  people  who  early  settled  there,  the 
Wallachs.  The  Roumanians  claim  descent  from  Vlachi, 
a  colony  of  Romans,  wTho  settled  in  Thrace,  and,  in  the  twelfth 
century,  emigrated  to  the  Danube.     The  name  Roumania  is 


198  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

derived  from  the  word  Roman,  the  country  having  originally 
been  "the  Land  of  the  Roumani."  Roumania  has  a  population 
of  about  7,600,000  and  comprises  64,000  square  miles. 

Macedonia,  famous  country  of  Greece  in  the  time  of 
Philip,  father  of  Alexander  the  Great,  embraced  the  entire 
region  from  the  Scardian  Mountains  to  Thessaly,  and  from  the 
Epirus  and  Illyria  to  the  river  Nestos,  taking  in  what  is  now 
part  of  Salonica.  It  was  reduced  by  the  Persians  and  subse- 
quently Alexander  the  Great  made  it  the  nucleus  of  a  vast  and 
powerful  empire  along  with  Greece.  Ultimately  it  passed 
tinder  Roman  sway,  until  it  was  ceded,  in  1913,  to  Greece. 

AN  OBJECT   OF  CONTENTION. 

Alsace-Lorraine  is  worthy  of  note,  as  comprising  one  of 
the  territories  which  for  centuries  have  been  the  cause  of  con- 
flict between  Germany  and  France.  It  is  pointed  to  as  the 
physical  evidence  of  the  humiliation  of  France  at  the  hands  of 
the  Germans,  in  1870,  and  has  for  nearly  one-half  a  century 
been  a  German  imperial  territory.  The  surrender  of  Alsace 
and  part  of  Lorraine  was  made  the  principal  condition  of  peace 
on  the  settlement  of  the  war  of  1870.  Bismarck,  it  is  said, 
might  have  been  content  with  a  language  boundary,  taking 
only  that  portion  of  the  country  in  which  lived  those  who  spoke 
the  German  tongue. 

For  strategic  purposes,  however,  Alsace  and  Lorraine, 
with  the  exception  of  one  district,  were  taken.  The  strip  or 
country  was  to  be  governed  by  the  power  of  the  German  Em- 
peror until  the  constitution  of  the  German  Empire  was  estab- 
lished. Many  of  the  inhabitants  opposed  the  Prussian  domi- 
nation, and  a  vote  was  taken  on  who  would  declare  themselves 
Germans  and  remain  in  the  territory,  or  French  and  leave. 
More  than  40,000  left  the  country  and  went  into  France. 

The  German  language  was  made  compulsory  in  the 
schools,  the  courts  and  the  legislative  body.  The  French  never 
forgot  their  loss,  and  revenge  for  that  loss  has  been  a  subject 


>H 


Pi 
O 

ir-i 
+-> 

eS 

.2  ho 

PI  © 


o    . 

to 
,«& 

-"& 

>  OT  s 

03  ft  © 

tod  d 

PI 

P 


« 
P 
H 

ft 

O 

51 


Pi    0> 


82  ^J 

c3 


d 

rO   .1-1 

CO    £> 


1-3 

H 
P 
Q 


B*3 


>» 
p. 
-p 

Pi 

d 
o 


d  «g53 
o  O 

•i-i  «2 

d  rl  ^ 
N2  O 
*r3  rd 

«  d 
,d  o 

fs 

d 
o 


199 


200  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

of  consideration  in  their  foreign  policy  ever  since  the  war  of 
1871.  Alsace  and  Lorraine  contain  about  5600  square  miles, 
and  together  have  a  population  of  about  two  million.  About 
85  per  cent  of  the  people  speak  German. 

PICTURESQUE  TURKEY. 

Turkey,  one  of  the  picturesque  and  ancient  countries 
which  is  aligned  with  the  Germans,  is  a  Mohammedan  state  of 
the  Ottoman  Empire  in  southeastern  Europe  and  western 
Asia,  whose  holdings  in  Europe  have  been  steadily  decreasing, 
especially  during  recent  years.  The  immediate  possessions  of 
Turkey,  or  those  directly  under  the  Sultan's  rule  at  the  time 
this  country  became  involved  in  the  great  world  war,  extended 
from  Montenegro,  Bosnia,  Servia  and  eastern  Roumelia  on  the 
north,  to  the  Agean  Sea  and  Greece  on  the  south,  and  from 
the  Black  Sea  to  the  Adriatic,  the  Straits  of  Otranto  and 
the  Ionic  Sea.  In  September,  1911,  the  Italian  government 
sent  a  long  list  of  claims  made  by  Italy  against  Turkey  for 
economic  and  commercial  discrimination  against  Italian  com- 
merce, and  the  person  of  Italian  citizens  all  over  the  world. 
A  reply  was  demanded  within  twenty-four  hours,  and  failing 
to  receive  a  reply  considered  satisfactory,  Italy  immediately 
sent  warships  to  Tripoli,  bombarded  and  captured  the  city. 
This  meant  that  Turkey  has  lost  one  of  her  most  important 
seaports,  consequently  weakening  her  position. 

The  immediate  possessions  of  Turkey  in  Europe,  at  this 
time,  had  an  area  of  65,350  square  miles,  with  a  population  of 
6,200,000.  In  Asia  Turkey  had  possessions  of  693,610  square 
miles,  with  a  population  of  16,900,000,  while  in  Africa  about 
398,000  square  miles  belonged  to  the  Turkish  Empire,  on  which 
lived  1,000,000  persons.  This  gave  Turkey  an  area  of  about 
1,157,860  square  miles,  with  a  population  of  24,100,000,  A 
number  of  islands  in  the  Agean  Sea  belong  to  Turkey,  and 
Egypt  is  also  nominally  part  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Sultan. 

The  population  is  a  motley  assortment  of  races,  nationali- 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  201 

ties  and  creeds.  About  38  per  cent  being  Ottomans  or  Turks. 
The  Slavic  and  Rouman  races  come  next  in  importance,  then 
the  Arabs,  the  remaining  population  consisting  of  Moors, 
Druses,  Kurds,  Tartars,  Albanians,  Circassians,  Syrians,  Ar- 
menians, and  Greeks,  besides  Jews  and  Gypsies. 

PHOENIX  OF  THE  GREEK  EMPIRE. 

The  Ottoman  Empire  arose  from  the  ruins  of  the  old 
Greek  Empire,  early  in  the  fifteenth  century,  Constantinople 
being  made  its  capital  in  1453,  after  its  capture  by  Mohammed 
II.  At  the  accession  of  Mohammed  IV,  in  1648,  the  Turkish 
Empire  was  at  the  zenith  of  its  power.  Internal  corruption 
caused  loss  of  power,  and  in  1774,  a  large  slice  of  territory  was 
ceded  to  Russia.  In  1821  Greece  became  independent.  The 
Crimean  War,  in  1854-56,  checked  Russia  for  a  while,  but  in 
1875  the  people  of  Herzegovina  rebelled.  A  year  later  the 
Servians  and  Montenegrins  revolted,  and  in  1877  Russia  be- 
gan hostile  operations  in  both  parts  of  the  Turkish  Emipre. 
At  this  time  Roumania  declared  her  independence.  After  the 
fall  of  Kars  and  of  Plevna,  the  Turkish  resistance  completely 
collapsed,  and  in  1878  Turkey  was  compelled  to  agree  to  the 
Treaty  of  San  Stefano. 

Within  the  year  the  Treaty  of  Berlin  declared  Roumania, 
Servia  and  Montenegro  independent;  Roumanian  Bessarabia 
was  ceded  to  Russia,  Austria  was  empowered  to  occupy  Bosnia 
and  Herzegovina ;  and  Bulgaria  was  made  a  principality.  The 
main  events  in  the  history  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  since  the 
Treaty  of  Berlin  were  the  French  invasion  of  Tunis  in  1881, 
the  Treaty  with  Greece,  executed  under  pressure  of  the  Great 
Powers  in  1881,  by  which  Greece  obtained  Thessaly  and  a  strip 
of  Epirus ;  the  occupation  of  Egypt  by  Great  Britain  in  1882 ; 
the  revolution  of  Philippopolis  in  1885,  by  which  eastern  Rou- 
melia  became  united  with  Bulgaria.  In  1908  Bulgaria  de- 
clared its  independence  and  the  Young  Turk  Party  extorted  a 
constitution  and  a  parliament  from  Abdul-Hamud  II,  who 


202  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

was  deposed  in  1909  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  national 
assembly.  Mohammed  V,  eldest  brother  of  the  deposed  Sultan 
succeeded  to  the  throne. 

Russia,  "the  Great  Bear,"  whose  part  in  the  war  brought 
on  internal  strife  and  revolution  which  robbed  Czar  Nicholas 
of  his  throne,  traces  its  history  back  for  more  than  ten  cen- 
turies, when  the  Norse  invaded  the  territory  and  founded 
Veliki  Novgorod,  for  many  years  one  of  the  chief  Russian 
cities.  The  Norse,  to  use  the  modern  vernacular,  "put  Russia 
on  the  map"  when  the  Russian  army  fought  its  way  to  the  very 
walls  of  Constantinople.  Much  of  the  early  history  of  the 
country  is  legendary,  and  one  of  the  famous  stories  is  that  after 
Igor,  who  commanded  the  great  armies,  was  put  to  death  by 
rebellious  subjects,  his  widow  sought  out  the  territory  where 
her  husband  had  lost  his  life  and  pretending  to  make  peace 
with  them,  requested  every  householder  to  give  her  a  pigeon. 

WINGED  FIREBRANDS. 

When  they  gladly  complied  with  her  request  she  sent  the 
tame  birds  back  home  with  flaming  firebrands  tied  to  their 
tails,  and  they  entered  their  lofts  or  rests  and  started  fires 
which  destroyed  the  city  of  Korosten.  The  ascendancy  of  the 
Romanoff  dynasty,  which  maintained  in  Russia  through  the 
centuries,  was  established  through  the  atrocities  of  Ivan  the 
Terrible,  who  is  said  to  have  absolutely  destroyed  the  descen- 
dants of  the  Rurik,  the  first  Niorse  chieftain.  Ivan  the  Ter- 
rible was  the  first  Czar  of  Russia.  He  conquered  Servia  and 
his  domestic  infamies  and  intrigues  are  among  the  historical 
scandals  of  the  country. 

Through  every  reign  in  Russian  history  there  ran  stories 
of  terrible  crime,  cruelties,  infamies,  immoralities  and  degra- 
dation. Following  the  death  of  Ivan  the  Terrible  came  Fedor, 
one  of  his  sons,  who  was  a  weakling  in  the  hands  of  "the  Duma 
of  five,  one  of  whom  was  Boris  Godounoff.  Fedor  reigned  but 
a  few  years,  and  Godounoff  was  elected  Czar.    He  was  am- 


OUTLINE  MAP  OF  THE  BALKAN  STATES. 

This  drawing-  shows  the  boundary  lines  as  they  were  at  the  beginning 
of  the  war.  It  also  shows  the  location  of  the  principal  city  of  each  country. 
This  part  of  the  world  has  always  been  of  great  importance  since  the  earliest 
history  of  man  and  nations — a  continuous  struggle  between  nations  to  con- 
trol this  gateway  into   southwestern  Asia. 

203 


204  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

bitious,  and  was  founder  of  the  system  of  serfdom,  and  also  of 

the  Russian  State  Church,  and  like  many  of  the  other  rulers  of 

Russia,  met  death  through  infamy,  supposedly  having  been 

poisoned. 

BASE  IMPOSTER  SLAIN. 

Boris  GodounofT  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Feodor,  but  he 
was  seized  by  a  pretender,  and  with  his  mother,  thrown  into 
prison,  where  they  were  murdered.  The  discovery  of  the  plot 
which  was  laid  at  the  door  of  the  King  of  Poland,  produced  an 
uprising  and  Czar  Dimitry  the  Impostor,  was  slain.  Vasili 
Shouyskie,  leader  of  the  mob  that  slew  Dimitry,  was  pro- 
claimed Czar,  but  pretenders  sprang  up,  and  one  of  these,  who 
posed  as  a  false  Dimitry,  invaded  Russia  from  Poland,  and 
established  a  rival  imperial  court  at  Toushin,  and  some  of  the 
Russian  cities  swore  allegiance  to  him. 

Vasili  Shouyskie  held  out  at  Moscow,  and  after  a  time 
Dimitry's  cause  failed,  whereupon  Sigsmund,  of  Poland,  in- 
vaded Russia,  and  put  forward  his  son  Vladislav.  Vasili, 
roused  to  anger,  committed  acts  which  provoked  Moscow,  and 
in  1610  he  was  compelled  to  abdicate,  and  a  council  of  nobles 
was  formed  to  run  the  government  until  a  Czar  could  be 
chosen.  Vladislav  was  finally  selected,  but,  Feodor  Romanoff 
sought  to  prevent  his  being  crowned.  There  was  a  period  of 
anarchy,  cities  were  burned,  and  chaos  was  complete. 

The  dignitaries  of  the  church  and  state  finally  set  to  work 
and  supported  the  candidacy  of  Mikliial  Feodorovitch  Roman- 
off, who  was  the  first  Romanoff  Czar.  He  reorganized  the 
empire,  and  reigned  for  thirty-three  years.  His  successor, 
Alexis,  the  direct  heir,  reigned  for  thirty-one  years,  and  culti- 
vated friendly  relations  with  Ukraine  and  the  Cossack  coun- 
try. He  was  followed  by  Feodor  II,  and  then  came  Peter  the 
Great.  There  were  two  claimants  to  the  throne,  Ivan  and 
Peter,  both  sons  of  Alexis  by  separate  wives,  and  the  difficulty 
was  settled  by  letting  the  two  reign  jointly  under  the  regency 
of  Sophia,  a  sister  of  Ivan. 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  205 

When  Ivan  died  Peter  assumed  the  reins,  and  it  was  he 
who  gave  Russia  a  frontage  on  the  Black  Sea,  and  on  the  Bal- 
tic, and  built  St.  Petersburg.  He  did  much  for  the  develop- 
ment of  Russia,  creating  a  navy  and  a  merchantile  marine. 

Catherine  the  First,  his  widow,  followed  him  in  reign,  and 
at  her  death,  Peter  II  occupied  the  center  of  the  stage.  At  his 
death  there  was  chaos  again  and  counter  claims.  Anna  of 
Courtland,  a  daughter  of  Ivan,  brother  of  Peter  the  Great, 
was  finally  elected  sovereign,  but  she  was  a  mere  puppet,  vest- 
ing her  authority  in  a  High  Council. 

FAMILY'S  WRETCHED  CAREER. 

During  her  reign  her  lover,  named  Biren,  held  sway  and 
distinguished  himself  by  sending  thousands  of  political  exiles 
to  Siberia.  At  the  death  of  Anna,  Ivan  IV,  her  grandnephew, 
reigned,  but  was  deposed  and  sent  to  prison  for  life,  while 
Elizabeth,  youngest  daughter  of  Peter  the  Great,  succeeded 
him.  She  permitted  the  government  to  be  run  on  compari- 
tively  honest  lines  by  favorites,  and  while  they  ruled  she  drank 
herself  to  death. 

Her  nephew,  Peter  III,  succeeded  her.  He  was  incom- 
petent and  a  tool  in  the  Prussian  hands.  His  wife  was  a 
German  princess,  and  led  a  movement  which  ended  in  his  being 
deposed,  imprisoned  and  murdered. 

Catherine,  widow  of  the  murdered  Peter,  succeeded.  She 
was  known  as  Catherine  the  Great,  and  is  credited  with  having 
been  the  most  infamous  of  women  in  all  history.  Catherine 
was  succeeded  by  Paul,  who  was  assassinated  by  his  own 
couriers  when  he  was  on  the  point  of  joining  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte in  his  conquest  of  India. 

His  son  was  Alexander  I,  who  added  Finland  and  Poland 
to  Russia,  and  founded  the  Holy  Alliance.  He  was  followed 
by  his  son  Nicholas,  who  ruled  for  30  years,  and  crushed  the 
Poles  and  Hungarians,  but  died  of  a  broken  heart  in  the 
Crimean  War. 


206  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

Next  came  Alexander  II,  who  gained  fame  as  liberator 
of  the  serfs,  and  died  the  victim  of  a  Nihilist  bomb  thrower. 
Alexander  III  succeeded  him,  and  then  came  Nicholas  II,  the 
last  Czar,  whose  reign  lasted  22  years.  The  beginning  of  the 
end  was  marked  by  the  request  of  the  workingmen  in  1905  for 
an  increase  in  civil  rights.  They  were  fired  upon,  and  there 
was  general  disorder,  until  the  Czar  proclaimed  a  constitution, 
and  established  a  Duma,  or  national  parliament,  which  met  for 
the  first  time  in  1906. 

BETRAYAL  OF    RUSSIA'S   MILITARY  PLANS. 

The  outbreak  of  the  war  was  marked  by  the  personal 
decree  of  the  Czar  to  change  the  name  of  the  capital,  St.  Peters- 
burg, to  Petrograd,  but  his  evident  intent  to  eliminate  evidences 
of  German  influence  did  not  stop  the  betrayal  of  Russia's 
military  plans  by  German  spys  within  the  court  circles,  and 
it  was  charged  that  supplies  were  withheld  from  the  Russian 
army  by  those  within  the  charmed  circle,  who  were  friendly 
to  Germany. 

Russia  was  a  party  to  the  Franco-Russian  and  Anglo- 
Russian  agreement,  which  constituted  the  basis  of  the  Triple 
Entente,  but  conditions  were  such  that  the  soldiers  refused  to 
fight,  and  the  situation  culminated  in  the  uprising  which  ended 
with  the  abdication  of  the  Czar,  in  behalf  of  his  brother,  who, 
however,  declined  to  accept  the  throne,  unless  he  should  be 
elected  by  the  votes  of  the  Russian  people.  The  Duma  there- 
upon decided  to  organize  a  republican  form  of  government, 
and  so  the  Russian  Republic  came  into  being  in  March,  1917. 

Spain,  a  fertile  country  in  the  southwestern  part  of 
Europe,  has  played  a  prominent  part  in  the  development  of 
the  world.  She  has  a  coastline  extending  nearly  1500  miles, 
and  there  are  about  200,000  square  miles  included  in  her  terri- 
tory. The  coastlands  and  the  southern  section  of  the  country 
are    especially    rich    in    fruits    and    agriculture.      Although 


THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR.  207 

watered  by  many  rivers,  the  land,  for  the  most  part,  is  artifici- 
ally irrigated. 

Up  until  1898  Spain  held  possession  of  magnificent  colo- 
nies in  Cuba  and  Porto  Rico  and  the  Philippines,  but  now  her 
colonial  possessions  are  confined  to  a  strip  on  the  west  coast  of 
the  Sahara,  and  the  island  of  Fernando  Po,  with  some  smaller 
possessions  on  the  Guinea  coast  in  Africa.  Their  total  area  is 
about  434,000  square  miles,  the  total  population  being 
10,000,000. 

SPAIN,  PAST  AND  PRESENT. 

Spain  formerly  composed  the  ancient  provinces  of  New 
and  Old  Castile,  Leon,  Asturias,  Galicia,  Estremadura, 
Andalusia,  Aragon,  Murcia,  Valencia,  Catalonia,  Navarre  and 
the  Basque  Provinces.  These,  since  1834,  have  been  divided 
into  49  provinces.  The  capital  of  Spain  is  Madrid,  and  the 
present  constitution  dates  from  1876.  There  is  a  Congress, 
which  is  composed  of  deputies,  each  one  representing  50,000  of 
the  population. 

The  Roman  Catholic  faith  is  the  established  form  of 
religion,  and  the  priesthood  possesses  considerable  wealth  and 
power,  although  the  dominant  influence  once  possessed  has 
been  curtailed  of  recent  years.  The  peace  strength  of  the 
army  is  about  83,000,  and  what  navy  she  has  is  practically 
new,  as  the  Spanish  navy  was  annihilated  in  the  war  with  the 
United  States  in  1898. 

During  recent  years  the  republican  tendencies  among  the 
people  have  found  vent  in  socialism.  The  Spanish  socialist 
leaders  belong  mostly  to  the  intellectuals,  and  here  again  is 
the  weakness  of  the  movement,  whether  considered  as  a  means 
of  giving  Spain  a  republic  or  of  liberating  her  political  system 
undejr  monarchical  form.  Some  of  the  intellectual  leaders 
among  the  socialists  headed  straight  for  philosophic  anarchy, 
while  others  expended  their  energies  in  building  castles  in  the 
clouds. 


208  THE  NATIONS  AT  WAR. 

The  substantial  socialism  of  the  recent  period  was,  how- 
ever, based  on  the  workingmen's  movement.  Before  the  out- 
break of  the  great  war  the  tendency  was  to  affiliate  with  the 
groups  in  other  countries  of  Europe  which  advocated  socialism 
as  an  international  creed.  But  when  the  German  socialists 
placed  their  country  above  internationalism,  and  the  French 
socialists  did  the  same,  and  the  Italian  socialists  joined  in  the 
agitation  to  force  the  government  into  war  to  get  back  terri- 
tory lost  to  Austria,  the  international  basis  of  Spanish  socialism 
disappeared. 


©Underwood  &  Underwood. 
AT  THE  BASE  OF  THE  CROSS. 

The  figure  of  the  Saviour  which  has  fallen  from  the  Cross  that  was  shaken  by  the  shells  which  fell 

all  about  the  Cross.  ■ 


©  Underwood  &  Underwood. 
A  BELGIAN  FAMILY  IN  FRONT  OF  THEIR  RUINED  HOMES. 
Three  generations  of  Belgians  are  shown  in  this  photograph  of  a  family  standing  in  front  of  their 
homes  left  in  ruins  by  the  shells  of  the  German  guns  thrown  into  Thormondo. 


o       08  a>A  J3 

o       p.  >.     3 

1=1        „      a» 

IS  ©oHw 
§M  S-a  .2 

15  *  fe  ?  S 

p  &c>,2  .© 

O  «flc8a:q 


Q> 


pq 
P* 
is 

C/2 
V. 

P 

O 


I]^"    Oh 

2  oi  a  t-t  a 
*  S  *C3  © 

Sg*°S 

OT   t>    C3  <K  *H 

©  '3  ^  "s  3 


^©^ 

.1-1  r  ra 

45  ®  to 
O+-.H 

03  jq  t/2 

fH  P" 

©    ^  ■ 

^  b.©  fl 
o>  £A  c3 

©a>tf-s 

O -&!!>> 
©<w  J*-Q 
03  ©  CS+j 

©+*c3 

o  s  c-'d 

(,   O  K  <D 

'O  p.ri  o> 
C3^     fl 

Cg"H   bfitc 

m~  2  2 

Ins* 

m-C!  5?© 

■H    Hl3 

ro  qj  2 
c3F«3 


Z     o 


25 

y    aa  O 


P-J3 

<1   g£ 

«   03 

O  ^  » 


§1 

^  C3 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
CANADIAN  OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH  FROM  THE  WESTERN  FRONT. 
Showing  a  village  that  is  being  heavily  bombarded. 


CANADIAN  OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
FROM  THE  WESTERN  FRONT. 


Troops  interrupted  during  a  service  on  occasion  of  50th  Anniversary  of  Dominion  Day  by  the  appear- 
ance of  an  airplane- 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
CANADIAN  OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH  FROM  THE  WESTERN  FRONT. 
Showing  the  firing  of  naval  guns  behind  the  Canadian  Infantry. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
CANADIAN  OFFICIAL  PHOTOGRAPH  FROM  THE  WESTERN  FRONT. 
Showing  a  German  5.9  gun  put  out  of  action  by  a  direct  hit  by  the  Canadian  Artillery. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 


SAILORS  OF  BRAZIL. 


The  Brazilian  Congress,  by  an  overwhelming  majority,  voted  for  war  with.  Germany.  Her  navy 
will  patrol  the  seas  and  help  rid  them  of  the  U-boat  menace.  This  photograph  shows  the  type  of 
Brazilian  sailors  on  board  the  dreadnaught  "Minas  Geraes,"  the  largest  of  Brazil's  warships. 


FIJI  ISLAND  WARRIORS. 


©American  Press  Ass'n. 


They  are  under  command  of  English  officials,  bound  for  France  and  the  war  zone.  This  photo- 
graph was  taken  while  they  stopped  off  at  Honolulu,  where  they  were  feasted  at  Waikiki  beach  by 
the  British  Club  at  H  awaij. 


INDIANS  HELP  RECRUITING. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 


Chiof  r>ald  Eagle  and  seven  other  Sioux  Indians  assisted  in  obtaining  sixty  new  recruits 
for  the  U.  S.  Navy  at  the  landship  "  Recruit,"  New  York  City.  When  they  first  arrived  at  the 
ship  tiiey  seemed  for  a  time  more  interested  in  the  Indian  corn  in  the  model  gardens  and  the 
machine  guns  on  board  the  vessels,  than  anything  else. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
EXCLUSIVE  PHOTO   OF  THE  DRAFT  AT  WASHINGTON 

This  picture  shows  clearly  Secretary  of  War  Newton  D.  Baker  drawing  the  first  capsule  that  started, 

the  enormous  draft  for  the  Army. 


SCENE  IN  SWITZERLAND. 


©American  Press  Ass'n 


The  fence  in  the  background  is  the  "border  line  between  Switzerland  and  Germany.    Swiss  soldiers  are 

on  guard  as  shown  in  the  picture. 


GERMAN   PRISONERS. 


©American  Press  Ass'n. 


This  photo  shows  a  small  portion  of  the  many  thousands  of  captives  taken  by  the  Allied  armies  on 

the  western  front. 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n 
INDIAN  COMPANY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  ARMY. 
Company  F,  6th  Nebraska  Infantry,  is  composed  of  descendants  of  the  warriors  who 
annihilated  General  Custer's  command  and  of  the  sons  and  grandsons  of  the  scouts  who 
served  with  Buffalo  Bill  and  General  Miles.      The  Winnebagoy  Omaha,  Sentee  Sioux  and 
Yankton  Sioux  tribes  are  represented. 


Photo  American  l'ress  Ass'n. 
PARADE  OF  AMERICAN  TROOPS  IN    LONDON. 

This  photograph  shows  the  soldiers  passing  down  Piccadilly  through  two  lines  of  cheer- 
ing populace 


Photo  American  Press  Ass'n. 
A  SUBMARINE  CHASER. 
Eternal  vigilance  is   the  watchword  of  these  patrols.    This  photo  shows  a  new  type  of 
glider,  which  keeps  a  constant  watch  in  the  waters  adjacent  to  Entente  seaports.    Jt  never 
leaves  the  water.    At  a  signal  from  scouting  airplanes  it  skims  over  the  surface  with  start- 
ling rapidity  toward  the  point  where  the  submarine  is  seen. 


©  American  Press  Ass'n. 
AN  AEROPLANE  MACHINE  GUN. 
This  is  a  photograph  of  Captain  Bishop,  a  Canadian  aviator  with  the  British  forces. 
He  is  seen  examining  the  gun  that  has  accounted  for  nearly  forty  German  aeroplanes  in 
this  war. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

MODERN  WAR  METHODS. 

Individual  Initiative  as  Against  Mass  Movements — Teench  Warfare  a  Game 
of  Hide  and  Seek — Eats  and  Disease — Surgery's  Triumphs — Changed  Tac- 
tics— Italian  Mountain  Fighting. 

WARFARE  such  as  carried  on  in  the  Great  World  War 
is  so  different  from  that  of  any  other  of  the  great  wars 
which  the  world  has  seen,  that  it  might  be  described  as 
a  method  of  fighting  distinctively  unique.  Undoubtedly,  more 
ancient  methods,  and  even  ancient  weapons,  have  been  em- 
ployed than  were  used  in  any  of  the  wars  which  have  changed, 
from  time  to  time,  the  boundary  lines  of  nations.  The  fighting 
of  mass  against  mass  has  been  practically  obliterated,  and  mod- 
ern evolutions  where  the  plan  is  man  to  man  have  developed 
a  mode  of  fighting  where  terrible  execution  has  resulted. 

Undoubtedly  this  means  of  fighting  has  developed  the  per- 
sonal initiative  of  the  soldiers,  and  the  modern  fighting  ma- 
chine of  the  nations  is  of  a  high  standard,  which,  together  with 
death-dealing  weapons,  has  resulted  in  terrible  havoc. 
Massed  movements,  such  as  carried  on  in  the  War  of  the  Re- 
bellion, have  been  practically  done  away  with,  and  although 
there  have  been  long  and  costly  sieges,  they  have  been  carried 
on  by  tedious  trench  fighting,  airships,  hand  grenades,  and 
massive  shells  fired  from  guns  of  great  caliber,  and  with  a 
range  which  is  really  marvellous. 

Shells  are  fired,  shrapnel  in  some  cases,  explosive  shells  in 
others,  which  are  timed  to  the  second,  so  that  when  fired  from 
guns  many  miles  from  the  objective  point,  they  explode  at  a 
measured  distance  from  the  earth.  They  are  exploded  within 
a  gauged  distance  of  the  target,  and  the  execution  is  done  over 
a  measured  area.  On  the  shells  are  indicators.  Within  the 
shrapnel  shells  are  hundreds  of  small  shot.     As  the  shell  ex- 

HR    14  209 


210  MODERN  WAR  METHODS. 

plodes  the  shots  are  scattered  over  the  enemy,  and  death  and 
destruction  are  unavoidable. 

With  bomb  shells,  fired  from  guns  of  the  largest  caliber, 
there  are  also  indicators  which  are  timed  to  the  second.  The 
range  and  time  of  explosion  previously  figured  out  by  officers, 
the  shell  explodes  where  it  is  intended  that  it  shall,  and  the 
work  of  the  great  explosive  is  done  with  resultant  damage. 

WAR'S  MANY  DEVELOPMENTS. 

The  war  has  developed  many  of  the  new  methods  of  fight- 
ing and  revived  many  of  the  old  means  of  warfare.  Cavalry 
has  not  been  as  active  in  the  relation  in  the  great  war  as  in  any 
of  the  wars  of  comparatively  recent  date,  because  of  the  ex- 
tensive trench  warfare  which  has  formed  so  much  of  the  fight- 
ing plan.  Fighting  has  been  a  question  of  trench  raids,  and 
barrage  fire,  followed  by  the  infantry  charge  through  shell 
holes.  The  impression  brought  home  to  the  modern  observer 
is  that  the  older  recognized  methods  of  warfare  are  gone  for 
good. 

The  thing  which  war  changed  in  the  work  of  the  cavalry- 
man is  in  the  nature  of  an  addition,  rather  than  a  subtraction 
from  his  duties  and  the  training  he  must  have.  The  day  of 
cavalry — as  cavalry  and  nothing  else — has  passed.  For  today 
the  cavalryman  must  be  familiar  not  only  with  the  sword,  lance 
and  revolver,  but  with  the  rifle  as  well.  It  has  been  demon- 
strated that  such  long  periods  of  trench  warfare  may  develop 
that  it  becomes  necessary  for  him  to  dismount  and  make  him- 
self valuable  in  the  scheme  of  military  economy  by  fighting  as 
infantry  until  such  time  as  the  enemy  line  is  broken  and  he  can 
again  take  to  his  horse  and  the  work  of  harrying  the  retreat- 
ing foe. 

The  war  has  been  full  of  surprising  results  as  regards  cav- 
alry. It  was  popularly  supposed  that  in  facing  such  terrible 
modern  weapons  as  the  repeating  rifle  of  long  range,  the  ma- 
chine gun  and  the  automatic  field  pieces  which  have  become  so 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  211 

well  known  as  the  French  "75s,"  any  body  of  cavalry  which 
attempted  to  charge  the  enemy  would  be  annihilated. 

CAVALRY'S  SUCCESSFUL  CHARGES. 

Yet  all  through  the  early  stages  of  the  war  one  reads  of 
desperate,  and,  what  is  more  to  the  point,  successful  charges 
made  by  British  cavalry  against  batteries  of  German  field 
pieces.  There  was  one  instance  in  France,  just  back  of  the 
Belgian  frontier,  where  a  charge  of  British  lancers  against  a 
German  battery,  which  had  a  commanding  position,  saved  the 
day  for  a  greatly-outnumbered  allied  detachment,  which  was 
conducting  that  most  difficult  of  all  maneuvers,  a  rear  guard 
action,  covering  the  retreat  of  the  body  of  the  army.  The 
charge  of  the  lancers  took  the  Germans  so  by  surprise,  and  was 
executed  with  such  speed,  that  despite  the  heavy  fire  they 
poured  into  the  advancing  horsemen  the  latter  were  at  work 
among  them  with  spear  and  saber  before  reinforcements  could 
be  brought  up.  Then  the  cavalry,  dismounting  and  unslinging 
their  carbines,  defended  the  position  with  such  tenacity  that  the 
German  advance  was  delayed  several  hours,  sufficient  for  the 
rest  of  the  allied  forces  to  make  good  its  withdrawal  and  the 
consolidation  of  the  new  lines  chosen  for  defense. 

This  idea  of  cavalry  serving  in  the  double  role  of  infantry 
and  cavalry  is  a  distinctly  American  development,  a  trick  which 
the  Federal  and  Confederate  armies  taught  the  world  during 
the  Civil  War,  and  of  which  the  British  made  excellent  use  in 
South  Africa  against  the  Boers.  The  fact  which  this  war  has 
established,  however,  is  that  the  older  use  of  cavalry,  in  the 
charge  against  infantry,  artillery  and  even  entrenched  posi- 
tions is  still  of  great  value.  The  idea  had  developed  from  the 
tactics  so  largely  employed  in  the  Civil  War  of  using  the  cav* 
airy  as  mounted  infantry,  that  the  increased  deadliness  of 
modern  weapons  would  make  this  us  3  of  cavalry  the  sole  use. 

Now,  however,  it  seems  that  not  even  the  lance  is  to  be 
discounted.    Given  the  opportunity  to  reach  his  objective,  the 


212  MODERN  WAR  METHODS. 

lance  becomes  a  terrible  weapon  in  the  bands  of  the  horseman. 
In  hand-to-hand  fighting  the  man  with  the  rifle  and  bayonet 
has  some  chance  against  the  mounted  man  with  the  saber. 
While  fighting  upward  from  a  lower  level  he  has  a  pretty  long 
reach,  and  the  advantage  of  being  completely  in  control  of  his 
own  movements,  whereas  even  the  most  expert  horseman  can- 
not control  the  step  and  movement  of  his  mount  as  well  as  a 
man  can  control  his  own.  Barring  fire,  however,  the  infantry- 
man has  no  chance  against  the  lance,  with  the  speed  and  mo- 
mentum of  the  mounted  man  behind  it. 

So,  for  this  reason,  though  they  are  cumbersome  weapons 
under  ordinary  circumstances,  and  make  a  detachment  equip- 
ped with  them  much  more  likely  to  be  seen,  lances  were  re- 
tained by  many  of  the  British  cavalry  regiments,  just  as  the 
German  Uhlans  retained  them. 

CAVALRY'S  IMPORTANT  SERVICE. 

One  of  the  most  important  services  which  cavalry  fulfills 
in  modern  warfare  is  that  of  drawing  the  enemy's  fire  at  the 
time  his  positions  are  being  approached.  This  is  done  to  ob- 
tain some  idea  of  his  force  and  the  disposition  of  his  guns. 

Cavalry  detachments  are  sent  scurrying  across  the  front, 
as  though  threatening  an  attack,  deliberately  furnishing  a  mark 
for  the  enemy  gunners  that  this  object  of  ascertaining  his 
strength  may  be  attained. 

The  more  ordinary  work  of  scouting,  advance  guard  work, 
and  riding  wide  on  the  flanks  of  an  advancing  force  are  parts 
of  the  cavalryman's  work  which  are  more  familiar. 

In  the  European  conflict  with  tremendous  concentration  of 
troops  and  continued  occupation  of  the  same  territory  the  for- 
aging feature  of  cavalry  work  disappeared.  It  is  no  longer 
possible  for  an  army  to  "live  on  the  country  as  it  goes."  Food 
and  supplies  must  be  brought  up  from  depots  in  the  rear 
through  an  entirely  separate  and  specialized  department  of  the 
military  organization,  which  does  its  work  with  a  celerity  cer- 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  213 

tainly  undreamed  of  in  former  days,  even  as  late  as  our  own 
war  with  Spain. 

In  the  modern  campaign  trenches  have  been  developed  to 
such  an  extent  that  it  is  really  marvellous  how  the  soldiers  live, 
and  to  what  an  extent  the  "underground  fortresses"  have  been 
used  for  living  as  well  as  fighting  purposes. 

In  a  letter  written  by  a  French  soldier  who  took  part  in  a 
successful  raid  upon  a  German  trench,  he  adequately  describes 
the  luxuries  enjoyed  by  the  German  soldiers  in  the  front  line 
trenches  in  the  Marne.  The  letter  was  written  by  a  youth  who 
had  been  wounded  in  the  fight,  and  was  mailed  in  April,  1917. 

LUXURIOUS  DUGOUTS. 

"We  are  now  living  in  German  lines  and  dugouts — a  mag- 
nificent work  we  have  just  now  taken — cement  and  steel  are 
used  with  profusion,  and  electricity  in  every  dugout,  even  in 
their  front  lines.  Unharmed  casements  and  machine  guns  in 
cemented  shelters  and  light  railways  and  immense  reserves  of 
food — thousands  of  bottles  of  claret. 

"But  also,  at  the  middle  of  each  staircase,  in  the  wall,  a 
box  with  about  seventy  pounds  of  cheddite — to  blow  the  shelter 
up  in  case  of  retreat.  They  knew  they  might  have  to  go  back, 
as  they  are  doing  now.  America  will  gain  victory,  as  until  the 
present  moment  only  the  bravery  of  our  soldiers  can  put  them 
back,  with  much  exertion  and  frequent  loss. 

"Our  men  are  magnificent  in  spite  of  death.  We  hope 
your  help  may  be  quick  and  decisive.  I  think  your  flying  corps 
especially  may  be  useful,  the  more  as  yesterday,  with  four  fel- 
lows, I  was  run  through  the  field,  and  in  a  destroyed  trench  by 
a  German  Albatross  shooting  a  machine  gun,  and  flying  ver}7^ 
low,  he  missed  us  quite  near.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  just 
a  few  days  hence  seen  a  sausage  balloon  destroyed  by  our  men. 
Anyhow  your  help  may  be  decisive. 

"I  believe  your  joy  is  great  about  the  Russian  revolution. 


214  MODEKN  WAE  METHODS. 

At  home  they  are  happy,  too — only  let  us  hope  the  Russian 
army  may  attack  this  summer — to  help  us. 

"I  need  not  tell  you  the  impression  made  by  your  Ameri- 
can decision  here.  We  now  know  victory  is  sure.  Let  us  hope 
it  may  be  this  year — though  you  may  easily  guess  such  is  not 
my  belief — next  year. 

"I  hope  my  next  letter  be  sent  from  farther  in  the  Ger- 
man lines — perhaps  from  a  place  they  have  not  had  time  to 
destroy." 

Shorn  of  all  technicalities,  the  plain  method  of  warfare 
which  has  developed  as  the  result  of  the  trench  building  is  that 
each  force  establishes  lines  along  miles  of  front  with  trenches 
in  rows,  one  after  the  other,  at  measured  intervals.  The  sol- 
diers are  thus  "entrenched."  One  force  seeks  to  drive  the  other 
from  its  position. 

MANY  DEADLY  DEVICES. 

The  force  of  batteries  is  directed  against  the  entrench- 
ments, hand  grenades,  bombs,  shells,  gases  and  every  device 
which  has  fallen  to  the  use  of  armies  is  projected  at  the  ditches 
in  which  are  hidden  the  enemy  soldiers.  When,  by  the  con- 
centration of  attack  the  trenches  are  destroyed  or  the  soldiers 
driven  from  their  first  position,  the  opposing  force  has  gained 
if  it  has  succeeded  in  advancing  its  own  soldiers  to  occupy  and 
reconstruct  the  trenches  or  defences  from  which  the  enemy  was 
driven. 

The  soldiers  carry,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  weapons, 
a  trench  spade,  and  in  most  cases  large  knives,  which  are  used 
to  cut  away  brush  or  dig  in  the  earth  when  emergency  demands. 
The  close  confinement  in  the  trenches  tends  to  develop  disease, 
and  the  sanitary  force  of  the  modern  army  is  a  thing  that  was 
undreamed  of  in  the  olden  days.  More  men  died  from  disease 
during  the  Civil  War  than  were  killed  by  bullets  or  in  hand-to- 
hand  encounter. 

The  percentage  of  those  who  die  from  camp  fever  has  been 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  215 

reduced  to  a  minimum.  Napoleon  said  that  armies  travel  on 
their  stomachs,  but  the  European  War  and  the  Russian-Jap- 
anese War  have  proven,  as  did  our  campaigns  in  Cuba  and 
Mexico,  that  soldiers  live  by  reason  of  the  health  which  they 
are  permitted  to  maintain.  Some  idea  of  the  conditions  which 
developed  in  the  trenches  may  be  gained  from  a  study  of  the 
various  hospital  reports,  and  investigations  which  have  been 
made  by  physicians. 

INFECTED  WITH  ASIATIC  JAUNDICE. 

Dr.  Hideyo  Noguchi,  of  the  Rockefeller  Institute  for 
Medical  Research,  completed  a  series  of  experiments  which 
showed  that  apparently  healthy  wild  rats  in  the  European  war 
zone  became  infected  with  Weil's  disease,  or  "infectious  jaun- 
dice," common  in  Asia.  Weil's  disease  is  characterized  by  sud- 
den onsets  of  malaise,  often  intense  muscular  pain,  high  fever 
for  several  days,  followed  by  jaundice,  frequently  accompanied 
by  complications.  It  becomes  more  virulent  as  it  is  successively 
transmitted  from  one  victim  to  another.  This  is  supposed  to 
explain  the  much  greater  mortality,  about  38  per  cent,  in 
Japan,  as  compared  with  from  2  to  3  per  cent,  among  Euro- 
pean soldiers. 

The  study  of  the  disease  was  made  possible  by  the  suc- 
cessful importation  from  Japan  and  Flanders  of  guinea  pigs 
and  rats  which  had  been  inoculated  with  the  causative  organism 
in  those  two  countries.  Experiments  previously  made  showed 
that  the  germ  of  the  disease  was  carried  in  the  kidneys  of  a 
large  percentage  of  apparently  healthy  wild  rats  caught  near 
the  districts  where  the  disease  had  been  epidemic.  Experi- 
ments in  Europe  demonstrated  the  presence  of  the  germ  in 
rats  not  only  near  the  infected  zones,  but  also  in  captured  lo- 
calities some  distance  from  trenches. 

For  purposes  of  comparison  Dr.  Noguchi  collected  a  num- 
ber of  rats  in  this  country  and  removed  their  kidneys.  His 
report  states  that  by  inoculating  the  emulsion  made  of  the  kid- 


216  MODERN  WAR  METHODS. 

neys  of  41  wild  rats  into  58  guinea  pigs  during  a  period  of 
three  months,  he  had  been  able  to  produce  in  three  groups  of 
guinea  pigs  typical  cases  of  infectious  jaundice  altogether  iden- 
tical with  the  findings  in  the  guinea  pigs  which  died  of  the 
injection  of  the  Japanese  and  Belgian  strains  of  the  disease. 
The  germs  taken  from  wild  rats  caught  near  New  York  pro- 
duced death  in  guinea  pigs  within  nine  to  twelve  days. 

AMERICA'S  GREAT  SERVICE  IN  WAR  ZONE. 

In  studying  the  conditions  and  helping  to  fight  the  dan- 
gers encountered  in  the  battlefields  and  camps  of  Europe,  no 
country  in  the  world  rendered  a  greater  service  than  America. 
Long  before  the  country  entered  the  war  hundreds  of  Ameri- 
can nurses,  ambulance  drivers  and  surgeons  were  on  the  battle- 
fields and  in  the  hospitals  of  Belgium,  France  and  England. 
Men  who  were  leaders  in  the  medical  and  surgical  world  gave 
their  services  to  the  Allies,  and  almost  every  hospital  in  the 
United  States  sent  some  of  its  staff. 

Through  the  efforts  and  study  of  Dr.  Alexis  Carrel,  of 
New  York,  deaths  from  wounds  received  in  battle  were  re- 
duced almost  90  per  cent,  by  a  system  of  treatment  which  he 
devised.  Dr.  Carrel  began  his  work  in  1914,  at  Compiegne, 
in  connection  with  the  military  hospital,  and  in  collaboration 
with  the  Dakin  Research  Laboratory,  under  the  auspices  of  the 
Rockefeller  Foundation. 

Using  a  solution  of  sodium  hypochlorite,  the  plain  method 
of  treating  wounds  which  proved  such  a  great  boon,  was  de- 
scribed at  the  Congress  of  Surgeons  in  Philadelphia  in  1916, 
where  many  of  the  wonders  of  war  surgery  were  described. 
By  means  of  a  rubber  tube,  which  is  run  through  or  into  the 
wound,  the  injury  is  flushed  continuously  by  the  solution,  for 
a  period  of  hours  or  minutes,  according  to  the  nature  and  char- 
acter of  the  wound. 

The  inflammation  is  reduced,  the  wound  cleaned,  and 
blood  poisoning  is  averted.    Under  the  treatment  the  soldier's 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  217 

stay  in  a  hospital  is  reduced  weeks  and  even  months,  and,  as 
has  been  stated  with  authority,  where  in  the  old  days  twenty 
operations  would  have  been  necessary,  the  modern  methods 
have  reduced  the  percentage  to  a  point  where  the  twenty  has 
become  as  one. 

The  story  of  surgery  itself  and  what  it  has  done  in  mod- 
ern warfare  would  make  a  wonderful  volume.  The  shattered 
bones  of  the  legs  and  arms  have  been  spliced,  and  laid  side  by 
side  in  open  wounds,  to  knit  together  and  practically  form  a 
new  limb.  Artificial  hands,  feet,  and  legs  have  been  made  by 
ingenious  mechanics,  which  are  so  perfect  that  those  who  have 
been  deprived  of  their  natural  facilities  can  use  them  with  a 
degree  of  facility  never  before  believed  possible. 

RESULT  OF  SCIENTIFIC  SURGERY. 

Armless  men  and  legless  men  have  worked  in  the  munition 
factories  of  both  France  and  of  England,  and  the  fact  that  they 
are  able  to  do  so  is  due  to  the  genius  of  surgeons  and  of  scien- 
tists. Thoroughness  and  preparation,  coolness  in  execution 
and  scientific  accuracy  in  all  directions  is  the  modern  necessity 
in  warfare. 

What  this  means  in  modern  battle,  as  demonstrated  in  the 
last  important  conflict  in  the  clearing  of  German  East  Africa 
by  British  forces,  was  decribed  by  Reuters'  correspondent  in 
an  account  of  the  battle  of  Rufiji  River. 

This  was  the  last  campaign  personally  commanded  by 
Major  General  Jan  Christian  Smuts,  the  former  Boer  com- 
mander, and  resulted  in  giving  the  British  control  of  all  the 
coastline  and  the  inhabitable  portion  of  German  East  Africa. 

For  two  weary  months  the  army  lay  upon  its  weapons, 
consolidating,  reorganizing,  rebuilding  railway  lines  and  pil- 
ing up  great  dumps  of  food  and  ridding  itself  of  its  sick  and 
wounded.  Then  it  moved  forward  from  Morogoro.  The  ob- 
ject of  the  advance  was  the  ejection  of  the  enemy  from  his 


218  MODEKN  WAE  METHODS. 

trenches  on  the  Mgeta  River  and  the  seizure  of  the  passages 
of  the  Rufiji  River. 

The  battle  was  directed  and  controlled  from  an  observa- 
tion hill  at  Dathumi,  but  General  Smuts  spent  little  time  on 
the  hill.  He  had  made  all  the  dispositions  and  issued  his  orders. 
Nothing  remained  for  him  to  do  and  he  was  back  in  his  camp 
calmly  reading  a  book. 

In  the  straw  hut  the  brigadier  general  sat  at  a  table  on 
which  was  an  oriented  map  showing  the  strategic  and  geo- 
graphical points  of  the  plans  which  lay  before  us,  at  his  elbow 
the  telephone  and  just  below  the  hut  the  wireless  instrument 
incessantly  emitted  sparks.  Higher  up  the  slope  of  the  hill 
were  the  observing  stations  of  the  battery  commanders. 
SIGNALED  BEGINNING  OF  BATTLE, 

The  burning  of  huts  at  Kiruru  signaled  the  beginning  of 
the  battle.  The  brigadier  general,  a  polite  little  man  who  has 
lectured  at  the  staff  college  for  twenty  years  and  who  knows 
the  last  word  in  the  science  of  warfare,  especially  of  artillery, 
called  the  howitzer  battery  by  telephone. 

"Open  fire  a  little  to  the  right  of  the  palm  tree,"  he  said. 
"You  have  the  elevation  and  direction.  The  Nigerians  will  be 
on  the  move."  Just  behind  the  palm  tree  and  a  little  to  the 
right  a  great  brown  cloud  of  mud  and  smoke  rose  high  in  the 
air.  From  the  plain  came  the  boom  of  heavy  guns  and  all 
along  the  river  branch  rose  clouds  of  smoke,  mud  and  dust. 

The  staff  officer  handed  in  a  telegram  reading:  "The  in- 
fantry are  now  about  to  advance;  they  ask  artillery  support." 

"Bring  the  field  guns  into  action,"  said  the  general. 

It  was  all  so  very  matter  of  fact.  This  little  man,  who 
was  about  to  let  loose  upon  the  German  trenches  a  hell's  broth 
of  fire  and  disaster,  acted  as  if  he  were  in  his  own  drawing 
room,  deciding  how  many  lumps  of  sugar  he  would  take  with 
his  tea. 

Down  below  on  the  plain  the  howitzers  were  lobbing  60- 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  219 

pound  shells  into  the  German  Askaris,  the  Nigerians  were  ad- 
vancing by  sharp  rushes  and  the  rat-tat  of  the  machine  guns 
and  the  crackle  of  musketry  broke  very  faintly.  Airplanes 
sailed  above  us.  A  message  came  from  the  Nigerians,  "We 
are  going  to  take  the  enemy's  trenches;  please  lift  gunfire." 
The  order  was  passed  along,  "All  guns  lift  two  degrees." 

Little  black  dots,  like  tiny  ants,  are  running  where  the 
shells  are  bursting.  The  Nigerians  are  rushing  the  trenches. 
The  forward  observing  officer  reports  that  the  enemy  is  re- 
tiring. The  15 -pounders,  man-killing  guns,  shower  shrapnel 
on  the  German  line  of  retreat. 

SUGGESTS  A  CUP  OF  TEA. 

The  infantry  report  having  occupied  the  German  first  line 
trenches,  halting  for  one  hour  to  consolidate.  The  brigadier- 
general  commented  on  the  difficulty  of  observation  in  the  hu- 
mid atmosphere  and  suggested  a  cup  of  tea.  It  seemed  that 
nothing  more  would  happen  until  after  lunch,  so  I  visited  the 
commander-in-chief.  He  was  occupied  for  the  moment  with 
a  volume  by  George  Gisslog  and  was  satisfied  with  the  reports 
he  had  received.  By  dark  the  whole  of  the  German  entrench- 
ments were  in  our  hands. 

A  volume  could  be  written  alone  on  the  changes  in  tactics 
which  have  been  developed  and  practiced  by  the  military 
geniuses  of  the  contending  forces.  In  the  European  War  the 
range  of  artillery  and  infantry  fire  was  three  times  what  it  was 
in  the  Franco-Prussian  War.  The  flattening  of  the  trajec- 
tory, which  means  making  the  bullets  go  more  nearly  on  a 
straight  line  instead  of  traveling  in  an  arc,  has  made  the  fire 
so  effective  as  to  compel  the  soldiers  to  "travel  on  their  stom- 
achs." To  crawl  along  the  ground  like  alligators,  or  advance 
like  moles  digging  their  way  into  the  earth. 

The  tremendous  range  of  the  modern  rifle,  single  arm,  or 
rapidfire  gun,  and  the  development  of  more  powerful  explo- 
sives for  ammunition  have  wrought  this  change.  The  bullet  will 


220  MODERN  WAR  METHODS. 

travel  a  longer  distance  at  a  horizontal  position  than  in  the  old 
days  when  ordinary  black  powder  and  a  smooth-bore  gun  were 
used,  and  so  at  hundreds  of  yards  distance  the  soldiers  can  aim 
direct  to  kill,  without  making  elevation  allowances. 

The  machine  gun  has  made  it  possible  for  the  men  to  fire 
from  four  to  five  shots  for  every  one  that  was  fired  in  the 
Franco-Prussian  War  and  probably  ten  for  every  one  that  was 
fired  in  the  Civil  War.  The  only  time  the  soldiers  exposed 
themselves  on  the  army  frontiers  were  when  they  were  storm- 
ing trenches,  and  this  was  not  attempted  until  the  trench  had 
suffered  bombardment  so  it  was  made  untenable. 

DIFFICULT  MOUNTAIN   FIGHTING 

Probably  nothing  in  the  warfare  of  nations  has  been  more 
colorful  and  replete  with  surprises  than  the  campaign  waged 
by  the  Italian  soldiers  on  the  Alpine  passes  between  Italy  and 
the  Austrian  strongholds,  and  in  the  discussion  of  modern  war- 
fare, a  brief  description  of  some  of  the  work  of  these  intrepid 
mountain  fighters  is  interesting. 

Much  of  this  fighting  has  been  the  most  difficult  known 
in  the  annals  of  modern  warfare,  save,  perhaps,  that  done  by 
the  famous  Younghusband  British  Expedition  to  Thibet.  And 
that,  by  comparison,  was  a  very  small  matter. 

The  mere  height — altitude — at  which  the  Italian  warfare 
against  the  Austrians  was  carried  on  has  been  sufficient  to  en- 
tail enormous  difficulties  and  a  great  additional  strain,  due  act- 
ually to  difficult  breathing  in  a  rarefied  atmosphere. 

The  warfare  in  the  clouds  which  has  characterized  the 
struggle  along  the  Isonzo  front  has  been  conducted  at  an  alti- 
tude seldom  less  than  8,000  and  often  rising  to  12,000  feet, 
which  is  well  within  the  realm  of  eternal  snow. 

Naturally,  therefore,  most  of  the  fighting  was  done  in 
bitter  cold.  To  this  fact  add  the  other  that  the  Italian  soldiers 
who  carried  it  on  were  almost  exclusively  men  who  had  not 
been  accustomed  to  the  cold.     They  had  been  drawn  from 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  221 

among  dwellers  in  a  semitropical  climate,  and  one  gets  an  idea 
of  the  immense  accomplishments  of  this  army  which  struggled 
in  the  skies. 

The  average  American  knows  the  Italian  as  immensely 
industrious,  but  perhaps  is  disinclined  to  credit  him  with  great 
constructive  ability  or  engineering  genius.  He  would  change 
his  estimate  of  him  if  he  could  see  him  fight  and  study  his  bat- 
tlefield. The  Italian  warfare  of  the  mountain  peak  and 
gorges  has  been  a  warfare  of  construction,  even  more  than  it 
has  been  a  warfare  of  destruction,  and  has  been  rendered  pos- 
sible only  by  the  exercise  of  engineering  genius  comparable 
with  that  which  sent  our  world-beating  American  railways 
through  the  famous  Rocky  Mountain  passes ! 

HALTED    BY   INTIMIDATION. 

The  fact  that  Italy's  warfare  has  been  invariably  against 
positions  stronger  than  her  own  is  the  result  of  the  fact  that 
while,  since  1866,  Austria  continually  strengthened  her  frontier 
with  fortifications,  most  of  them  of  ferro-concrete,  the  Italians 
were  not  able  to  fortify  at  all.  Every  step  in  that  direction 
brought  forth  threats  of  war.  These  began  at  a  time  when 
Italy  was  in  no  condition  to  fight,  before,  as  a  unified  nation, 
she  became  a  world-power. 

Being  weak,  she  was  prevented  from  making  any  prepa- 
rations for  defense  against  a  foe  which  continually  was  ob- 
viously getting  ready  for  attack  upon  her.  The  mere  com- 
mencement of  preparations  might  have  precipitated  war.  But 
Austria  continually  prepared.  Besides,  the  Italians  ever  have 
been  a  peace-loving  nation. 

As  a  natural  and  inevitable  consequence  of  all  these  con- 
ditions all  the  dominating  positions  along  the  Austro-Italian 
frontier  were  strongly  fortified  by  the  Austrians.  They  have 
long  occupied  the  crest  of  every  mountain  in  such  a  way  that 
their  guns  could  rake  any  Italian  approach  from  below,  along 
a  front  of  450  miles — about  the  distance  from  New  York  to 


222  MODERN  WAE  METHODS. 

Buffalo,  and  almost  the  same  as  that  of  the  whole  French- 
British-Belgian  eastern  front  in  this  war. 

During  the  winter  of  1916,  one  of  the  most  exceptionally 
hard  winters  known  in  the  annals  of  the  Italian  Weather  Serv- 
ice, the  Italians  not  only  have  been  righting  for  their  sunny 
homeland,  but  have  been  fighting  in  a  region  of  eternal  snow. 

This  snow  was  an  obstacle  extremely  hard  to  overcome. 
It  may  be  said  never  to  have  been  less  than  six  yards  deep  on 
the  Isonzo  front,  so  the  task  of  the  consolidation  of  positions, 
enabling  troops  at  once  to  resist  attack  and  protect  themselves 
from  assault  from  the  rear,  was  highly  difficult. 
TYPICAL   ROAD    BUILDERS. 

The  Italians  were  ever  road-builders,  descendants,  as  they 
are,  of  those  Romans  who  built  roads  for  all  Europe.  While 
the  Austrians  were  fully  supplied  with  roads  of  the  best  and 
most  modern  character,  there  were  hundreds  of  miles  on  the 
Italian  side  where  there  were  not  even  mule-tracks. 

Here  was  a  vast  problem. 

Literally  millions  of  soldiers  were  not  free  to  fight,  but 
had  been  drafted  for  the  road-building  work.  Carrying  picks 
and  shovels,  managing  steam-shovels,  working  electric  hoists, 
stringing  supporting  cables,  they  were  as  truly  fighting  men, 
however,  as  any  who  ever  bore  rifles  or  worked  machine-guns. 

Miles  of  the  roads  were  rebuilt  under  Austrian  fire,  by 
men  who  built  them  well  enough,  even  in  the  great  8,000-foot 
heights,  that  they  could  bear  heavy  artillery  of  vast  weights 
without  suffering  damage.  They  built  them  in  such  easy  gra- 
dients that  heavy  artillery  could  be  moved  speedily,  the  guns 
and  motor-lorries  that  passed  over  them  frequently  weighing 
as  much  as  fifteen  tons. 

Nor  did  the  problem  end  with  the  construction  of  these 
marvel-roads.  It  was  necessary  to  transport  very  heavy  war 
material  across  stretches  where  the  building  of  any  roads  what- 
ever was  a  sheer  impossibility.    Often  it  was  necessary  to  take 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  223 

> 

heavy  guns  as  far  as  might  be  upon  sleighs  and  then  drag  them 
for  considerable  distances  by  hand ;  quite  as  often  it  was  impera- 
tive that  across  chasms  great  cables  should  be  rigged  on  which 
the  guns  might  be  swung,  sometimes  hundreds  or  even  thou- 
sands of  feet  above  the  valleys  beneath,  from  one  height  to 
another. 

The  "wireways"  by  which  much  of  this  unique  transporta- 
tion was  accomplished  are  of  Italian  invention,  as  were  other 
notable  and  essential  engineering  devices  of  this  great  war  of 
mountain  transportation. 

Such  contrivances,  known  as  "teleferrica,"  were  intro- 
duced for  the  first  time  during  the  winter  of  1916,  and  by  sum- 
mer there  were  about  200  along  the  mountainous  front.  They 
not  only  supplied  very  advanced  positions  with  armament, 
ammunition  and  food,  but  transported  men  back  and  forth 
between  them  and  lower  points. 

SYSTEM  ONE  OF  TACKLES. 

The  system  was  one  of  tackles  (where  guns  and  other 
heavy  freight  were  to  be  moved)  or  cars  (like  cradles,  where 
men  were  to  be  moved),  operated  by  motor-pulleys  directly 
connected  up  with  great  electric  power.  One  of  the  most  aston- 
ishing and  picturesque  uses  to  which  these  aerial  wireways  were 
put  was  the  movement  downward  of  men  wounded  at  the 
advanced  posts  with  which  the  teleferrica  communicate. 

To  see  wounded  men  going  down  these  wireways,  mere 
dots,  each  representing  a  suspended  stretcher  upon  which  a 
suffering  human  being  is  strapped  securely,  was  described  as 
one  of  the  most  amazing  spectacles  of  the  whole  war.  The 
experience,  to  some  wounded  men,  swinging  sickeningly,  dizzy- 
ingly  alone  in  midair,  was  probably  more  terrifying  than  actual 
fighting,  although  there  were  few,  if  any,  accidents  connected 
with  the  wireways. 

Not  infrequently  these  wireways  were  within  direct  range 
of  the  enemy  fire,  and  that  complicated  matters.    So  far  as  is 


224  MODEKN  WAR  METHODS. 

known,  there  has  been  no  instance  of  a  cable  cut  by  gunfire,  but 
in  several  districts  it  was  necessary  that  the  men,  going  to  their 
duty  and  the  wounded  going  backward,  having  done  theirs, 
must  needs  be  protected  in  armored  baskets,  somewhat  like 
those  which  often  are  swung  beneath  observation  balloons  on 
the  various  fronts. 

PROBLEMS   OF   TRANSPORTATION. 

The  problems  of  transportation,  great  as  they  are,  are  by 
no  means  the  only  unique  difficulties  presented  to  these  brave 
mountain  fighters.  In  this  extraordinary  warfare  mining  by 
means  of  high  explosives  was  carried  on  upon  a  hitherto  un- 
equaled  scale.  Such  work  with  high  explosives  was  not  only 
continually  necessary  in  the  construction  of  roads  and  fortifi- 
cations in  a  region  of  solid  rock,  but  sometimes  proved  the  only 
effective  means  of  attack  upon  the  enemy. 

The  mine  was  used  as  an  offensive  weapon  by  both  sides, 
and  often  with  very  terrible  results. 

Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  of  the  campaign  was  the 
mine  laid  by  the  Italians  after  infinitely  difficult  and  very  ex- 
tensive tunneling  in  solid  rock  at  the  Cima  del  Col  di  Lana. 

This  immense  effort  with  explosives  blew  off  the  whole  top 
of  a  mountain — and  that  mountaintop  was  thickly  occupied  by 
Austrians  at  the  time  of  the  explosion  of  the  mine.  None  on 
the  Italian  side  knows  exactly  what  the  Austrian  casualties 
were,  but  it  is  certain  that  through  this  one  explosion  more  than 
an  entire  company — that  is,  more  than  400 — of  the  enemy's 
soldiers  were  destroyed. 

An  interesting  detail  of  this  operation  is  the  fact  that 
while  the  Italians  were  tunneling  for  this  great  mine  they  were 
perfectly  aware  that  the  Austrians  also  were  at  work  upon  a 
similar  effort.  It  amounted  to  a  race  with  death,  and  the 
Italians  won  it. 

Correspondents  agree  that  the  thing  which  most  impresses 
the  visitor  to  the  mountain  fronts  of  the  Italian  army  is  the 


MODERN  WAR  METHODS.  225 

immense  patience  which  it  has  shown  in  the  face  of  the  difficult 
tasks  of  this  astonishing  campaign.  Italians  usually  are  re- 
garded as  temperamental  creatures,  but  "dogged"  has  been  the 
word  which  has  meant  most  in  this  campaign. 

Some  of  the  movements  of  troops  across  exposed  snow- 
covered  spaces  have  been  marvels  of  incredible  patience.  To 
escape  observation  the  soldiers  have  been  clad  in  white  clothing, 
but  in  addition  to  this  it  has  been  necessary  for  them  to  lie  flat 
upon  their  faces  in  the  snow,  moving  very,  very  slowly,  accom- 
plishing their  transfers  from  point  to  point  literally  at  snail 
speed. 

With  regard  to  such  work,  as  with  regard  to  the  Italian 
wounded,  one  thing  is  remarked  by  all  the  officers  and  those 
who  have  been  privileged  even  for  a  short  time  to  share  the 
hardships  of  the  Italian  "common  soldier."  He  never  com- 
plains. Healthy  or  hurt,  weary  or  fresh,  he  takes  war  with  a 
smile  full  of  flashing  teeth  and  with  eyes  glittering  with  interest 
and  good  nature. 


H  R— 15 


CHAPTER  XIII 

WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR 

She  has  Won  "  Hee  Place  in  the  Sun  " — Rich  and  Poob  in  the  Munitions 
Factories — Nurse  and  Ambulance  Driver — Khaki  and  Trousers — Organ- 
izes and  Farmer — Heroes  in  the  Stress  of  Circumstances — Doing  Men's 
Work  for  Men — Even  a  "  Bobbie." 

IF  IT  were  ever  really  necessary  for  woman  to  "win  a  place 
in  the  sun"  she  has  done  so  by  her  activities  with  relation 

to  the  war.  We  have  regarded  woman  with  a  high  degree 
of  sentimentality,  and  to  her  pleas  for  recognition  in  world 
affairs  have  shrugged  our  shoulders  and  intimated  that  she  was 
fit  to  bear  children,  nurse  the  sick,  do  household  chores  and 
cook,  cook,  cook;  but  physically,  mentally  and  by  training  she 
was  unfit  to  perform  the  greater  world  duties. 

But  the  world  war  has  proved  that  all  the  tasks  which  men 
claimed  women  were  unfitted  to  perform  can  as  well  be  done  by 
what  we  have  been  pleased  to  term  the  "weaker  sex." 

The  war  has  proved  a  truism  that  old  saying,  "The  hand 
that  rocks  the  cradle  rules  the  world,"  and  also  that  the  burden 
of  war  falls  upon  women.  It  is  they  who  give  up  their  sons  to 
their  country  and  send  their  husbands  and  boys  to  the  front  to 
serve  as  fodder  for  the  cannon. 

In  England  the  work  of  women  in  the  war  secured  for 
them  a  degree  of  recognition  in  Parliament  which  all  of  their 
agitation  and  militant  tactics  failed  to  produce. 

National  extremity  was  woman's  opportunity;  frank  in- 
vitation to  new  lines  of  work  was  followed  by  hearty  apprecia- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  men;  and  a  proposition  to  extend  suf- 
frage to  6,000,000  English  women  was  based  avowedly  upon 
the  general  gratitude  felt  for  their  loyal  and  effective  service  in 
the  war.  And  it  is  war  service,  for  modern  warfare  has  greatly 
enlarged  the  content  of  that  term.    In  the  modern  conception 

226 


WOMAN  AND  WAR.  227 

those  who  make  munitions  or  in  other  ways  release  others  for 
the  front  are  doing  war  service  as  truly  as  those  who  bear  arms. 
Instead  of  yielding  to  fame  a  few  isolated  Mollie  Pitchers, 
the  war  brought  a  largely  neglected  half  of  the  nation's  mili- 
tary strength  into  practical  service.  Indeed,  though  woman 
dreads  war  more  than  man  does,  if  it  comes  to  actual  defense 
of  land  and  home  and  young,  we  find,  with  Kipling,  that  "the 
female  of  the  species  is  more  deadly  than  the  male." 

THE  WORK  OF  WOMEN. 

The  work  of  the  women  in  the  munitions  factories  in  Eng- 
land has  deservedly  attracted  large  attention,  and,  doubtless, 
British  historians  will  for  centuries  tell  how,  when  England 
found  herself  utterly  at  a  loss  before  her  enemies  because  of  a 
lack  of  effective  ammunition,  the  women  responded  "as  one 
man"  to  meet  the  need  and  save  the  Union  Jack  from  being 
forced  to  the  shore.  It  was  a  repetition,  multiplied  10,000 
times,  of  the  Presbyterian  parson  at  Springfield,  N.  J.,  supply- 
ing Washington's  army  with  Watts  hymn  books  when  it  was 
retreating  to  serve  as  paper  wadding  for  the  rifles. 

The  innovation  of  the  task,  the  large  scale  on  which  it  was 
carried  out  and  the  striking  success  of  it  make  it  a  major  event 
of  the  war,  even  to  be  compared  with  the  battle  of  the  Marne. 
And  shall  not  American  historians  ascribe  to  the  scores  of 
young  girls  who  lost  their  lives  in  an  explosion  at  Eddy  stone, 
Pa.,  making  munitions,  the  honor  of  being  the  first  martyrs  of 
the  German- American  War? 

It  was  not  alone  the  working  girls  of  England  who  tired 
their  arms  and  calloused  their  hands  on  the  heavy  shells.  When 
the  work  was  at  its  full  capacity,  a  proposition  was  sent  to  the 
women  of  leisure  to  undergo  three  weeks  of  training  in  a  muni- 
tions factory  and  then  take  up  the  work  at  the  week-ends  to 
relieve  the  regular  workers,  the  women  shell  machinists,  whose 
strength  and  skill  could  best  be  maintained  by  saving  them 
from  Saturday  and  Sunday  overtime. 


228  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

There  was  a  strange  incongruity  in  paying  them  less  than 
the  men  for  the  same  work.  They  worked  in  eight-hour  shifts 
and  were  required  to  stand,  except  during  a  single  half -hour 
interval.  The  prospectus  of  instruction  suggested  short  skirts, 
thick  gloves  and  boots  with  low  heels,  adding  that  evening 
dress  would  not  be  necessary. 

Hotel  accommodations  were  attempted  for  these  "lady" 
Workers,  but  this  proved  inadequate,  and  part  of  them  went  to 
the  lodgings  with  the  regular  workers.  Short  skirts  were  only 
the  first  step  that  promptly  led  to  overalls,  and  when  these 
English  ladies,  whom  the  girls  called  "Miaows,"  got  well 
grimed  with  dust  and  grease,  utterly  tired  out  with  handling 
12-pound  shells  and  hungry  enough  to  prefer  coarse  food,  they 
understood  the  workgirls  as  never  before,  and  the  men,  too,  and 
they  had  a  new  birth  of  patriotism.  One  lady  said  she  found 
great  relief  and  enthusiasm  by  thinking  of  the  shells  as  so  many 
dead  Boches  or  live  Tommies. 

VARIED  OCCUPATIONS  OF  WOMEN. 

Making  ammunition  and  hospital  supplies,  handling  lug- 
gage and  trunks  in  baggage  rooms,  driving  motors,  conducting 
trolley  cars,  carpentry  work  on  wooden  houses  for  the  front, 
are  but  a  few  of  the  occupations  in  which  European  women 
engaged  in  war  service.  They  have  served  as  lift  attendants, 
ticket  sellers,  post  office  sorters,  mail  carriers,  gardeners,  dairy 
lassies,  grocery  clerks,  drivers  of  delivery  wagons  and  vans, 
commissionaires.  More  than  a  million  were  added  to  the  in- 
dustrial workers  in  England  during  the  first  two  years  of  war. 

America  coming  later  into  the  war,  its  women  naturally 
followed  the  lead  of  the  English  and  French  along  many  lines 
tried  and  proved  to  be  worth  while,  but  our  matrons  and  maids, 
famed  for  their  independence  and  initiative,  developed  also  new 
lines  of  patriotic  effort.  As  soon  as  it  was  evident  that  German 
ambitions  included  designs  upon  America,  the  strong  feminine 
instinct  for  preservation  began  to  assert  itself.    Pacifism  had 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  229 

no  special  appeal  to  the  gentler  sex  at  such  a  time.  She  got 
behind  the  recruiting  as  if  it  were  her  own  job,  and  much  of  the 
success  of  it  was  due  to  her  efforts. 

The  Woman's  Section  of  the  Navy  League  may  well  be 
described  by  quoting  from  its  own  statement  of  motive  and 
purpose.  '  'Every  mother  with  sons,  every  wife  with  husband, 
every  sister  with  a  brother,  feels  her  heart  stand  still  with  the 
horror  of  what  war  may  bring  to  her." 

WOMAN'S  MANY  SERVICES. 

These  women  spread  information  to  arouse  interest  in  the 
condition  of  the  United  States  naval  forces,  aided  recruiting 
for  the  Naval  Reserve,  assisted  in  procuring  enrollments  for 
the  Naval  Coast  Reserve,  and  drawing  on  their  resources  pro- 
vided many  needed  articles  of  clothing,  equipment  and  comfort 
not  furnished  by  the  Government.  A  knitting  committee 
makes  sleeveless  jackets,  helmets,  wristlets  and  mufflers.  Com- 
fort kits,  games,  blankets,  underwear,  rubber  hats,  coats 
and  boots  are  made  or  bought  by  the  Comfort  and  Supplies 
Committee. 

The  two  poles  of  patriotic  service  are  the  production  of 
food  and  fighting  at  the  front;  a  world  of  activity  bulges  be- 
tween them.  European  women  are  accustomed  to  farm  labor. 
Millions  of  peasant  women,  serfs,  all  but  in  name,  under  the 
late  Russian  regime;  Balkan  women,  German  and  French 
wives  and  girls,  and,  to  some  extent,  the  mothers  and  daugh- 
ters of  the  English  poor,  would  have  understood  Markham's 
poem  better  if  he  had  called  it,  "The  Woman  With  the  Hoe." 

In  the  war  food  crisis  the  women  of  America  matched  the 
women  of  the  enemy  and  vied  with  those  of  their  own  allies  in 
persuading  mother  earth  to  yield  her  bounty.  In  heavy  shoes, 
trousers  of  jean,  rolled-up  sleeves  and  a  straw  hat,  the  girls  of 
America  here  and  there  turned  to  the  land  and  took  hold  of  the 
tasks  of  the  farm. 

So  far  we  have  mentioned  only  the  work  at  home  that 


230  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

women  took  up  for  the  war,  but  this  is  only  a  part;  the  other 
pole  finds  them  near.  The  invaluable  service  of  Red  Cross 
nurses,  their  zeal  and  sacrifice  and  sometimes  martyrdom,  from 
Elizabeth  Fry  and  Florence  Nightingale  to  Edith  Cavell,  have 
been  women's  glory  for  more  than  half  a  century.  This  war 
multiplied  the  need  many  times  and  veritable  regiments  of 
them  responded.  Their  emblem  became  the  symbol  universal 
of  mercy,  charity  and  good  will. 

In  addition  to  the  50  trained  nurses  for  a  base  hospital, 
there  are  25  hospital  aids,  who  serve  without  pay.  America 
has  8000  registered  Red  Cross  nurses  and  scores  of  thousands 
are  in  training  for  aids. 

The  effective  and  helpful  work  of  women  in  all  lines  of 
endeavor,  aside  from  home  and  family  life,  has  never  before 
been  shown  so  impressively  as  now.  Their  energy,  willingness, 
faithfulness  and  capability  in  every  activity  are  unsurpassed. 

WOMAN  BENT  ON  DOING  HER  UTMOST. 

But  woman  shares  the  lot  of  mankind  on  earth,  and  in  the 
issues  of  life  and  death,  land  and  home,  she  fears  to  do  less  than 
her  most,  and  we  would  fear  to  have  her  do  less. 

The  woman  for  ages  has  been  the  war  nurse,  but  the  Amer- 
ican woman  has  gone  a  step  further  and  qualified  as  the  war 
physician.  When  the  war  clouds  first  hovered  over  America 
more  than  200  women  physicians  formally  offered  their  serv- 
ices to  the  Government.  At  the  graduation  exercises  of  a 
women's  medical  college,  when  America  first  entered  the  war, 
a  prominent  official  made  the  statement  that  3,000  women 
physicians  could  find  unlimited  work  of  mercy  behind  the  first 
line  of  firing  in  Europe. 

The  surgeon  general  of  the  United  States  army  did  not 
await  an  actual  call  to  arms  to  notify  a  physician  that  the 
proffer  of  the  services  of  women  physicians  would  be  accepted 
when  the  need  came. 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  231 

"When  I  spoke  to  the  women,"  said  this  physician,  "I 
asked  them  this  question : 

"  'Can  I  tell  the  Government  that  it  may  count  upon  each 
and  all  of  you  for  any  work  within  your  power?' 

"Their  answer  was  unanimous.    It  was  'Yes.'  " 

There  is  a  law  prohibiting  women  from  going  aboard  bat- 
tleships when  they  are  under  way,  but  such  an  obstacle  has  not 
stood  in  the  way  of  woman's  desire  to  help  where  she  can  when 
her  country  calls,  and  so  Miss  Loretta  Walsh  became  a  mem- 
ber of  the  United  States  navy — the  first  woman  enlisted  in  that 
branch  of  the  service,  with  the  exception  of  the  nurses'  corps. 
Her  title  was  chief  yeoman. 

Women  announced  their  readiness  to  assist  in  another  way 
— in  economizing — one  organization  having  adopted  the  fol- 
lowing resolutions : 

RESOLUTION  ON  ECONOMICS. 

"Resolved,  That  all  patriotic  women  be  urged  to  use  their 
influence  on  fashions  in  dress  to  keep  them  as  economical  as 
possible,  and  to  register  their  disapproval  of  such  styles  as  the 
melon  and  peg-top  skirt,  or  any  other  styles  that  imply  ex- 
travagant changes  in  the  wardrobe,  to  the  end  that  the  time  and 
money  thus  saved  from  clothes  may  be  devoted  to  the  needs  of 
the  nation." 

How  often  have  we  heard :  "When  war  comes,  when  our 
homes  are  threatened,  when  peril  stalks  abroad  in  the  land, 
who  shoulders  the  musket  and  goes  out  to  fight?  The  man! 
The  man!" 

But  woman,  knowing  better  than  man  the  impulses  of  her 
own  heart,  only  awaited  the  opportunity  to  show  what  she  could 
do,  though,  much  more  than  man,  she  loves  peace,  detests  strife. 
But  she  did  not  await  an  actual  call  to  arms  to  show  the  patri- 
otic spirit  with  which  her  soul  was  fired.  Whatever  her  Gov- 
ernment was  willing  she  should  do,  to  that  was  she  prepared  to 
give  her  best  efforts. 


232  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

Lady  Frances  Balfour,  president  of  the  London  Society 
of  National  Union  of  Women  Suffragists  and  president  of  the 
Travelers'  Aid  Society,  worked  as  hard  to  win  the  war  as  any 
Tommy  in  the  trenches. 

A  daughter  of  the  eighth  Duke  of  Argyll  and  the  widow 
of  a  soldier,  she  played  an  important  part  in  Scotch  and  Eng- 
lish public  life  for  many  years,  and  has  done  much  to  advance 
the  cause  of  British  women. 

An  authentic  view  of  the  situation  as  it  developed  with 
reference  to  the  reception  of  women  into  the  everyday  work 
and  what  American  women  might  do  is  contained  in  the  follow- 
ing interview  with  Lady  Balfour: 

WOMAN  AS  'WAGE  EARNER. 

"We  are  doing  everything,"  she  said.  "We  are  rilling 
nearly  every  post.  If  the  House  of  Lords  had  not  vetoed  the 
bill  we  would  be  solicitors,  but  that  must  wait  for  a  time. 
British  women  are  now  meeting  with  success  because  for  the 
first  time  they  are  receiving  a  proper  wage  and  are  able  to  live 
in  a  way  to  do  their  best  work.  The  old  sweat  shop  wage  has 
gone,  and  I  hope  never  to  return.  Women  will  never  return 
to  the  conditions  which  existed  before  the  war. 

"American  women  start  with  a  great  advantage.  They 
have  already  the  entree  in  the  business  world  and  fill  many 
clerical  places,  whereas  our  women  and  girls  had  to  break  down 
the  barriers  of  conservatism  existing  in  a  great  number  of 
banks.  There  was  the  same  objection  to  women  workers  among 
the  farmers  of  the  South  of  England,  though  in  Scotland  the 
woman  has  always  done  her  part  on  the  farm. 

"Girls  are  beginning  on  the  farm  at  18  shillings  ($4.50) 
a  week ;  before  the  war  men  farm  hands  worked  for  1 1  shillings 
($2.75).  Our  women  are  milking  cows,  running  steam  plows, 
digging  in  the  fields  and  giving  complete  satisfaction.  I  dare 
not  venture  to  predict  what  will  happen  in  the  future,  but  we 
can  face  it  with  confidence,  I  am  certain.    Now  we  are  inspired 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  233 

with  the  spirit  of  patriotism;  we  feel  we  owe  our  best  to  our 
country;  we  are  ready  to  suffer  hardship  just  as  our  brave  men 
are  doing  in  the  trenches. 

BRITISH  WOMEN'S  PATRIOTISM. 

"The  patriotism  of  British  women  had  stood  a  hard  test; 
I  hope  American  women  have  an  easier  trial.  Lloyd  George 
says  he  hopes  America  will  profit  by  the  mistakes  of  Britain. 
For  more  than  a  year  the  government  of  this  country  snubbed 
and  discouraged  our  women.  The  government  does  not  pay 
women  at  the  same  rate  as  men ;  it  does  not  give  them  the  same 
war  bonus.  There  came  a  time  when  the  government  realized 
the  war  could  not  be  won  without  the  women.  Then  it  issued 
frantic  calls  for  help,  and  the  women  responded  nobly,  just  as 
they  would  have  done  months  before.  I  hope  your  American 
Government  will  recognize  the  value  of  woman's  help  from  the 
very  start. 

"Unfortunately  I  must  judge  your  women  largely  by 
those  who  come  over  here  for  the  season  in  peace  days.  As  I 
remember  they  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  and  money  at  the 
hairdressers,  manicures,  dressmaking  establishments  and  hotels. 
But  I  am  certain  the  great  majority  of  Americans  care  more 
for  their  homes  and  country  and  less  for  display.  I  feel  that 
they  should  concentrate  on  the  production  of  food.  We  need 
all  we  can  get  and  then  we  shall  not  have  as  much  as  we  require. 
Money,  food  and  ships  are  the  things  most  needed. 

"Your  women  have  been  wonderfully  generous  in  giving 
us  money,  supporting  hospitals  and  sending  us  supplies.  We 
can  use  some  of  your  nurses  and  women  doctors.  We  have  a 
hospital  here  in  London  holding  nearly  1000  soldiers  and  it  is 
run  entirely  by  women.  Our  Scottish  women's  hospitals  have 
done  grand  work  in  the  various  theaters  of  war.  Not  only  the 
nurses,  but  the  doctors  and  ambulance  drivers  are  women.  We 
have  supplied  about  72,000  women  for  this  work  alone." 


234  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

"How  Have  women  regarded  the  discipline  of  army  life?" 
was  asked. 

"Wonderfully!"  said  Lady  Frances.  "It  has  been  good 
for  them.  Just  see  our  women  'bus  conductors.  They  work 
hard,  handle  all  kinds  of  people,  but  I  never  heard  them  say 
they  are  unable  to  meet  the  emergencies  which  arise.  And  for 
the  most  part  they  are  women  who  come  from  very  humble 
surroundings.  You  hear  that  women  have  broken  down  in 
health  under  their  work,  but  it  seems  to  me  I  have  read  fre- 
quently about  American  business  men  suffering  from  nervous 
breakdowns  and  overwork." 

SUCCESS  BUILT  ON  RUINS  OF  FAILURE. 

No  great  victories,  either  in  war  or  in  the  ordinary  relations 
of  life,  are  attained  without  initial  blunders.  Many  a  splendid 
success  is  built  upon  the  ruins  of  failure,  and  this  is  a  fact  that 
the  women  of  Europe  learned  after  the  first  hysteria  occasioned 
by  the  marching  soldiers,  the  beat  of  drums  and  all  the  excite- 
ment incident  to  real  warfare.  American  women,  when  they 
joined  hands  with  the  Allies  against  Prussianism  and  all  that  it 
meant,  builded  splendid  records  of  their  usefulness  upon  the 
mistakes  that  these  women  made. 

In  the  summer  of  1914  every  girl  and  woman  clamored  to 
be  a  nurse.  Women  with  a  great  deal  of  money  and  no  experi- 
ence opened  "hospitals"  that  were  about  as  fit  for  the  reception 
and  treatment  of  wounded  men  as  a  henroost  is  capable  of  hous- 
ing an  eagle.  They  all  wanted  to  be  in  the  "Red  Cross"  or  "V. 
A.  D."  (Voluntary  Aid  Department)  and  wear  caps  and 
bandage  wounds. 

Then  there  were  the  amateur  nurses  who  didn't  know  much 
about  nursing,  "but  would  love  to  try."  The  daughter  of  a  duke 
tried  to  go  through  a  probationary  course  at  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's Hospital  because  she  thought  the  uniform  "perfectly 
sweet."  But  of  course  this  element  of  "fluffiness"  exists  on 
the  outside  of  any  great  movement.   It  has  to  be  blown  away 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  235 

so  that  the  hard  surface  of  genuine  and  practical  endeavor  can 
be  seen  and  felt.  And  that  is  what  happened  to  England.  The 
"fluff"  disappeared  and  women  knew  where  they  were,  and  men 
realized  that  women  possess  a  force,  a  firm  and  splendid  resolve, 
that  gives  them  the  right  to  step  beside  men  in  the  march  toward 
victory. 

Another  craze  that  amounted  to  a  vice  was  the  furious  and 
ill-considered  efforts  of  totally  unskilled  women  to  make  shirts 
and  hospital  garments  for  soldiers.  If  some  of  the  results  had 
not  been  pathetic  one  could  almost  be  overcome  with  the  comi- 
cality of  the  whole  business.  Soldiers'  shirts  were  turned  out  by 
a  circle  of  busily  sewing  ladies  that  would  not  fit  a  dwarf,  while 
probably  the  next  batch  of  garments  dispatched  with  patriotic 
fervor  to  a  regimental  depot  might  have  been  designed  for  a 

race  of  giants. 

NATIONAL  SERVICE  FOR  WOMEN. 

National  service  for  women  as  well  as  for  men  proved  a 
very  substantial  portion  of  Great  Britain's  strength,  but  before 
national  service  had  been  generally  thought  of  an  organization 
called  the  Women's  Service  Bureau  had  been  formed  by  a 
group  of  influential  and  intelligent  women  who  were  imbued 
with  the  idea  that  only  by  careful  and  systematized  registration 
and  selection  could  the  matter  of  feminine  war  work  be  success- 
fully arranged. 

Lady  Frances  Balfour  was  the  first  president  of  the 
Women's  Service  Bureau,  which  with  the  London  Society  for 
Suffrage  established  62  branches  in  the  city  of  London  and 
its  suburbs. 

What  the  women  at  the  head  of  this  society  realized  was  the 
necessity  for  giving  the  right  women  the  most  suitable  employ- 
ment and  also  to  give  every  applicant  for  work  helpful  and 
practical  advice.  The  need  for  women's  labor  in  the  many 
trades  and  professions  hitherto  closed  to  them,  and  for  their 
increased  co-operation  in  those  in  which  they  already  took  part, 
has  been  forced  home  even  to  unwilling  minds. 


236  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

Here  and  there  on  the  battlefields  of  Europe— in  Bulgaria, 
Servia,  Roumania,  France,  Belgium  and  Russia — have  been 
noted  occasionally  the  presence  of  a  woman  warrior,  a  modern 
Joan  of  Arc.  It  was  not  expected,  however,  that  in  America 
woman  would  do  more  than  perform  the  service  work  which  fell 
to  the  lot  of  the  Red  Cross  nurses  and  the  women  practicing 
conservation  and  effecting  organization  in  England. 

But  the  women  of  America  were  not  satisfied  with  "petti- 
coat preparedness."  They  rushed  to  the  khaki  suits  and  to  the 
colors  with  unexpected  enthusiasm.  One  khaki-clad  woman 
walked  from  San  Francisco  to  Nfew  York,  making  recruiting 
speeches  on  the  way. 

The  infantry,  the  cavalry,  the  navy,  the  marines  could 
all  point  to  their  girls  in  khaki. 

ALL  KINDS  OF  WOMEN  ENLISTED. 

As  the  women  enlisted  for  all  kinds  of  service,  so  it  may 
be  said  all  kinds  of  women  enlisted — that  is,  women  of  all  ranks 
of  life— some  from  society,  some  from  the  mills,  others  from  the 
offices,  the  shops,  the  stage,  the  restaurants  and  the  colleges. 

Many  years  ago  the  country  rang  with  the  name  of  Tippe- 
canoe, and  one  of  the  men  who  bore  arms  on  the  western  frontier 
was  William  Henry  Harrison.  The  years  went  by  and  Ben- 
jamin Harrison  came  to  the  White  House  as  President. 

The  Harrison  blood  showed  in  the  preparedness  work,  and 
Old  Tippecanoe's  great  granddaughter  helped  to  make  the 
women  of  the  country  fit  for  the  burden  of  war. 

There  isn't  anything  on  earth  that  shows  so  strongly  in  the 
blood  as  the  soldier  element,  and  Elizabeth  Harrison,  whose 
great  ancestor  faced  the  perils  of  the  frontier  warfare,  was  a 
leader  by  force  of  her  inherited  ability  as  a  leader.  She  was 
elected  drill  sergeant  for  the  college  girls  of  the  New  York 
University. 

When  the  war  clouds  came  she  was  following  inherited 
bent.  All  of  the  Harrison  men  had  been  among  the  country's 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  23? 

greatest  lawyers  and  Miss  Harrison  was  studying  for  the  bar. 

But  just  as  the  warwhoop  of  the  West  called  Tippecanoe 
from  his  books  and  briefs  to  bullets  and  battles,  so  the  daughter 
of  the  former  President  dropped  Blackstone  and  Kent  to  take 
up  the  Drill  Regulations  and  the  elementary  text  books  of  the 
army. 

She  knew  that  the  way  to  make  women  fit  for  their  part  of 
war  service  was  to  make  them  strong  and  healthy  and  to  give 
them  an  idea  of  the  things  that  men-at-arms  have  to  do. 

NOTED  WOMEN  IN  THE  WORK. 

So  Miss  Harrison  was  one  of  the  first  workers  in  the  move- 
ment to  teach  women  the  elements  of  war.  Many  women  of 
importance  in  the  social  and  financial  world  took  up  the  task 
with  a  will,  and  there  was  a  girl  for  every  signal  flag,  a  maid  for 
every  wireless  station,  and  an  angel  for  every  hospital  ward  in 
the  making  as  the  men  pursued  the  task  of  providing  guns  and 
the  men  behind  the  guns. 

Miss  Harrison  and  the  girls  she  drilled  at  the  University 
wore  regulation  field  service  uniform,  khaki  breeches,  coat, 
heavy  shoes  and  puttees,  and  a  large  hat  of  military  cut. 

The  American  Woman's  League  for  Self-Defence  and 
Preparedness  was  the  first  woman's  military  organization  in 
America,  according  to  its  president,  Mrs.  Ida  Powell  Priest, 
who  is  descended  from  an  old  Long  Island  family,  Thomas 
Powell  being  one  of  her  ancestors. 

The  first  cavalry  troop,  of  which  Ethel  M.  Scheiss  was  first 
senior  captain,  drilled  regularly.  Their  first  appearance 
mounted  caused  a  mild  sensation  on  Broadway.  They  were 
most  impressively  stern  soldierettes  as  they  trotted  and  galloped 
their  horses. 

Everywhere  the  girl  in  America  strove  with  helpful 
earnestness  to  do  "her  bit."  Every  strata  of  society  called  out 
its  members  in  a  wonderful  plan  of  feminine  preparedness. 
Besides  the  thousands  of  women  members  of  the  Red  Cross 


238  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

some  of  the  most  prominent  organizations  officered  and  planned 
by  women  include  The  National  League  for  Women's  Service, 
which  has  branches  in  every  large  city  in  the  United  States. 
They  enrolled  women  as  motor  car  drivers,  telegraphers,  wire- 
less operators,  agriculturists  and  skilled  mechanics. 

Miss  Anne  Morgan,  as  head  of  this  organization,  devoted 
an  enormous  amount  of  energy  to  the  success  of  the  work. 

OTHER  SOCIETIES  ORGANIZED. 

Other  societies  organized  were  the  National  Special  Aid 
Society,  Service  of  Any  Kind,  Militia  of  Mercy,  which  sends 
and  provides  bandages  and  other  necessities  and  comforts  for 
the  soldiers;  Girl  Scouts  of  America,  first  aid,  signalling  and 
drills;  Daughters  of  the  American  Revolution;  the  Suffrage 
Party  and  the  Anti-Suffrage  Society;  the  International  Child 
Welfare  League  and  the  Girls'  National  Honor  Guard.  The 
Federation  of  Women's  Clubs  all  over  the  United  States  also 
organized  for  any  patriotic  service  that  women  could  perform. 

A  practical  way  of  doing  something  to  help  France  and 
Servia  was  offered  early  in  the  war  by  the  splendid  initiative 
of  Dr.  Elsie  Inglis  and  the  Scottish  Federation  of  Women's 
Suffrage  Societies,  who  organized  hospitals  for  the  wounded, 
the  staffs  of  which  were  all  women,  and  called  on  other  societies 
for  their  support. 

The  London  society  responded  first  by  subscriptions  from 
individual  members,  then  by  giving  beds,  then  (in  February, 
1915)  by  offering  itself  as  London  agent  for  the  hospitals  and 
undertaking  all  the  practical  work,  in  the  sending  out  of  per- 
sonnel and  equipment,  which  had  to  be  transacted  in  London. 

It  is  only  by  carefully  systematized  organization  that  great 
work  of  this  kind  can  be  carried  on.  The  slapdash,  haphazard 
of  hysterical  excitement  can  have  no  legitimate  place  in  a  move- 
ment that  provides  stepping  stones  toward  the  salvation  of  the 
civilized  world. 

One  of  the  things  which  will  live  long  in  the  history  of 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAK.  239 

womankind  was  the  wonderful  work  done  by  the  magnificently 
courageous  units  of  Lady  Paget's  nursing  force,  which  went 
out  to  Servia,  when  that  country  was  laid  waste  not  only  by  the 
German  beasts,  but  also  by  disease. 

It  was  not  the  fault  of  those  brave  women  and  men  that 
things  happened  at  Uskub  and  in  other  Servian  towns  that  do 
not  bear  repeating. 

It  was  just  the  lack  of  thorough  preparedness  for  a  war 
which  was  much  worse  than  humanity  had  thought  possible  that 
deepened  the  tragedy  of  their  situation.  In  Servia,  in  fact,  the 
career  of  the  hospitals  was  quite  checkered  and  the  service 
rendered  proportionately  more  vital. 

LONDON-WALES  UNIT. 

At  the  time  of  the  Austro-German  invasion  in  the  autumn 
of  1915,  the  London- Wales  Unit  was  at  Valjevo,  one  of  the 
five  Scottish  women's  hospitals  working  in  the  country.  It  was 
under  the  command  of  Dr.  Alice  Hutchinson  and  was  very 
highly  organized.  Doctor  Inglis  had  herself  gone  on  to  Servia 
to  take  general  charge  of  the  hospitals  there  in  the  spring  of 
1915.  From  the  time  that  a  typhus  epidemic  was  overcome  by 
women  doctors  early  in  the  year  to  the  time  of  the  invasion  all 
seemed  to  be  going  well.  Then  came  three  weeks  of  great  pres- 
sure of  worKand  of  rapid  moves  from  place  to  place  as  the 
enemy  advanced  into  the  country.  Finally,  it  became  a  necessity 
for  the  personnel  of  the  different  units  either  to  retreat  with  the 
Servian  army  over  the  mountains  into  Montenegro  or  to  fall 
in  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  story  of  the  retreat  is  now  very  generally  known.  The 
journey  was  one  long  series  of  forced  marches.  Mountains  7000 
feet  high  had  to  be  traversed  in  blinding  snow,  almost  the  whole 
journey  had  to  be  made  on  foot  and  it  was  six  weeks  before  the 
little  band  reached  the  coast.  Doctor  Inglis  meanwhile,  with 
her  group  of  nurses  and  orderlies,  and  Doctor  Hutchinson,  with 
the  London- Wales  Unit,  had  gallantly  stayed  behind  and  con- 


240  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR. 

tinued  to  attend  to  their  Servian  wounded  and  to  organize  help 
for  them  till  the  work  was  forcibly  stopped  by  the  advancing 
Austrian  army. 

UNIT  TAKEN  PRISONERS. 

After  being  ordered  out  of  Valjevo,  Doctor  Hutchinson 
made  several  attempts  to  organize  hospitals  in  the  line  of 
retreat.  She  was  at  Vrnyachka  Banja  when  the  Austrians 
entered  the  town  on  November  10,  1915.  She  and  her  unit 
were  taken  prisoners  and  interned,  first  near  the  Servian  fron- 
tier and  then  in  Hungary  for  three  weary  months.  The  cheer- 
ful courage  with  which  the  members  of  the  unit  bore  hardship 
and  uncertainty  and  hope  deferred  has  been  related  by  Doctor 
Hutchinson  in  a  memorable  narrative.  Their  conditions  would 
have  been  still  more  intolerable  and  their  release  would  have 
been  still  longer  delayed  if  Doctor  Hutchinson  herself  had  not 
known  a  great  deal  more  about  the  Geneva  Convention  than 
the  Austrian  authorities  had  ever  dreamed.  She  was  thus  able 
to  assert  herself  on  behalf  of  those  under  her  in  a  way  which 
taught  her  captors  something  new  about  British  women.  At 
the  beginning  of  February  the  unit  was  at  last  allowed  to  cross 
the  frontier  into  Switzerland.  It  reached  England  on  Feb- 
ruary 12.  It  was  only  the  perfection  of  its  organization  that 
carried  this  brave  body  of  women  through  amazing  hardships. 

Abroad  women  chauffeurs  became  almost  as  common  in 
the  war  as  men;  the  public  in  Paris  and  London  refused  to 
regard  the  appearance  of  a  woman  on  the  streets  in  cap, 
"knickers"  and  puttees  or  heavy  boots  as  unusual,  and  in  need 
they  in  many  instances  not  only  drove  "taxi,"  but  guided  ambu- 
lances in  the  hospital  service. 

The  Red  Cross  in  America,  in  the  matter  of  preparedness, 
organized  a  class  for  women  chauffeurs.  One  of  these,  started 
in  Philadelphia,  had  among  its  instructors  Mrs.  Thomas  Lang- 
don  Elwyn  and  Miss  Letitia  McKim,  both  of  whom  drove 
ambulances  for  the  Allies  in  England. 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAE.  241 

The  National  League  for  Woman  Service,  working  in 
conjuction  with  the  Council  of  National  Defense,  canvassed  the 
country  through  its  Bureau  of  Registration  and  Informa- 
tion to  provide  statistics  for  mobilizing  the  entire  woman-force 
of  the  Nation ;  all  of  which  was  done  with  the  approval  of  the 
Secretary  of  Labor. 

Perhaps  the  outstanding  incident  of  industrial  employ- 
ment among  women  was  that  of  several  women  in  France  as 
locomotive  engineers.  It  is  true  that  they  operated  only  the 
shunting  engines  about  the  yards  at  the  military  camps,  but 
it  was  noted  in  dispatches  in  every  quarter  of  the  globe  that 
Mesdames  Louis  Debris  and  Marie  Viard,  whose  husbands 
were  killed  in  the  war,  were  piloting  the  engines  which  their 
husbands  had  formerly  driven. 

WOMAN'S  INGENUITY. 

And  woman  has  proved  her  ingenuity.  In  the  damp 
trenches  of  the  battlefields  abroad  the  men  need  protection 
from  the  dampness  and  cold,  which  ordinary  clothing  will  not 
provide.  It  was  found  that  the  leather-lined  huntsmen's  coats, 
and  the  sort  of  garments  worn  by  the  chauffeur,  the  aviator 
and  the  mountaineer  served  the  men  in  the  trenches  well,  and 
particularly  along  the  Russian  frontier  and  in  the  cold  moun- 
tainous regions. 

But  the  price  of  leather  soared,  with  the  demand  for  mil- 
lions of  pairs  of  shoes,  saddles,  harness,  headgear,  and  what- 
not, and  leather-lined  coats  were  at  a  premium.  The  women 
were  not  to  be  denied,  and  through  the  Suffrage  organizations 
which  turned  in  to  prepare  America  for  the  struggle  and  to 
render  assistance  to  the  Allies,  the  unique  plan  was  adopted 
of  making  linings  for  the  airmen  and  soldier's  coats  of  old  kid 
gloves. 

One  group  of  women  in  a  single  section  of  Philadelphia 
gathered  a  thousand  pairs  of  old  gloves  in  a  canvass.  The 
seams  were  ripped  and  the  gloves  cut  down  one  side  and  laid 

H  R— 16 


242  WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR 

open.  The  fingers  of  one  glove  so  treated  were  dovetailed 
between  the  ringers  of  another  glove  so  cut,  and  stitched 
together.  Thus  one  glove  was  sewed  to  another  until  a  section 
of  leather  was  formed  sufficient  to  make  a  lining  for  a  coat. 
And  many  such  were  devised  and  incorporated  in  the  garments 
sent  to  the  front  by  the  various  agencies  dominated  by  the 
women  of  the  land. 

WOMEN  AS  POLICEMEN. 

While  women  to  a  limited  degree  were  rendering  service 
as  "policemen"  in  certain  sections  of  the  United  States  and  on 
Continental  Europe  the  war  was  responsible  for  the  develop- 
ment of  an  organized  force  in  London,  which  will  probably 
remain  a  permanent  organization  to  the  end  of  time.  Miss 
Darner  Dawson  is  chief  of  the  London  woman  "bobbies,"  and 
M.  S.  Allen  is  chief  superintendent. 

The  force  was  organized  in  1914,  shortly  after  the  out- 
break of  the  war  and  has  relieved  the  men  of  a  large  amount 
of  responsibility.  The  force  is  uniformed,  the  women  wearing 
military  costumes  with  visored  caps.  They  operate  under  the 
supervision,  or  with  the  authority  of  Sir  Edward  Henry,  Chief 
Commissioner  of  the  Metropolitan  police,  and  serve  for  duty 
at  the  munition  plants  where  women  workers  are  employed, 
besides  doing  regular  patrol  duty  and  welfare  work. 

The  service  in  London  is  in  the  nature  of  a  training  for 
special  service  and  the  women  after  sufficient  experience  are 
sent  to  suburbs  and  small  towns  to  do  police  duty.  They  are 
highly  spoken  of  and  declared  to  be  very  efficient,  rendering 
service  in  the  barrooms  and  looking  after  women  in  a  manner 
that  the  regular  "bobbies"  cannot  approximate. 

It  was  declared  in  England,  by  way  of  closing  the  com- 
ment on  this  phase  of  the  war  that  no  one  thing  so  stimulated 
the  enlistments  for  service  as  the  execution  of  Miss  Edith 
Cavell,  the  English  nurse  who  was  shot  as  a  spy  by  Germany. 


WOMAN  AND  THE  WAR.  243 

That  her  name  will  go  down  in  history  as  a  martyr  to  the  cause 
of  liberty  and  humanity  goes  without  saying. 

Miss  Cavell  had  been  a  nurse  in  Brussels,  and  after  the 
occupation  of  the  Belgian  capital  by  the  Germans,  she  remained 
where  she  used  her  private  hospital  for  the  nursing  of  wounded 
soldiers;  not  excluding  the  Germans.  It  had  been  intimated 
that  she  had  better  cross  the  border,  but  she  insisted  on  remain- 
ing at  her  post.  Ultimately  she  was  accused  of  being  one  of 
the  instigators  of  a  plot  to  smuggle  English,  French  and 
Belgian  soldiers  across  the  lines,  and  of  serving  the  enemies  of 
Germany. 

To  the  German  mind  she  was  more  than  a  spy;  her  con- 
duct was  reprehensible,  because  in  the  capacity  of  nurse  she 
had  won  a  degree  of  confidence.  She  was  therefore  held  as  a 
spy  and  traitor.  And  though  Brand  Whitlock,  America's 
Minister  to  Belgium,  and  other  diplomats  sought  to  save  her, 
she  was  shot  by  the  ruthless  Germans. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE  TEKMBLE  PKICE. 

A  Nation  of  Men  Destroyed — Millions  in  Shipping  and  Commerce  Destroyed — 
World's  Maps  Changed — Billions  in  Money — Immense  Debts — Nation's 
Wealth — The  United  States  a  Greai  Provider. 

THE  human  tongue  seems  almost  devoid  of  power  to  con- 
vey to  the  human  mind  what  the  war  has  actually  cost 
the  world  in  lives,  money,  property,  ideals  and  all  that 
is  dear  to  humanity.  In  all  the  world  there  is  not  a  human 
being  who  has  not  contributed  something  to  the  awful  cost 
and  the  loss  due  to  the  destruction  of  property,  the  stopping 
of  industry,  the  waste  of  energy  and  the  curtailment  of  human 
endeavor  in  the  interest  of  civilization,  and  the  effects  which 
the  struggle  has  had  upon  the  world  cannot  even  be  approxi- 
mated in  dollars  and  cents. 

We  have  been  taught  to  regard  war  as  a  terrible  thing 
and  to  realize  that  thousands  must  be  slain,  but  in  no  war  in 
the  history  of  the  world  has  there  been  as  many  troops  engaged 
as  have  been  killed  in  the  European  war  on  the  battlefields  of 
Belgium  and  France. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  year  1917  it  was  estimated  that 
the  total  casualties  of  the  war  were  22,500,000.  In  a  report 
based  on  figures  compiled  in  Washington  it  was  stated:  The 
human  estimated  waste  and  financial  outlay  are  staggering. 
The  combined  casualties  of  the  war,  partly  estimated  because 
all  belligerents  do  not  publish  lists,  are  22,500,000.  The  figures 
included  killed,  permanently  injured,  prisoners  and  wounded 
returned  to  the  front.  Of  this  number  the  Central  Powers 
were  estimated  to  have  suffered  permanent  losses  in  excess  of 
4,000,000,  and  the  entente  perhaps  twice  that  number,  Russia 
being  by  far  the  heaviest  loser. 

The  financial  outlay,  based  in  part  on  official  reports  and 

244 


THE  TEKBIBLE  PRICE.  245 

statements  and  in  part  on  estimates,  was  placed  at  approxi- 
mately $80,000,000,000,  divided  $50,000,000,000  to  the  entente 
and  $30,000,000,000  to  the  Central  Powers.  The  entente  lost 
more  than  3,500,000  tons  of  merchant  shipping  and  approxi- 
mately 800,000  tons  of  naval  vessels.  On  the  other  side  the 
loss  of  naval  tonnage  was  approximately  250,000  tons,  and 
merchant  ships  aggregating  211,000  tons  were  reported  cap- 
tured or  destroyed. 

IMMENSE  LOSS  TO  COMMERCE. 

Of  the  foreign  commerce  the  Central  Powers  had  lost 
$10,000,000,000  in  the  two  and  a  half  years  of  war,  including 
imports  and  exports.  The  loss  of  commerce  of  Great  Britain 
and  her  allies  with  the  Central  Powers  probably  was  in  the 
neighborhood  of  $7,000,000.  This  was  largely  made  up  at 
least  on  the  import  side  by  increased  trade  with  the  United 
States  and  other  neutral  countries  and  enlarged  trade  with  the 
colonies. 

Germany  lost  virtually  all  her  African  colonies  and  all 
her  possessions  in  the  Pacific  Ocean,  an  aggregate  of  more 
than  1,000,000  square  miles.  Turkey  also  lost  a  large  area  of 
territory  held  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  while  Austria  lost 
most  of  Bukowina  and  Galicia.  To  offset  the  territory  losses 
of  the  Central  Powers,  the  entente  have  lost  in  Europe  approxi- 
mately 300,000  square  miles.  Of  this  large  area,  all  of  it 
thickly  populated  in  normal  times,  175,000  square  miles  were 
wrested  from  Russia  on  the  eastern  battlefield. 

The  staggering  losses  in  men  include  the  vast  number  on 
both  sides  wounded  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  permanently  cripple 
them  and  render  them  unfit  for  military  service.  The  figures 
are  based  on  official  reports  and  estimates  by  military  experts. 

Germany's  permanent  losses  were  placed  at  1,500,000 
men,  including  about  1,000,000  in  killed.  The  permanent 
losses  of  Austria-Hungary  were  placed  at  about  1,000,000 
more  than  those  of  Germany,  owing  to  the  fact  that  so  much 


246  THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE. 

of  the  hard  fighting  on  the  eastern  front  was  in  the  Austro- 
Hungarian  theater.  The  losses  of  the  Austro-Hungarians 
during  the  drive  of  General  Brusiloff  in  1916  were  frightful. 
Large  numbers  of  Austrians  were  taken  prisoner  by  BrusilofT. 
Russia's  casualties  for  the  first  year  of  the  war  were  esti- 
mated by  military  experts  at  more  than  3,500,000  men,  and 
these  were  doubled  in  the  succeeding  year,  according  to  esti- 
mates by  American  military  experts.  Russia  returned  to  the 
fighting  line  a  smaller  percentage  of  wounded  than  any  of  the 
other  great  Powers. 

GREAT  BRITAIN'S  CASUALTIES. 

Great  Britain's  casualties  were  placed  in  excess  of  1,250,- 
000  despite  the  limited  front  of  British  operations  in  France 
in  the  early  stages.  The  aggregate  of  Italy's  casualties  was 
estimated  at  1,500,000,  while  Belgium's  were  placed  at  200,000, 
Servia's  at  400,000,  Montenegro's  at  150,000  and  Rumania's 
at  more  than  300,000. 

While  the  area  of  the  territorial  losses  of  the  Central 
Powers  was  nearly  four  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  entente 
group,  with  the  exception  of  the  occupied  portions  of  Buko- 
wina  and  Galicia,  the  value  of  the  territory  included  in  them 
is  comparatively  small.  For  example,  Germany's  African 
colonies  were  sparsely  settled,  largely  by  natives,  with  virtually 
all  development  in  the  future.  Despite  this  fact,  their  loss 
was  a  severe  blow  to  Germany. 

The  territorial  losses  of  the  entente  covered  all  but  a  small 
corner  of  Belgium,  a  highly  developed,  thickly  populated 
industrial  country;  a  large  slice  of  northern  France,  virtually 
all  of  Servia,  all  of  Montenegro,  more  than  three-fourths  of 
Rumania  and  175,000  square  miles  of  Russia,  the  major  part 
of  it  in  the  grain-growing  section. 

According  to  military  experts  on  the  "war  map"  of 
Europe  as  it  stood  at  that  time,  the  Central  Powers  had  won  the 
war.    But  when  their  enormous  loss  of  foreign  commerce  and 


THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE.  247 

territory  is  considered,  their  "victory"  was  shown  to  have  most 
decided  limitations,  especially  because  of  their  admission  that 
they  eventually  would  have  to  give  up  all  occupied  territory  in 
view  of  the  frightful  cost  in  men  and  money. 

FIGURES  POSITIVELY  STAGGERING. 

Supplementing  these  statements,  as  showing  the  progress 
of  the  war,  it  was  stated  just  before  the  Ubited  States  took 
its  memorable  step  to  break  off  diplomatic  relations  with 
Germany,  members  of  the  National  War  Council  estimated  the 
total  casualties  of  the  war  at  that  time  as  in  excess  of  the 
population  of  the  United  Kingdom,  which  in  1911  was  more 
than  45,000,000.  This  of  course  included  those  maimed, 
injured  or  so  stricken  that  they  were  unfit  for  future  service. 
The  number  actually  killed  was  estimated  at  more  than 
7,000,000. 

Staggering  as  these  figures  are  they  are  easily  conceivable 
when  it  is  remembered  that  the  German  front  lines  covered 
more  than  500  miles  with  Allied  troops  opposing  them,  and 
that  in  a  single  battle  millions  of  shells  were  fired  by  one  side 
or  the  other.  In  one  battle  it  was  officially  reported  that 
4,000,000  shot  and  shell  were  used,  and  in  another  the  English 
mined  the  German  trenches  for  a  distance  of  several  miles  and 
blew  out  the  strongholds,  using  more  than  1,000,000  pounds 
of  high  explosives. 

One  of  the  great  42-centimeter  guns  of  the  Germans  is 
said  to  have  used  a  charge  of  guncotton  involving  the  use  of 
a  full  bale  of  cotton  to  make  the  explosive — and  a  bale  of 
cotton  contains  500  pounds.  The  shrapnel  of  the  heavy  field 
artillery  of  the  United  States  contains  717  balls  or  bullets  about 
the  size  of  a  common  marble,  and  the  shell,  so  timed  that  it 
explodes  just  before  it  touches  the  ground,  scatters  the  bullets 
or  balls  over  an  area  estimated  at  one  yard  for  every  bullet,  or 
more  than  700  yards.     With  thousands  of  such  shells  being 


248  THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE. 

rained  over  the  entrenchments  is  it  any  wonder  that  the  list  of 
wounded  and  killed  was  great? 

Thousands  were  killed  by  poisoned  gases,  and  where  they 
were  not  killed  a  very  large  percentage  of  those  affected 
suffered  consequences  which  rendered  them  unfit  for  battle — 
turned  them  into  invalids.  The  gas  bombs  produced  hemor- 
rhages of  the  lungs  and  bowels  in  thousands  of  cases  and  left 
those  who  inhaled  the  fumes  in  an  anemic  and  permanently 
disabled  condition.  And  what  of  the  thousands  who  suc- 
cumbed to  fevers,  and  who  because  of  the  terrible  shock  became 
mental  and  physical  wrecks  and  were  made  unfit  for  further 
duty  on  the  actual  firing  lines  ? 

A  MATTER  OF  DOLLARS  AND  CENTS. 

When  it  comes  to  the  cost  in  dollars  and  cents  it  is  possible 
to  tell  something  of  what  they  mean  with  reference  to  war 
construction  and  maintenance,  although  no  one  can  estimate 
what  it  represents  in  destruction.  No  one  has  yet  devised  &n 
accounting  system  to  determine  the  percentage  of  "deprecia- 
tion" through  wear  and  tear  on  guns  and  devices  that  cost 
thousands  of  dollars  each,  but  everybody  knows  that  guns  wear 
out  and  that  some  of  the  larger  ones  have  a  very  decided  limit 
on  the  number  of  times  they  can  be  fired  without  being  rebored 
or  rifled. 

Railroads  which  have  taken  years  to  build  and  develop 
have  been  destroyed,  telephone  and  telegraph  lines  put  out  of 
commission,  great  castles  and  temples  razed,  works  of  art 
burned,  whole  cities  devastated,  green  fields  turned  into  great 
craters  torn  up  by  bombs  and  shells,  factories  dismantled,  herds 
of  cattle  fed  into  the  maw  of  the  armies,  and  the  ruthless 
Germans  even  went  so  far  as  to  wantonly  cut  down  and  destroy 
whole  forests  and  magnificent  shade  trees  which  it  took  genera- 
tions to  grow. 

How  the  indebtedness  of  the  nations  grew  during  the 
progress  of  the  war  is  shown  in  the  following  statement  issued 


THE  TERRIBLE  PEICE.  249 

by  some  of  the  financial  institutions  of  the  country  in  the 
Spring  of  1917: 

"Indebtedness  of  the  seven  principal  nations  engaged  in 
the  European  war  has  crossed  $75,000,000,000.  In  the  middle 
of  1914  the  indebtedness  of  these  seven  nations  was  $27,000,- 
000,000." 

Financing  on  an  extensive  scale  followed  this  state  of 
affairs.  France  issued  a  second  formal  war  loan,  Germany  a 
fifth  loan  and  Russia  a  sixth  loan.  Great  Britain  issued  tem- 
porary securities  in  enormous  sums. 

The  war  cost  $105,000,000  every  twenty-four  hours,  ac- 
cording to  the  statistics,  expenditures  of  the  Entente  Allies 
being  fully  double  those  of  the  Central  Allies. 

COMPARATIVE  WAR  EXPENSES. 
Without  for  one  moment  taking  into  consideration  the 
billions  which  were  thrown  into  the  war-pot  by  America  the 
figures  are  staggering.  An  interesting  comparison  is  found 
in  the  cost  of  the  previous  great  world  wars.  The  American 
Civil  War,  the  greatest  conflict  in  prior  history  cost  $8,000,- 
000,000,  a  sum  equalled  every  three  months  in  the  conduct  of 

the  European  war. 

Approximate  cost. 

Napoleonic  Wars,  1793-1815 $6,250,000,000 

American  Civil  War,  1861-1864 8,000,000,000 

Franco-Prussian  War,  1870-1871 3,000,000,000 

South  African  War,  1900-1902 1,250,000,000 

Russo-Japanese  War,  1904-1905 2,500,000,000 

European  War,  1914-1917  (3  years) 75,000,000,000 

It  was  further  estimated  that  after  the  year  1917,  the 
payment  of  $3,800,000,000  a  year  would  be  required  to  pay  the 
interest  on  the  debt,  and  that  the  total  Government  expendi- 
tures in  Europe  for  bond  interest  and  support  of  the  various 
branches  of  the  Governments  would  require  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  20  per  cent  of  the  people's  income. 


250  THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE. 

POPULATION  AND  WEALTH  OF  COUNTRIES. 
Another  comparative  table  that  is  important  to  any  one 
desiring  to  study  the  costs  and  their  effects  is  that  relating  to 
population  and  wealth  of  the  principal  countries.     The  latest 
available  figures  are: 

Population  Wealth 

United  States 101,577,000  $187,739,071,090 

British  Empire 394,930,000  130,000,000,000 

Germany   67,810,000  80,000,000,000 

France   39,700,000  50,000,000,000 

Russia    187,379,000  40,000,000,000 

Austria-Hungary 53,000,000  25,000,000,000 

Spain   20,000,000  5,400,000,000 

Belgium 7,500,000  9,000,000,000 

Portugal    5,958,000  2,500,000,000 

Italy     37,048,000  20,000,000,000 

Taxes  have  been  the  main  sources  for  raising  money  to 
carry  on  the  war.  In  Germany  taxes  on  all  incomes  from  the 
Kaiser  to  the  ordinary  business  man  were  kept  at  the  highest 
rate,  the  Kaiser  paying  $500,000  on  his  fortune  of  $35,000,000 
during  the  early  part  of  the  struggle.  This  was  in  addition 
to  his  income  tax  which  amounted  to  $440,000,  making  a  total 
annual  tax  of  nearly  $1,000,000.  The  Krupps  are  said  to  have 
been  assessed  at  $3,000,000. 

When  the  new  military  service  laws  were  approved  in 
Paris,  which  was  about  the  middle  of  July,  1913,  the  French 
Cabinet  was  at  its  wit's  end  to  provide  the  financial  end  of  the 
tremendous  military  budget.  Investment  markets  were  slug- 
gish, and  there  were  thousands  of  notes  whose  values  were 
rapidly  depreciating.  The  French  Government  was  unable 
to  float  a  loan  of  $200,000,000  which  was  necessary  for  making 
preparations. 

Then  in  her  desperation  Paris  closed  her  doors  to  all 


THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE.  251 

foreign  loans.  The  Viviani  Ministry  practically  duplicated 
the  plan  of  its  predecessor  in  proposing  an  issue  of  $360,000,000 
31/2  Per  cent  bonds,  which  were  redeemable  in  25  years. 

One  year  previously  to  this  financial  struggle  the  Belgian 
Government  had  started  to  raise  $62,800,000  in  order  that  the 
people  of  this  country  might  prevent  its  being  used  as  the 
battleground  for  the  world  war  which  they  had  seen  away  off 
in  the  future.  This  money  was  raised  for  the  purpose  of  mak- 
ing Antwerp  an  impregnable  fortress. 

IMMENSE  SUM  FOR  ARMY  AND  NAVY. 

Russia  had  taken  steps  to  raise  $3,700,000,000  which  the 
Russian  Minister  of  Finance  had  informed  the  Budget  Com- 
mittee must  be  spent  in  the  next  five  years  on  the  army  and 
navy.  During  the  first  year  of  the  war  there  was  $500,000,000 
spent  by  this  country  in  military  and  naval  defence.  This  does 
not  include  the  cost  of  those  strategic  railroads  of  which  so 
many  were  constructed  by  the  Russian  Government,  and 
which  cost  so  many  hundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars. 

Previous  to  the  time  Great  Britain  declared  war  on  Ger- 
many the  House  of  Commons  had  voted  $525,000,000  for 
emergency  purposes,  and  within  a  couple  of  days  of  this  appro- 
priation an  additional  $500,000,000  was  granted  by  the  British 
Parliament. 

One  of  the  things  accomplished  by  war  wa§  j^^^gig  out 
the  fact  that  the  resources  of  individuals  a^rjej$r  greater  than 
is  ordinarily  suspected.  In  1870  Bismarck  imposed  an  indem- 
nity of  $1,000,000,000  on  France,  never  believing  that  country 
could  meet  the  great  debt,  but  with  the  help  of  all  the  inhabi- 
tants the  debt  was  lifted  within  a  few  months. 

When  countries  are  at  war  the  cost  of  continuing  fighting 
does  not  stop  with  those  actually  engaged.  The  trade  of  the 
world  is  affected,  and  this  means  loss  in  all  quarters  of  the 
globe.  Of  the  import  trade  of  the  United  States  more  than 
$500,000,000  was  directly  with  those  nations  engaged  in  the 


252  THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE. 

war  at  the  opening  of  hostilities.  This  was  out  of  a  total  of 
$1,850,000,000.  A  great  part  of  this  commerce  is  classed  as 
among  that  which  yields  the  greatest  import  tax,  which  means 
that  internal  taxes  must  be  imposed  on  the  people  to  make  up 
for  the  money  necessary  to  meet  with  the  yearly  loss  occasioned 
during  the  continuance  of  the  war. 

ANNUAL  NATIONAL  INCOME. 

In  the  United  States  there  is  an  annual  national  income 
of  $50,000,000,000,  the  total  bank  resources  being  $35,000,- 
000,000,  the  individual  deposits  being  $24,000,000,000,  with 
cash  held  by  the  banks  totaling  $2,500,000,000,  total  gold  stock 
in  the  country  being  $3,000,000,000,  and  available  additional 
commercial  credits  on  the  basis  of  cash  holdings  totaling 
$6,000,000,000. 

The  borrowing  power  of  the  American  Government  does 
not  total  less  than  $40,000,000,000,  from  domestic  sources,  and 
this  does  not  disturb  the  ordinary  financial  and  economical 
affairs  of  the  nation. 

During  the  first  five  months  in  1917  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  reached  a  record  for  expenditures  never 
before  equalled  in  American  history.  The  total  amount 
expended  was  $1,600,000,000. 

The  chief  item  of  the  increase— $607,500,000— was  the 
purchase  of  the  obligations  of  foreign  Governments  in  exchange 
for  loans  advanced  to  the  Allies.  The  sum  did  not  represent  by 
approximately  $140,000,000  the  total  amount  authorized  in 
loans.  An  increase  of  approximately  $245,000,000  in  the 
ordinary  disbursements  of  the  Government,  chiefly  due  to 
military  and  naval  needs,  also  was  recorded  and  another  item 
going  to  swell  the  grand  total  of  expenditures  was  the  payment 
of  $25,000,000  for  purchase  of  the  Danish  West  Indies. 

War  loans  of  the  six  chief  European  belligerents,  early  in 
1917,  aggregated  approximately  $53,113,000,000. 

Loans  of  the  chief  Entente  nations,  Great  Britain,  France, 


THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE.  253 

Russia  and  Italy,  were  placed  at  about  $36,300,000,000;  those 
of  Germany  and  Austria-Hungary,  not  including  the  sixth 
German  loan  reported  to  have  yielded  about  $3,000,000,000,  at 
$18,800,000,000. 

The  amounts  of  the  various  loans  were  placed  at : 
Great  Britain,  to  March  31,  1917,  $18,805,000,000; 
France,  to  February  28,  $10,500,000,000;  Russia,  to  December 
31, 1916,  $7,896,000,000;  Italy,  to  December  31,  1916,  $2,520,- 
000,000;  Germany,  to  December,  31,  1916,  $11,226,000,000; 
Austria,  to  December  31,  1916,  $5,880,000,000;  Hungary, 
$1,730,000,000. 

The  total  included  the  advances  made  by  the  United  King- 
dom and  France  to  the  smaller  belligerent  countries  allied  with 
them. 

SOME  IDEA  OF  NATIONAL  FINANCING. 

Some  idea  of  what  all  this  financing  means  to  a  country 
may  be  judged  by  the  statement  of  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Exchequer,  who  in  October,  1916,  replying  to  questions 
regarding  the  English  loans  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
declared  that  England  was  paying  at  that  time  about  $10,000,- 
000  a  day  in  the  United  States,  for  every  working  day  in  the 
year. 

When  the  English  mission  visited  the  United  States  in 
May,  1917,  after  the  country  had  entered  the  war,  there  was 
handed  to  Arthur  James  Balfour,  ex-Premier  of  England,  a 
check  for  $200,000,000,  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  largest 
single  checks  ever  paid  in  this  country.  It  was  a  loan  for  war 
purposes.  In  the  month  of  June  it  was  stated  that  the  total 
advance  made  to  the  Allies  was  $923,000,000,  among  the  loans 
made  then  was  one  of  $75,000,000  to  Great  Britain,  and  $3,000,- 
000  to  Servia.  The  Servian  loan,  the  first  made  by  the  United 
States  to  that  country,  was  mainly  for  the  improvement  of  rail- 
way lines,  A  small  portion  was  used  foi*  the  relief  of  the 
distressed  population,  and  Red  Cross  work. 


254  THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE. 

It  was  stated  that  the  allied  countries  would  spend  in 
America,  in  the  neighborhood  of  $200,000,000  a  month  for 
the  year ;  which  brings  attention  to  the  resources  which  America 
turned  in  against  Germany  when  she  joined  the  allied  forces. 
To  meet  the  demands  made  upon  it  the  Government  borrowed 
at  once  $3,000,000,000  by  popular  subscription — a  matter  of 
history  of  which  the  nation  is  proud. 

From  its  funds  the  country  loaned  Russia  $100,000,000, 
which  was  the  first  loan  made  by  the  United  States  to  that 
Government.  A  credit  of  $45,000,000  to  Belgium  was  also 
established  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasur}^.  This  also  was 
Belgium's  first  participation  in  the  loan  of  the  Allies. 

COUNTRY'S  NATURAL  RESOURCES. 

Aside  from  the  financial  resources  of  the  United  States, 
the  country  is  undoubtedly  the  richest  in  agricultural,  mineral 
and  other  natural  resources.  It  annually  produces  more  than 
3,500,000,000  bushels  of  corn,  wheat  touching  the  high  point  of 
1,500,000,000  bushels;  1,600,000,000  bushels  of  oats;  250,000,- 
000  bushels  of  barley;  40,000,000  bushels  of  rye;  22,000,000 
btidiels  of  buckwheat;  425,000,000  bushels  of  potatoes;  77,000,- 
000  tons  of  hay;  30,000,000  bushels  of  flaxseed;  7,000,000,000 
pounds  of  cotton;  more  than  1,000,000,000  pounds  of  tobacco; 
2,000,000  long  tons  of  sugar  and  275,000,000  pounds  of  wool. 

There  are  nearly  70,000,000  swine,  and  as  many  cattle, 
more  than  25,000,000  head  of  horses  and  mules,  and  62,000,000 
sheep.  Coal  is  mined  at  the  rate  of  more  than  500,000,000  tons 
yearly,  and  the  copper  mines  yield  1,250,000,000  pounds  of 
metal.  Petroleum  wells  yield  225,500,000  barrels  yearly. 
There  are  270,000  manufacturing  plants  with  a  yearly  output 
of  more  than  $25,000,000,000.  The  products  of  the  farm  total 
more  than  $11,000,000,000  annually. 

As  to  Germany's  position,  economists  all  over  the  world 
have  considered  her  position  as  not  only  lacking  soundness, 
but  as  crazy — crazy  in  that  no  attention  whatever  has  appar- 


THE  TERRIBLE  PRICE.  255 

ently  been  paid  to  what  are  recognized  as  firmly  fixed  economic 
laws.  The  world  has  been  at  a  loss  to  understand  Germany's 
attitude,  and  it  can  only  be  explained  by  assuming  that  Ger- 
many was  perfectly  well  aware  of  the  entire  unsoundness  of 
her  commercial  and  financial  position,  and  was  willing,  or,  in 
fact,  had  to  risk  everything  with  the  hope  of  acquiring  sufficient 
indemnity,  resulting  from  the  wrar,  to  bring  her  financial  affairs 
to  a  sound  basis.  Germany's  entire  structure  from  the  close  of 
the  Franco-Prussian  war  evidently  was  built  upon  rotten 
foundations. 


CHAPTER   XV 

THE  WOKLD  KULERS  AT  WAK. 

Woodeow  Wilson,  the  Champion  of  Democracy — The  Egotistical  Kaiseb — 
The  Geeman  Cbown  Peince — Britain's  Monaech — Constantine  Who  Quit 
Eatheb  than  Fight  Geemany — Peesident  Poincaiee — And  Otheb  National 
Heads. 

Nr  O  matter  what  the  human  frailties  may  be  there  are  al- 
ways men  who  rise  in  the  stress  of  circumstances  to  unex- 
pected heights.  They  thrive  upon  difficulties  and  in  the 
emergencies  become  protectors  and  saviors  of  men.  In  the 
world's  greatest  melting-pot — the  burned  and  blood-stained 
battle-fields  of  Europe — there  were  tried  and  tested  millions 
of  men  of  all  nationalities  and  characteristics,  and  though  the 
experience  was  one  of  bitterness,  there  was  found  in  it  the 
satisfaction  that  in  their  own  way  millions  of  men  proved 
themselves  great. 

Out  of  the  hordes  that  rode  over  mountains,  sailed  the 
seas  or  picked  their  way  through  trenches  and  across  the 
scarred  surface  of  the  earth  there  looms  the  figures  of  some 
whose  names  will  go  down  in  history  for  all  time.  Their  names 
will  be  written  indelibly  upon  the  pages  of  life  and  they  will  be 
known  for  ages  after  the  evidences  of  the  great  strife  have 
been  obliterated  and  the  peace  for  which  the  world  struggled 
has  been  made  a  permanent  thing. 

Among  those  whose  names  will  be  forever  linked  with  the 
terrible  war  as  a  leader  of  men — whose  figure  stands  out 
against  the  mass  of  humanity — is  Woodrow  Wilson,  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States  of  America.  Though  he  neither 
faced  bullets  nor  tramped  the  historic  byways  of  Europe  in 
the  terrible  struggle,  he  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the 
commander-in-chief  of  all  the  world  forces  seeking  to  break 
the  autocratic  domination  of  the  Hohenzollerns  of  Germany 

25G 


THE  WORLD  RULERS   AT  WAR.  257 

and  give  democracy  its  place  among  the  nations  of  the  world 
which  its  character  justifies. 

President  Wilson,  when  he  was  elevated  to  the  highest 
position  in  America  which  the  Nation  could  bestow,  was 
recognized  as  one  of  the  greatest  essayists  and  students  of 
history,  political  economy,  constitutional  law  and  government 
in  the  country.  And  those  who  made  light  of  his  "book- 
learning"  and  referred  to  him  as  "the  school-master  president," 
came  to  know  that  his  training  and  the  very  character  of  his 
life's  work  fitted  him  better  than  probably  any  other  man  in 
America  to  deal  with  the  great  national  and  international 
problems  which  confronted,  which  culminated  with  or  grew 
out  of  America's  entrance  into  the  great  war. 

WILSON'S  MANY  HONORS. 

He  was  born  in  Staunton,  Va.,  in  1856,  the  son  of  Rev. 
Joseph  Woodrow  Wilson,  and  received  his  early  education  at 
Davidson  College,  X.  C.  Subsequently  he  received  a  degree 
at  Princeton  University  and  graduated  in  law  at  the  Univer- 
sity of  Virginia,  later  practicing  law  at  Atlanta.  After  this 
he  received  degrees  at  Johns  Hopkins,  Rutgers,  University  of 
Pennsylvania,  Brown,  Dartmouth,  Harvard  and  Yale  Col- 
leges, and  was  professor  of  history  and  political  economy,  first 
at  Bryn  Mawr  College  and  later  at  Wesleyan  University,  and 
finally  professor  of  jurisprudence  and  political  economy,  then 
jurisprudence  and  politics  and  afterward  president  at  Prince- 
ton University,  from  which  post  he  was  elected  Governor  of 
the  State  of  New  Jersey  in  1913.  He  resigned  from  the 
Governorship  and  was  elected  President  of  the  United  States 
for  a  term  beginning  March,  1913,  and  was  re-elected  in 
November,  1916,  for  a  second  term  beginning  March,  1917, 
both  times  on  the  Democratic  ticket. 

As  against  the  figure  of  President  Wilson  there  stands 
that  of  the  Emperor  William  of  Germany,  whose  policies  indi- 
rectly precipitated  the  war  and  impelled  the  alignment  of 

hr  17 


258  THE  WOELD  KULERS   AT  WAR. 

nations  to  defend  themselves  against  his  autocratic  domination. 
For  years  the  head  of  the  House  of  Hohenzollern,  descendant 
of  the  ancient  margraves  of  Germany  who  have  battled  with 
the  old  Romans,  made  it  manifest  in  speech  and  by  action  that 
his  ambition  was  to  create  a  world  empire. 

GERMANY  MUST  BE  RECKONED  WITH. 

Once  at  the  launching  of  one  of  the  great  German  war- 
ships he  said:  "The  ocean  teaches  us  that  on  its  waves  and 
on  its  most  distant  shores  no  great  decision  can  any  longer  be 
taken  without  Germany  and  without  the  German  Emperor. 
I  do  not  think  that  it  was  in  order  to  allow  themselves  to  be 
excluded  from  big  foreign  affairs  that,  thirty  years  ago,  our 
people,  led  by  their  princes,  conquered  and  shed  their  blood. 
Were  the  German  people  to  let  themselves  be  treated  thus,  it 
would  be,  and  forever,  the  end  of  their  world-power;  and  I  do 
not  mean  that  that  shall  ever  cease.  To  employ,  in  order  to 
prevent  it,  the  suitable  means,  if  need  be  extreme  means,  is  my 
duty  and  my  highest  privilege." 

In  a  famous  interview  in  the  London  "Daily  Mail"  in 
1908,  discussing  the  attitude  of  Germany  toward  England,  the 
Kaiser  was  quoted  as  follows : 

"You  English,"  he  said,  "are  mad,  mad,  mad  as  March 
hares.  What  has  come  over  you  that  you  are  so  completely 
given  over  to  suspicions  quite  unworthy  of  a  great  nation? 
What  more  can  I  do  than  I  have  done?  I  declared  with  all 
the  emphasis  at  my  command,  in  my  speech  at  Guildhall,  that 
my  heart  is  set  upon  peace,  and  that  it  is  one  of  my  dearest 
wishes  to  live  on  the  best  of  terms  with  England.  Have  I  ever 
been  false  to  my  word?  Falsehood  and  prevarication  are  alien 
to  my  nature.  My  actions  ought  to  speak  for  themselves,  but 
you  listen  not  to  them  but  to  those  who  misinterpret  and  dis- 
tort them.  That  is  a  personal  insult  which  I  feel  and  resent. 
To  be  forever  misjudged,  to  have  my  repeated  offers  of 
friendship  weighed  and  scrutinized  with  jealous,  mistrustful 


THE  WORLD  RULERS   AT  WAR.  259 

eyes,  taxes  my  patience  severely.  I  have  said  time  after  time 
that  I  am  a  friend  of  England,  and  your  Press — or  at  least  a 
considerable  section  of  it — bids  the  people  of  England  refuse 
my  proffered  hand,  and  insinuates  that  the  other  holds  a 
dagger.    How  can  I  convince  a  nation  against  its  will?" 

And  then  as  if  to  impress  upon  the  world  the  belief  that 
he  was  chosen  of  God,  the  Kaiser  repeatedly  gave  voice  to  such 
bombastic  utterances  as  when  to  his  son  in  Brandenburg,  he 
declared:  "I  look  upon  the  people  and  nation  handed  on  to 
me  as  a  responsibility  conferred  upon  me  by  God,  and  that  it 
is,  as  is  written  in  the  Bible,  my  duty  to  increase  this  heritage, 
for  which  one  day  I  shall  be  called  upon  to  give  an  account; 
those  who  try  to  interfere  with  my  task  I  shall  crush." 

THE  "  GOD-APPOINTED  "  HOHENZOLLERNS. 

Again  he  expressed  the  same  sentiment  when  he  said: 
"It  is  a  tradition  of  our  House,  that  we,  the  Hohenzollerns, 
regard  ourselves  as  appointed  by  God  to  govern  and  to  lead 
the  people,  whom  it  is  given  us  to  rule,  for  their  well-being 
and  the  advancement  of  their  material  and  intellectual 
interests." 

And  finally  in  his  address  to  the  people  in  August,  1914, 
he  said  at  the  beginning  of  war:  "A  fateful  hour  has  fallen 
for  Germany.  Envious  peoples  everywhere  are  compelling 
us  to  our  just  defence.  The  sword  has  been  forced  into  our 
hands.  I  hope  that  if  my  efforts  at  the  last  hour  do  not  suc- 
ceed in  bringing  our  opponents  to  see  eye  to  eye  with  us  and 
in  maintaining  the  peace,  we  shall,  with  God's  help,  so  wield 
the  sword  that  we  shall  restore  it  to  its  sheath  again  with 
honor. 

"War  would  demand  of  us  an  enormous  sacrifice  in  prop- 
erty and  life,  but  we  should  show  our  enemies  what  it  means 
to  provoke  Germany.  And  now  I  commend  you  to  God.  Go 
to  church  and  kneel  before  God,  and  pray  for  His  help  for 
our  gallant  army." 


260  THE  WOELD  EULERS  AT  WAR. 

This  is  the  picture  of  "Kaiser  Bill"  whose  egotism  gave 
expression  to  itself  in  1910  when  in  a  speech  he  said:  "Con- 
sidering myself  as  the  instrument  of  the  Lord,  without  heed- 
ing the  views  and  opinions  of  the  day,  I  go  my  way." 

EMPEROR  WILLIAM'S  CHILDREN. 

William  II,  Emperor  of  Germany  and  King  of  Prussia, 
was  born  January  27,  1859,  succeeding  his  father,  Emperor 
Frederick  the  III,  in  June,  1888.  He  married  the  Princess 
Augusta  Victoria,  of  Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augus- 
tenburg,  and  had  the  following  issue:  Frederick  William, 
Crown  Prince,  born  May  6,  1882;  William  Eitel-Frederick, 
born  1883;  Adalbert,  born  1884;  August,  born  1887;  Oscar, 
born  1888;  Joachim,  born  1890,  and  Victoria  Louise,  born 
1892. 

Crown  Prince  Frederick  William  is  one  of  the  remark- 
able figures  of  the  war.  A  profound  admirer  of  Napoleon  he 
has  always  made  a  close  study  of  that  great  French  soldier, 
and  has  long  been  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  war-seeking  element 
in  Germany.  The  Crown  Prince,  who  was  born  in  1882,  is 
tall,  slim  and  impulsive.  The  late  Queen  Victoria,  his  great 
grandmother,  was  his  godmother. 

After  he  had  completed  a  military  course  he  attended 
Bonn  University,  and  on  the  completion  of  his  college  course 
he  set  out  on  extensive  travels.  After  his  return  he  was  placed 
in  the  offices  of  the  Potsdam  provincial  government  so  that 
he  might  study  local  administration.  After  completing  this 
study  he  was  given  a  course  in  the  intricate  routine  through 
which  two-thirds  of  the  German  people  are  governed,  by  being 
placed  in  the  Prussian  Ministry  of  the  Interior.  Naval 
administration  has  also  been  a  part  of  the  studies  of  the  Crown 
Prince,  in  fact  he  was  deeply  engrossed  in  that  study  when 
the  war  was  declared. 

The  Crown  Prince  married  Duchess  Cecilie  of  Mecklen- 
burg-Schwer  in,  in  1905. 


THE  WORLD  RULERS  AT  WAR.  261 

King  George  V,  of  Great  Britain,  the  only  surviving  son 
of  the  late  King  Edward,  was  born  in  1865.  He  was  the 
second  son  of  the  king,  his  brother  Prince  Albert,  the  heir  to 
the  throne,  dying  suddenly  in  1892  and  bringing  the  second 
son,  who  had  been  destined  for  the  navy,  into  direct  succession. 
In  1893  Princess  Mary  of  Teck,  who  was  to  have  married 
Prince  Albert,  was  married  to  Prince  George,  and  there  is 
one  daughter,  Princess  Mary,  and  five  sons — Edward,  Prince 
of  Wales,  and  Princes  Albert,  Henry,  George  and  John. 

THE  DUKE  OF  CONNAUGHT. 

Prince  Arthur,  the  Duke  of  Connaught,  who  is  now 
Governor  General  of  Canada,  is  an  uncle  of  the  King.  He 
was  married  to  Princess  Louise-Margaret  of  Prussia,  the 
daughter  of  Prince  Frederick-Charles  of  Prussia  and  Princess 
Marie- Anne  of  Anhalt.  He  has  three  children;  Margaret, 
the  oldest,  is  the  Crown  Princess  of  Sweden;  Prince  Arthur 
is  married  to  his  cousin,  Princess  Alexandra,  Duchess  of  Fife, 
and  Princess  Victoria-Patricia,  who  is  unmarried. 

King  Edward  had  three  brothers  and  five  sisters,  two 
brothers  falling  heir  in  turn  to  the  Duchy  of  Saxe-Coburg- 
Gotha. 

King  George  V  is  uncle  by  blood  to  Olaf ,  Crown  Prince 
of  Norway,  and  by  marriage  with  Queen  Mary,  to  three 
Princes  and  three  Princesses  of  Teck.  He  is  brother-in-law  to 
King  Haakon  VII  of  Norway  and  Prince  of  Denmark,  Duke 
Adolph  of  Teck,  and  Prince  Alexander  of  Teck.  He  is  a  first 
cousin  on  his  father's  side  to  Emperor  William  II  of  Ger- 
many, and  his  brothers  and  sisters,  among  whom,  principally, 
is  the  Queen  of  Greece;  to  Ernst-Louis,  Grand  Duke  of 
Hesse,  and  his  four  sisters,  one  of  whom  is  the  wife  of  Prince 
Henry  of  Prussia,  and  another  is  Alice,  former  Czarina  of 
Russia.  The  first  and  second  cousins  of  the  King  run  well  up 
into  the  hundreds. 

The  Royal  Family  of  Belgium  was  founded  when,  in 


262  THE  WORLD  RULERS  AT  WAR 

1831,  the  people  elected  King  Leopold  I  to  rule  the  destinies 
of  that  country.  The  king  was  married  to  Princess  Louise 
of  Orleans,  after  which  practically  all  the  marriages  of  the 
family  were  with  the  southern  group  of  royal  houses. 

There  were  three  children  born  to  the  couple,  the  oldest 
son  succeeding  to  the  throne  as  King  Leopold  II.  The  latter 
married  Archduchess  Marie  Henriette  of  Austria.  One  son, 
and  three  daughters  were  born,  the  son  dying  when  he  was  23 
years  old.  The  oldest  of  the  daughters  became  the  wife  of 
Prince  Philip  of  Saxe-Coburg-Gotha,  the  second  wedding 
Crown  Prince  Rudolph  of  Austria-Hungary,  who  died  in 
youth,  and  the  third  becoming  the  wife  of  Prince  Napoleon 
Bonaparte.  The  daughter  of  Leopold  I  is  the  widow  of  the 
ill-fated  Emperor  Maximilian  of  Mexico,  who  was  executed 

there  in  1867. 

SECOND  SON  OF  LEOPOLD  I. 

The  second  son  of  Leopold  I  was  Philip,  the  Count  of 
Flanders,  who  was  married  to  Princess  Marie  of  Hohen- 
zollern,  sister  of  the  Prince  Leopold  of  Hohenzollern  and 
King  Charles  of  Roumania.  The  son  to  this  marriage  is  King 
Albert  of  Belgium,  who  succeeded  his  uncle,  Leopold  II,  in 
1909.  The  Queen  of  Belgium  is  Princess  Elizabeth  of  the 
Ducal  House  of  Bavaria.  Through  her  King  Albert  is  allied 
to  the  Crown  Prince  of  Bavaria,  the  Grand  Duchess  of  Lux- 
emburg, the  Duke  of  Parma,  the  late  Franz  Ferdinand  of  Aus- 
tria, and  the  present  heir-apparent,  Archduke  Charles  Francis 
Joseph.  The  King  and  Queen  have  two  sons,  Leopold,  born  in 
1902,  and  Charles  Theodore,  who  is  two  years  younger.  There 
is  also  a  daughter,  the  Princess  Marie- Josephine,  born  in  1906. 

King  Nicholas  I,  ruler  of  the  picturesque  little  country 
of  Montenegro,  which  was  the  scene  of  much  bitter  fighting, 
was  born  October  7,  1841,  and  proclaimed  Prince  of  Monte- 
negro, as  successor  to  his  uncle  Danilo  I,  in  1860.  He  became 
king  in  1910.    Nicholas  I  married  Milena  Petrovna  Vucotic. 


THE  WOULD  RULERS   AT  WAR.  263 

The  children  are  Princess  Militza,  who  married  the  Russian 
Grand  Duke  Peter  Nikolaievitch ;  Princess  Stana,  who  mar- 
ried George,  Duke  of  Leuchtenberg,  but  which  marriage  was 
dissolved,  the  Princess  subsequently  marrying  the  Russian 
Grand  Duke  Nicholas  Nikolaievitch.  The  other  children  are 
Prince  Danilo  Alexander,  heir-apparent;  Princess  Helena, 
who  married  Victor  Emmanuel,  King  of  Italy ;  Princess  Anna, 
who  married  Prince  Francis  Joseph  of  Battenberg;  Prince 
Mirko,  who  married  Natalie  Constantinovitch ;  Princess  Zenia, 
Princess  Vera  and  finally  Prince  Peter,  who  was  born  in  1889. 

KING  OF  SERVIA. 

Peter  I,  King  of  Servia,  one  of  the  figures  of  the  war,  is 
the  son  of  Alexander  Kara-Georgevitch.  He  was  born  in 
Belgrade  in  1844,  and  was  proclaimed  King  after  the  murder 
of  King  Alexander  and  Queen  Draga.  He  ascended  the 
throne  on  June  2,  1903.  He  was  married  in  1883  to  Princess 
Zorka,  of  Montenegro,  who  died  in  1890.  He  has  two  sons 
and  a  daughter;  George,  who  was  born  in  1887,  and  who 
renounced  his  right  to  the  throne  in  1909 ;  Alexander,  born  in 
1889,  and  Helen,  who  was  born  in  1884.  Because  of  his  ill 
health  King  Peter,  for  a  long  time,  delegated  authority  to  his 
son  Alexander  for  the  purpose  of  government. 

Nicholas  II,  the  last  Czar  of  Russia,  who  abdicated  in 
June,  1917,  was  born  May  18,  1868,  and  succeeded  his  father, 
Emperor  Alexander  III,  on  November  1,  1894.  He  married 
Princess  Alexandra  Alice,  daughter  of  Ludwig  IV,  Grand 
Duke  of  Hesse,  and  has  four  daughters  and  one  son:  Olga, 
Tatinia,  Marie,  Anastasia  and  Alexis. 

The  family  is  descended  in  the  female  line  from  Michael 
Romanof,  first  elected  Czar  in  1613,  and,  in  the  male  line, 
from  Duke  Karl  Frederick  of  Holstein-Gottorp.  As  the 
result  of  intermarriages  and  connections  with  the  royal  houses 
of  Germany,  they  are  practically  Germans  by  blood. 


264  THE  WORLD  IIULEKS  AT  WAR 

It  was  in  fact  the  German  influence,  which  is  said  to  have 
been  the  immediate  cause  of  the  revolt  in  the  great  country. 

The  revolution  may  be  said  to  have  had  its  inception 
when  a  small  group  of  men  opposed  to  the  German  influence 
at  court  assassinated  the  monk  Gregory  Rasputin,  who  had  a 
great  influence  over  the  Czar. 

A  REACTIONARY  CABINET  INSTALLED. 

Czar  Nicholas  in  anger  dismissed  Premier  Trepoff  and 
installed  a  thoroughly  reactionary  Cabinet.  Trepoff  had  been 
in  office  only  a  short  time,  having  followed  M.  Sturmer,  who 
had  bitterly  fought  the  Duma.  It  had  been  commonly 
reported  that  the  real  power  in  the  Russian  Government  after 
Sturmer  went  out  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  M.  Protopopoff.  Sturmer  had  been  called  to  the 
premiership  to  succeed  M.  Goremykin,  who  was  in  office  when 
the  war  began. 

The  fact  that  Michael  Rodzianko,  president  of  the  Duma 
and  one  of  the  leading  advocates  of  liberalization  of  the 
Government,  was  named  as  the  chief  figure  in  the  provisional 
government,  showed  that  the  movement  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
same  forces  which  had  demanded  the  overthrow  of  the  bureau- 
cracy and  a  more  energetic  prosecution  of  the  war. 

There  were  many  changes  in  the  Russian  Government 
during  the  war,  although  the  censorship  was  enforced  so 
rigidly  that  the  significance  of  the  rapid  shifts  was  apparent. 
Vague  reports  reached  the  outside  world  of  high  councilors  of 
State  who  were  obstructing  instead  of  assisting  the  work  of 
carrying  on  the  war,  and  the  strength  of  German  influence  at 
Petrograd.  The  most  conspicuous  case  of  this  sort  was  that 
of  General  SoukhomlinofY,  former  Minister  of  War,  who  was 
dismissed  from  office  and  imprisoned  as  a  result  of  charges  of 
criminal  negligence  and  high  treason. 

M.  Sazonoff,  Russia's  Foreign  Minister  at  the  beginning 
of  the  war  and  an  ardent  believer  in  the  prosecution  of  the 


THE  WORLD  RULERS   AT  WAR.  265 

war,  was  deposed  early  in  the  reactionary  regime  and  sent  as 
envoy  to  London.  It  was  suggested  that  the  motive  for  this 
was  not  to  honor  an  anti-German,  but  to  get  him  out  of 
Russia. 

MEMBERS  OF  THE  RUSSIAN  CABINET. 

The  members  of  the  Russian  Cabinet,  as  announced  for 
the  Provisional  Government,  were : 

Prince  Georges  E.  LvofY,  well  known  as  president  of  the 
Zemstvos'  Union,  Prime  Minister. 

Alexander  J.  Guchkoff,  Minister  of  the  Interior. 

Paul  Milukoff,  well  known  as  a  Constitutional  Democrat 
leader,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

M.  Pokrovski,  Minister  of  Finance. 

General  Manikovski,  chief  of  the  Artillery  Department, 
War  Minister. 

M.  Savitch,  Minister  of  Marine. 

M.  Maklakoff,  Minister  of  Justice. 

M.  Kovalevski,  Minister  of  Education. 

M.  Nekrasoff,  Minister  of  Railways. 

M.  Konovaloff,  Moscow  merchant,  Minister  of  Com- 
merce and  Industry. 

M.  Rodischneff,  Secretary  for  Finland. 

M.  Kerenski,  Minister  without  portfolio. 

The  executive  committee  of  the  Imperial  Duma,  as  the 
provisional  Government  styles  itself,  is  composed  of  twelve 
members,  under  M.  Rodzianko,  including  two  Socialists,  two 
Conservatives,  three  Moderates,  five  Constitutional  Demo- 
crats and  Progressives. 

Constantine  I,  King  of  Greece,  who  abdicated  in  favor 
of  his  son,  Prince  Alexander,  on  June  11,  1917,  under  pressure 
from  the  Allied  countries,  was  born  in  1868.  His  father,  King 
George,  was  assassinated  at  Salonica  on  March  18,  1913.  The 
abdication  of  King  Constantine  in  June,  1917,  was  due  to  his 
opposition  to  the  forces  in  the  government  which  desired  to 


266  THE  WORLD  RULERS   AT  WAR. 

join  the  Allies  in  the  war  against  Germany.  The  influence 
in  favor  of  the  Germans  in  the  royal  family  of  Greece  was 
Queen  Sophia,  a  sister  of  the  Kaiser. 

For  a  time  Constantine  was  a  veritable  idol  in  Greece. 
In  1896  when  his  country  was  drifting  into  war  with  Turkey, 
he  sounded  a  warning  that  the  Greek  army  was  unprepared 
for  a  campaign.  The  infantry  was  armed  with  condemned 
French  rifles;  the  cartridges  were  15  years  old;  there  was  no 
cavalry ;  the  artillery  was  obsolete,  and  the  officers  few.  When 
the  country  went  to  war  despite  his  warning,  the  result  was  a 
disastrous  defeat.  A  similar  situation  developed  when  King 
George  tried  to  oppose  the  popular  clamor  for  the  annexation 
of  Crete.  The  King  knew  that  Turkey  was  waiting  for  another 
opportunity  to  crush  Greece,  and  there  was  a  second  uprising. 

CONSTANTINE  BECOMES  AN  IDOL. 

Constantine  had  been  in  command  of  the  military  forces, 
and  King  George  was  obliged  to  dismiss  him  as  Generalissimo. 
In  the  Balkan  war  of  1912,  however,  when  he  led  an  army  of 
10,000  Greeks  to  the  capture  of  Salonica,  causing  30,000 
Turks  to  lay  down  arms,  he  became  an  idol.  On  ascending 
the  throne,  it  was  said  that  he  aimed  to  restore  the  grandeur 
of  the  ancient  Hellenic  Empire,  and  that  he  was  a  firm  be- 
liever in  the  old  national  prophecy  that,  under  the  reign  of  a 
"Constantine  and  a  Sophia,"  the  Eastern  Empire  would  be 
rejuvenated  and  the  cross  restored  on  Saint  Sophia  in  Con- 
stantinople, supplanting  the  Crescent  of  the  Turk.  In  fact, 
after  the  Balkan  war,  when  Greece  added  a  section  of  Turkish 
territory  to  her  domain,  and  the  islands  of  Crete  were  annexed, 
King  Constantine  hoisted  the  ancient  Hellenic  flag  over  the 
fort. 

The  climax  in  Grecian  affairs  was  precipitated  when  Tur- 
key entered  the  great  World  War  on  the  side  of  Germany. 
The  question  of  intervention  on  the  part  of  Greece  arose,  and 
King  Constantine  insisted  on  strict  neutrality  being  observed. 


THE  WORLD  RULERS  AT  WAR.  267 

The  cabinet,  headed  by  Premier  Venizelos,  which  was  for  war 
on  the  side  of  the  Allies,  tendered  its  resignation.  When  the 
operations  began  against  the  Dardanelles  the  Government 
believed  that  the  time  had  come  for  Greece  to  enter  the  war. 
The  King  refused  to  countenance  the  plan,  arguing  that  the 
sending  of  forces  to  the  Dardanelles  would  dangerously 
weaken  the  Greek  defences  on  the  Bulgarian  frontier.  Queen 
Sophia  was  regarded  as  bitterly  opposed  to  the  country  join- 
ing the  Allies,  and  was  reported  to  have  threatened  several 
times  to  leave  the  country. 

The  criticism  directed  against  Constantine  was  severe  be- 
cause, under  the  terms  of  the  treaty  made  in  the  Balkan  war, 
Greece  was  committed  to  ally  herself  with  Servia  if  that  coun- 
try were  attacked  by  another  power.  Austria  did  invade 
Servia,  but  Constantine  asserted  that  the  treaty  applied  only 
to  an  attack  by  another  Balkan  nation. 

ACCUSED  OF  EVASION. 

The  occupation  by  troops  of  the  Entente  Powers  of  a 
part  of  Macedonia,  and  the  seizure  of  Salonica  as  their  base, 
involved  the  King  of  Greece  in  a  long  series  of  clashes  with 
the  Entente  commanders,  and  he  was  accused  of  evasion  and 
attempting  to  gain  time  in  the  interests  of  Germany.  A  tem- 
porary understanding  was  obtained,  but  meantime  the  pro- 
visional government,  headed  by  Venizelos,  had  been  growing 
in  strength,  and  obtained  the  recognition  of  the  Entente 
Powers. 

The  Allies  laid  an  embargo  on  the  supplies  of  Greece, 
and  Constantine  was  denounced  by  the  people  of  Crete  and 
other  territory,  who  demanded  his  dethronement.  This  was 
the  situation,  in  a  general  way,  which  led  to  his  abdication 
and  his  retirement  to  Berlin,  with  the  Queen,  in  the  summer 
of  1917. 

Alexander,  who  succeeded  his  father,  was  a  second  son. 


268  THE  WORLD  RULERS  AT  WAR. 

born  August  1,  1893.     He  was  a  captain  in  the  First  Regi- 
ment, artillery,  in  the  Greek  army. 

Victor  Emmanuel,  King  of  Italy,  who  threw  the  weight 
of  his  country  with  the  Allies,  repudiating  the  treaty  with 
Germany  and  Austria-Hungary  which  established  what  was 
known  as  the  Triple  Entente,  was  born  in  1869,  the  only  son 
of  King  Humbert,  second  King  of  United  Italy,  who  was 
murdered  at  Monza,  in  July,  1900.  Victor  Emmanuel  married 
Princess  Elena,  daughter  of  Nicholas,  King  of  Montenegro, 
and  has  four  children:  Princess  Yolanda,  Princess  Mafalda; 
Prince  Humbert,  heir-apparent,  and  Princess  Giovanna.  The 
mother  of  King  Emmanuel — Dowager  Queen  Margherita — 
is  a  daughter  of  the  later  Prince  Ferdinand  of  Savoy. 

TRAGEDY  THE  PATHWAY  TO  THRONE. 

Charles  I,  the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  King  of  Hungary, 
was  born  in  1887  and  succeeded  his  grand  uncle,  Francis 
Joseph  I,  in  November,  1916.  His  way  to  the  throne  lay 
through  tragedy,  for  he  came  into  the  crown  immediately 
through  the  assassination  of  the  Archduke  Francis  Ferdinand, 
heir-apparent,  and  his  morganatic  wife  Countess  Sophie 
Chotek,  in  Bosnia,  and  which  crime  was  the  signal  for  the  war. 
Nor  would  Charles  have  been  entitled  to  succeed  to  the  throne 
but  for  the  fact  that  the  Archduke  Rudolf,  heir-apparent  to 
the  throne,  committed  suicide  in  1889. 

The  right  of  succession  went  with  his  death  to  the  second 
brother  of  the  then  Emperor  Francis  Joseph,  or  Archduke 
Charles  Louis,  father  of  the  assassinated  Archduke  Francis 
Ferdinand.  It  passed  then  after  the  tragedies  to  Archduke 
Otto,  brother  of  Francis  Ferdinand,  Charles  I,  being  the  son 
of  the  Archduke  Otto.  The  young  Emperor  married  Princess 
Zita  of  Bourbon  Parma  in  1911.  She  is  the  daughter  of  Duke 
Robert  of  Parma,  and  sister  of  the  first  wife  of  Czar  Ferdi- 
nand of  Bulgaria.     The  Emperor  has  four  children:   Francis 


THE  WOKLD  KULE11S   AT  WAR.  209 

Joseph  Otto,  Adelaide  Marie,  Robert  Charles  Ludwig  and 
Felix  Frederic  August. 

Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria,  Czar,  is  son  of  the  late  Prince 
Augustus  of  Saxe-Coburg  and  Gotha  and  late  Princess  Clem- 
entine of  Bourbon-Orleans,  daughter  of  King  Louis  Phil- 
ippe. He  was  born  in  1861  and  succeeded  Prince  Alexander, 
who  abdicated.  He  married  Marie  Louise,  daughter  of 
Robert  of  Parma,  and  after  her  death  married  Princess  Elea- 
nore  of  Reuss-Kostritz.  There  are  four  children  by  the  first 
marriage :  Prince  Boris,  heir-apparent ;  Prince  Cyril,  Princess 
Eudoxia,  Princess  Nadejda. 

Alfonso  XIII,  King  of  Spain,  was  born  May  17,  1886, 
his  father,  King  Alfonso  XII,  having  died  nearly  six  months 
previous  to  his  birth.  Maria  Christina,  mother  of  the  heir  to 
the  Spanish  throne,  was  an  Austrian  princess.  In  1906  King 
Alfonso  XIII  married  the  English  Princess  Victoria  Eugenie, 
daughter  of  the  late  Henry  of  Battenberg  and  Princess 
Beatrice,  a  daughter  of  the  late  Queen  Victoria. 

KING  ALFONSO'S  SONS. 

King  Alfonso  XIII  has  four  sons:  Alfonso,  Prince  of 
the  Asturias,  heir  to  the  Spanish  throne;  Prince  Jaime,  who 
is  deaf  and  dumb;  Prince  Juan,  and  Prince  Gonzalo.  There 
are  two  daughters,  Princess  Beatrice,  and  Princess  Maria 
Christina. 

The  King's  sisters  were  Maria  de  las  Mercedes,  who  mar- 
ried Prince  Carlos  of  Bourbon,  in  February,  1901,  and  died 
in  1904,  and  Infanta  Maria  Teresa,  who  died  suddenly  from 
the  effects  of  childbirth.  She  was  the  wife  of  Prince  Ferdi- 
nand, who  afterward  remarried  Dona  Maria  Luisa  Pie  de  Con- 
cha, who  was  created  Duchess  of  Talavera  de  la  Reina,  and 
given  the  courtesy  title  of  Highness  by  Alfonso.  Don  Carlos, 
who  was  born  in  1848,  and  was  the  pretender  to  the  Spanish 
throne,  was  a  second  cousin  to  the  King.  He  died  in  1909,  leav- 


270  THE  WOELD  EULERS  AT  WAR. 

ing  a  son,  Prince  Jamie,  born  in  1870,  and  who  is  the  present 
pretender,  and  four  daughters. 

The  Spanish  reigning  family  are  the  Bourbons,  descend- 
ants of  King  Louis  XIV  of  France. 

Ferdinand,  King  of  Roumania,  was  born  in  1865,  and  is 
a  nephew  of  the  late  King  Carol,  who  died  in  1914.  In  1893 
he  married  Princess  Marie  of  Saxe-Coburg  and  Gotha,  and 
two  sons  and  four  daughters  were  born  to  the  royal  couple  as 
follows:  Charles,  who  was  born  in  1893,  and  who  is  heir- 
apparent;  Nicholas,  Elizabeth,  Marie,  Ileana  and  Mircia,  the 
latter  dying  when  four  years  old. 

POINCAIRE'S  VERSATILITY. 

President  Poincaire,  of  France,  is  a  bearded,  pale-faced, 
short,  and  rather  stout  man,  who  leaves  upon  those  who  come 
in  contact  with  him,  an  impression  of  his  mental  ability.  He 
was  born  in  1860,  and  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  few  strong 
characters  who  have  held  the  office  of  President  since  the  war 
which  brought  about  the  third  Republic.  He  is  an  author  of 
widely  read  books,  and  has  won  a  place  in  the  French 
Academy.  As  a  lawyer  he  was  a  leader  at  the  bar,  and  before 
being  chosen  President,  in  1913,  he  served  as  Minister  of 
Finance,  and  as  Minister  of  Public  Instruction.  While  serv- 
ing as  Minister  of  Finance  he  is  credited  with  having  put  on 
the  statutes  admirable  laws  regulating  and  equalizing  the  tax- 
ations of  millions.  President  Poincaire  is  a  patron  of  art, 
and  has  been  counsel  of  the  Beaux  Art,  of  the  National 
Museum  and  President  of  the  Society  of  Friends  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Paris. 

The  Sultan  of  Turkey,  the  outstanding  nation  in  the 
conflict,  not  Christian,  was  chosen  ruler  and  took  the  Osman 
sword  on  May  10,  1909,  and  was  designated  Mohammed  V. 
His  name  is  Mohammed  Reshad  Effendi,  and  he  succeeded 
Abd-ul-Hamid,  who  was  deposed.     The  latter  became  Sultan 


THE   WORLD  RULERS   AT  WAR.  271 

in  1876,  succeeding  Abd-ul-Aziz,  who  was  preceded  by  Abd- 
ul-Mejid. 

The  history  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  is  filled  with  mystery, 
romance  and  stories  of  intrigue,  cruelty  and  barbarities,  involv- 
ing internal  wars,  uprisings,  almost  continuous  struggles  with 
practically  all  of  the  European  countries  and  massacres  that 
aroused  the  whole  world.  Legend  assigns  Oghuz,  son  of  Kara 
Khan,  father  of  the  Ottoman  Turks,  whose  first  appearance 
in  history  dates  back  to  1227  A.  D. 

The  reign  of  Abd-ul-Aziz  in  the  latter  part  of  the  last 
century  was  marked  by  many  massacres  and  the  extravagant 
conduct  of  affairs  by  the  Sultan,  who  visited  England  in  1876 
and  was  honored  by  Queen  Victoria,  who  bestowed  upon  him 
the  Order  of  the  Garter.  He  was  deposed  and  Abd-ul- 
Hamid  succeeded.  He  made  feeble  attempts  to  reorganize 
the  Government,  but  his  efforts  were  fruitless  and  following 
wars  and  uprisings  and  further  internal  troubles  and  the  loss 
of  territory  he  was  deposed  and  the  present  Sultan  was  chosen. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE  WAK'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

Stbiking  Figures  in  the  Conflict — Joffre,  the  Hero  of  Marne — Ntvelle,  the 
French  Commander — Sir  Douglas  Haig — The  Kaiser's  Chancellor — Ven- 
izeloss — "  Black  Jack  "  Pershing. 

ONE  of  the  most  striking  figures  among  those  whose 
names  are  irrevocably  linked  with  the  history  of  the 
world  fight  for  democracy,  is  that  of  Joseph  Joffre, 
Marshal  of  France,  former  Commander  of  the  French  forces 
and  victor  of  the  famous  battle  of  the  Marne,  who  led  the 
French  Mission  to  the  United  States,  after  America  entered 
the  war. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  of  all  the  French  armies,  a  man 
of  humble  birth,  saw  the  light  of  day  at  Perpignan,  near  the 
Pyrenees,  in  1852. 

The  future  General  early  showed  a  deep  interest  in  mathe- 
matics and  obtained  the  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Science  at  the 
College  of  Perpignan  at  the  early  age  of  16.  He  was  a  stu- 
dent at  the  Polytechnic  Institute  when  the  Franco- German 
War  of  1870  broke  out.  Joffre  was  placed  in  charge  of  a 
large  part  of  the  defense  of  Paris  and  drew  the  plans  of  the 
fortifications  in  the  direction  of  Enghein.  At  the  age  of  19 
he  was  promoted  to  Captaincy  in  the  presence  of  Marshal 
MacMahon  and  his  whole  staff. 

Marshal  Joffre  traveled  much  and  spent  a  great  many 
years  fighting  France's  colonial  wars.  He  served  in  the 
Formosa  campaign  of  1885;  constructed  a  chain  of  forts  at 
Tonkin,  Cochin-China ;  was  decorated  for  distinguished 
bravery  in  leading  his  troops  in  action  there  in  the  eighties; 
was  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Engineering  Corps  at  Hanoi,  and 
undertook  the  building  of  a  railroad  from  Senegal  to  the  Niger 
River  in  1892. 

Joffre  fought  through  the  Dahomey  Campaign  in  1893; 

272 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  273 

saved  the  day  for  the  French  in  a  brilliant  rear-guard  action 
and  entered  Timbuctoo  as  a  conqueror.  Later  he  proceeded 
to  Madagascar,  where  he  constructed  fortifications  and  organ- 
ized a  naval  station. 

Recalled  to  France,  General  JofTre  became  a  Professor 
in  the  War  College  and  obtained  his  stars  in  1901.  He  later 
entered  the  Engineering  Department  of  the  War  Ministry; 
then  became  Military  Governor  of  Lille.  Later  he  was  pro- 
moted to  be  a  Division  Commander  in  Paris  and  then  com- 
mander of  the  Second  Army  Corps  at  Amiens.  He  gained 
the  honor  in  1911  of  a  unanimous  vote  of  the  Superior  Council 
of  War  making  him  Commander  of  all  the  military  forces  of 
France. 

A  FAMOUS  WAR  RECORD. 

His  record  in  the  World  War  is  well  known.  Every  one 
has  read  of  his  masterly  conduct  of  the  retreat  from  the 
Belgian  border;  of  his  work  in  regrouping  the  shattered  and 
retiring  French  forces;  of  his  ringing  appeal  to  the  men  to 
strike  back  at  the  moment  he  had  determined  upon.  At  the 
Marne  he  saved  France  and  perhaps  the  world. 

JofTre  is  unsympathetic  and  grim  when  at  work.  He  has 
no  patience  for  anything  but  the  highest  efficiency.  At  a 
single  stroke  he  cashiered  a  score  of  Generals  who  did  not 
measure  up  to  his  standards.  He  is  a  master  builder,  organ- 
izer and  strategist.  Though  rather  taciturn  he  is  loved  both 
by  the  officers  and  poilus.  Among  the  latter  he  became  known 
as  "Papa"  JofTre. 

He  showed  by  his  appointments  and  acts  that  a  new 
inspiration  —  an  inspiration  of  patriotism  —  controlled  the 
Republic.  JofTre's  accession  to  supreme  command  symbolized 
that  France  had  experienced  a  new  birth,  that  the  army  was 
well  organized  and  that  the  man  who  for  three  years  had  been 
silently  performing  the  regeneration  of  the  land  forces  had 
rightly  been  placed  over  the  forces  he  had  reformed. 

HR18 


274  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

Almost  unknown  to  the  masses,  Joffre  was  placed  at  the 
head  of  the  French  troops  in  the  summer  of  1914.  Among 
his  associates  he  was  known  as  an  authority  on  aeroplanes, 
automobiles,  telegraphs  and  the  other  details  of  modern  war- 
fare. Above  everything  else  he  stood  for  efficiency  and  pre- 
paredness, and  lacked  the  qualities  of  the  French  soldier  of 
literature.  To  be  prepared  for  instant  war  had  been  his  effort 
for  three  years,  and  when  that  time  came  France  found  her- 
self nearly  as  well  prepared  for  the  conflict  as  was  Germany, 
which  had  prepared  for  twenty-five  years. 

ADJURATION  TO  SCHOOL  CHUMS. 

One  of  his  few  published  speeches,  made  to  his  old  school 
chums,  is  on  this  theme.  "To  be  prepared  in  our  days,"  he 
said,  "has  a  meaning  which  those  who  prepared  for  and  fought 
the  wars  of  other  days  would  have  great  difficulty  in  under- 
standing. It  would  be  a  sad  mistake  to  depend  upon  a  sudden 
burst  of  popular  enthusiasm,  even  though  it  should  surpass 
in  intensity  that  of  the  volunteers  of  the  Revolution,  if  we  do 
not  fortify  it  by  complete  preparation. 

"To  be  prepared  we  must  assemble  all  the  resources  of  the 
country,  all  the  intelligence  of  her  children,  all  their  moral 
energy  and  direct  them  toward  a  single  aim — victory.  We  must 
have  organized  everything,  foreseen  everything.  Once  hostil- 
ities have  begun  no  improvisation  will  be  worth  while.  What- 
ever lacks  then  will  be  lacking  for  good  and  all.  And  the 
slightest  lack  of  preparation  will  spell  disaster." 

What  Joffre  said  to  his  chums  he  had  done  for  the  French 
army,  and  President  Poincare,  after  the  Battle  of  the  Marne, 
summed  up  his  qualities  which  made  it  a  French  victory  in 
this  message  to  Joffre:  "In  the  conduct  of  our  armies  you 
have  shown  a  spirit  of  organization,  order  and  of  method 
whose  beneficent  effects  have  influenced  every  phase,  from 
strategy  to  tactics;  a  wisdom  cold  and  cautious,  which  has 
always  prepared  for  the  unexpected,  a  powerful  soul  which 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  275 

nothing  has  shaken,  a  serenity  whose  salutary  example  has 
everywhere  inspired  confidence  and  hope." 

These  words  of  the  President  of  the  French  Republic  are 
an  epitome  of  the  character  and  the  military  record  of  Joffre. 
He  is  representative  of  the  real  France,  not  the  France  of 
Paris  and  scandals.  He  is  of  the  peasantry,  and  he  and  his 
kind,  men  of  character,  brought  about  the  glorious  France  of 
the  war. 

Among  those  who  accompanied  Joffre  on  his  visit  to  the 
United  States  was  Rene  Viviani,  ex- Premier  of  France  and 
Minister  of  Justice.  He  was  born  in  Algeria  in  1862,  his 
family  being  Corsican,  and  originally  of  Italian  blood. 

VIVIANI  A  SOCIALIST  LEADER. 

M.  Viviani  became  a  lawyer  in  Paris  and  built  up  a  large 
practice.  In  1893  he  entered  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  as  a 
Socialist.  Together  with  Briand,  Jaures  and  Millerand  he 
was  long  a  leader  of  the  parliamentary  delegation  of  Social- 
ists. On  June  1,  1914,  one  month  before  the  outbreak  of  the 
war,  M.  Viviani  became  Prime  Minister.  He  showed  himself 
a  brilliant  leader  and  tireless  worker.  His  speeches  embodying 
the  spirit  of  righting  France  were  read  and  admired  the  world 
over.  Many  persons  consider  Rene  Viviani  France's  greatest 
orator.     Volumes  of  his  speeches  have  had  a  wide  sale. 

M.  Viviani  was  succeeded  in  the  Premiership  by  M. 
Briand,  and  recently  he  became  Minister  of  Justice  in  the 
Ribot  Cabinet.  He  is  a  man  of  great  culture.  Though  an 
excellent  Latin  and  Greek  scholar,  he  speaks  no  English. 
Rene  Viviani  has  had  some  experience  as  a  newspaper  man, 
as  a  special  writer  and  as  managing  editor  of  the  Petite 
Republique.  His  younger  son,  aged  22,  was  killed  in  the 
war.     His  older  son  has  been  wounded  but  is  back  at  the  front. 

Another  member  of  the  French  mission  was  M.  de  Hovel- 
acque,  the  French  Inspector  General  of  Public  Instruction. 


276  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

He  is  well  known  in  the  United  States  because  of  his  marriage 
to  Miss  Josephine  Higgins,  of  New  York  State. 

The  Right  Honorable  Arthur  Balfour,  ex-Premier  of 
England,  who  came  to  America  to  join  in  the  conferences  at 
which  the  policies  for  carrying  the  war  were  outlined  after 
America  became  an  Ally,  is  described  as  one  of  the  most  intel- 
lectual statesmen  in  England,  and  one  who,  although  he  won 
all  the  honors  his  country  could  give  him,  never  realized  his 
own  possibilities.  At  sixty-nine,  at  the  height  of  his  mental 
development,  he  occupies  a  place  in  the  English  cabinet,  a 
place  which  was  given  him  because  of  his  great  hold  upon  the 
autocracy  of  England. 

BALFOUR'S  INTELLECTUAL  ABILITY. 

As  the  Premier  of  England,  as  Secretary  of  Ireland  and 
as  the  leader  of  the  House  of  Commons  Mr.  Balfour  displayed 
great  intellectual  agility,  but  at  no  time  was  credited  with 
having  displayed  the  industry  which  spurred  on  such  men  as 
Lloyd  George  to  success.  He  is  of  the  aristocracy  and  his 
position  in  English  politics  came  to  him  as  the  nephew  of  Lord 
Salisbury. 

He  was  born  in  1848  and  educated  at  Eton  and  Cam- 
bridge and  entered  the  House  of  Commons  at  the  age  of  26. 
Mr.  Balfour  was  known  in  his  early  years  as  a  philosophically 
and  religiously  inclined  young  man,  and  it  occasioned  some 
surprise  when  he  followed  the  traditions  of  his  family  by  enter- 
ing politics. 

Some  years  after  taking  his  seat  he  joined  what  was 
known  as  the  Fourth  Party,  a  conservative  rebel  faction,  con- 
sisting of  three  members,  Lord  Randolph  Churchill,  Sir  Henry 
Drummond  Wolff  and  Sir  John  Gorst.  This  group  consti- 
tuted a  sort  of  mugwump  element  that  voted  independently 
on  every  party  question  and  that  tried  to  rouse  the  Conserva- 
tives from  their  party  prejudices  and  narrow  leanings. 

To   Mr.   Balfour  belonged   the   distinguished  honor   of 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  277 

attending  the  Berlin  Conference  of  1878  as  private  secretary 
to  Lord  Salisbury.  In  1885  he  became  President  of  the  Local 
Government  Board.  The  Conservatives  were  thrown  out  of 
power  for  a  short  time  at  this  juncture,  but  when  they  were 
restored  in  1886  Balfour  became  Secretary  for  Scotland. 
Shortly  after  he  was  promoted  to  be  Chief  Secretary  for 
Ireland. 

Despite  his  gentle  manners  and  quiet  ways,  the  new  Chief 
Secretary  ruled  the  then  disturbed  Ireland  with  an  iron  hand. 
He  was  known  as  "Bloody  Balfour"  by  the  Irish  agitators 
until  he  began  to  show  his  milder  ways  upon  the  restoration  of 
peace.  He  remained  in  Ireland  until  1891.  He  had  endured 
abuse  and  faced  threats  and  had  come  away  triumphant.  From 
Ireland  Mr.  Balfour  went  to  England  as  First  Lord  of  the 
Treasury. 

Arthur  James  Balfour  showed  his  friendship  for  the 
United  States  when,  in  1897,  as  Acting  Secretary  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  he  refused  to  give  England's  consent  to  a  continental 
proposal  that  Spain  be  permitted  to  govern  Cuba  as  she  chose. 

LIBERALS  COME  INTO  POWER. 

When  Lord  Salisbury  died  in  1902  Mr.  Balfour  succeeded 
him  as  Prime  Minister.  He  remained  in  that  office  until  1905, 
when  the  Liberals  came  into  power.  In  the  coalition  Ministry 
formed  since  the  outbreak  of  the  European  War,  he  was  nomi- 
nated First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  He  showed  remarkable 
ability  in  this  office.  Upon  the  resignation  of  Mr.  Asquith's 
Cabinet,  Mr.  Balfour  became  Secretary  for  Foreign  Affairs. 
He  is  an  enthusiastic  sportsman  and  has  written  a  book  on  golf. 

The  other  English  envoys  who  accompanied  Mr.  Balfour 
to  Washington  were  Rear  Admiral  Sir  Dudley  Rawson 
Stratford  de  Chair,  and  Lord  Walter  Cunliffe,  Governor  of 
the  Bank  of  England. 

Rear  Admiral  de  Chair  was  born  August  30,  1864.  He 
entered  the  Royal  Navy  at  the  age  of  14,  and  received  his 


278  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

early  training  aboard  His  Majesty's  Ship  Britannia.  He 
served  in  the  Egyptian  war  and  was  naval  attache  at  Washing- 
ton in  1902. 

Admiral  de  Chair  commanded  the  Bacchante,  Cochrane 
and  Colossus  successively  in  the  years  between  1905  and  1912. 
From  1912  to  1914  he  acted  as  Assistant  Controller  of  the 
Navy  and  subsequently  he  was  the  Naval  Secretary  to  the 
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  he 
became  Admiral  of  the  training  services  and  of  the  Tenth 
Cruiser  Squadron.  Admiral  de  Chair  is  a  member  of  the 
Royal  Victorian  Order  and  a  Companion  of  the  Bath. 

LORD  WALTER  CUNLIFFE. 

Lord  Walter  Cunliffe,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England, 
is  52  years  old.  He  received  his  education  at  Harrow  and 
at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  from  which  he  graduated  with 
the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts.  He  is  a  Lieutenant  of  the  City 
of  London. 

Lord  Cunliffe  has  been  active  in  the  banking  field  for 
many  years  and  is  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Cunliffe  Brothers. 
He  is  a  Director  of  the  North  Eastern  Railway  Company  and 
has  been  a  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England  since  1895.  He 
became  Deputy  Governor  of  the  bank  in  1911  and  has  been 
Governor  since  1913.  Lord  Cunliffe  is  the  first  Governor 
of  the  Bank  of  England  to  receive  the  honor  of  re-election 
after  serving  his  term  of  two  years.  In  1914  he  was  created 
the  First  Baron  of  Headley. 

Among  the  dominating  characters  of  the  war  and  upon 
whose  judgment  and  ability  the  destinies  of  France  and  the 
Allies  depended  for  a  long  period  is  General  Robert  Nivelle, 
Commander  of  the  French  armies,  and  who  succeeded  General 
Joffre.  General  Nivelle  is  a  man  of  silence;  he  speaks  little. 
General  Nivelle  is  four  years  younger  than  Joffre. 

As  a  boy  of  fourteen  he  could  not  take  part  as  did  Joffre 
and  Gallieni  and  Pau  and  Kitchener  also,  in  the  tragical  war 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  279 

of  1870.  Joffre  studied  at  the  Ecole  Polytechnique,  in  Paris ; 
Gallieni,  at  Saint  Cyr,  without  the  walls;  Nivelle  studied  at 
both;  he  may  claim  to  belong  to  all  arms,  artillery,  infantry — 
even  cavalry.  And,  in  his  youth,  he  was  not  only  a  magnificent 
all-round  athlete,  as  indeed  he  still  is,  but  also  a  headlong  rider 
of  steeplechases,  in  which,  had  he  been  fated  to  break  his  neck, 
his  neck  would  infallibly  have  been  broken.  This  is  a  trait 
he  shares  with  General  Brussiloff,  and,  like  the  great  Russian 
General,  he  was  famous  for  the  skill  with  which  he  tamed  and 
trained  cavalry  mounts. 

SERVES  AS   JUNIOR  OFFICER. 

As  a  junior  officer  Nivelle  saw  service  in  the  French 
General  Staff;  his  part  in  the  expedition  to  China  we  have 
recorded;  he  also  served  in  Northern  Africa.  So  that,  like 
Joffre,  Gallieni,  Lyautey,  Roques  and  so  many  leaders  of 
French  armies,  Nivelle  gained  an  invaluable  element  of  his 
training  in  the  out-of-the-wray  corners  of  France's  vast  col- 
onial empire,  which  has  outposts  in  every  continent  and  meas- 
ures nearly  five  million  square  miles. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  World  War  Nivelle,  with  the  rank 
of  Colonel,  commanded  the  Fifth  Regiment  of  Artillery,  which 
is  the  artillery  element  of  the  Seventh  Army  Corps,  the  corps 
of  Besancon  and  the  old  Franche-Comite,  under  the  Jura 
Mountains,  at  the  corner  of  Switzerland  and  Alsace. 

It  was,  in  fact,  in  the  section  of  Alsace  invaded  and  re- 
taken by  the  French  army  of  General  Pau — who  lost  an  arm 
in  Alsace  in  the  war  of  1870 — that  Nivelle  struck  the  first  of 
many  hard  blows  which  made  him  Field  Commander  of  the 
splendid  army  of  France.  He  directed  the  guns  of  his  Fifth 
Regiment  with  such  deadly  accuracy  against  a  group  of  Ger- 
man guns  that  he  first  scattered  their  gunners  in  flight  and  put 
them  out  of  action,  and  then  led  them  off  in  triumph,  twenty- 
four  guns  in  all,  the  first  great  trophy  won  by  the  arms  of 
France. 


280  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

In  the  battle  of  the  Ourcq,  fought  with  superb  tenacity 
and  dash  by  Manoury  and  his  men,  the  first  decisive  blow  of 
the  great  battle,  the  first  definite  victory,  was  gained ;  General 
von  Kluck's  right  wing  was  smashed  in  and  out-flanked,  with 
the  result  that  the  whole  German  line  was  dislocated  and  sent 
hurtling  backward. 

In  that  battle  and  victory  Colonel  Nivelle,  as  he  then  was, 
had  his  part ;  but  it  was  on  the  Aisne,  a  few  days  later,  that  a 
strikingly  brilliant  act  brought  him  into  especial  prominence. 
The  Seventh  Corps  was  attacked  by  exceedingly  strong  enemy 
forces  and  forced  backward  over  the  Aisne.  Colonel  Nivelle, 
commanding  its  artillery,  saw  his  opportunity,  and,  himself 
leading  on  horseback,  brought  his  batteries  out  into  the  open, 
right  between  the  retreating  Seventh  Corps  and  the  strong 
German   forces  that   were  pursuing  them,   already  sure   of 

victory. 

VICTORY  TURNED  TO  SLAUGHTER. 

With  that  calm  serenity  which  is  his  dominant  character- 
istic in  action,  he  let  the  Germans  come  close  up  to  his  guns  in 
serried  masses.  Then  he  opened  fire,  at  short  range,  with 
deadly  precision,  so  that  the  expected  victory  was  turned  into 
a  slaughter.  The  broken  German  regiments,  fleeing  to  the 
woods  beside  the  Aisne  for  safety,  ran  upon  the  bayonets  of 
the  rallied  Seventh  Corps,  inspired  to  splendid  valor  by  the 
magnificent  action  of  their  artillery.  Of  6000  Germans  who 
made  that  charge  few  indeed  returned  to  their  trenches. 

This  was  on  September  16,  1914.  Before  the  New  Year 
the  Artillery  Colonel  had  been  made  a  General  of  Brigade, 
and  in  January,  1915,  the  new  General  distinguished  himself 
by  stopping  the  tremendous  and  unforeseen  German  drive 
against  Soissons.  He  was  forthwith  recommended  for  further 
promotion,  and  on  February  18  was  gazetted  General  of 
Division.  Shortly  after  this  be  gained  new  laurels  by  captur- 
ing from  the  Germans  the  Quenevieres  salient. 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  281 

This  great  commander  was  the  son  of  Colonel  Nivelle — 
and  an  English  mother,  a  former  Miss  Sparrow,  whose  family 
lived  at  Deal,  on  the  English  Channel.  In  his  married  life 
General  Nivelle  has  been  exceedingly  happy. 

The  dominating  figure  in  the  English  army  when  America 
entered  the  fray  was  Sir  Douglas  Haig.  He  succeeded  Sir 
John  French. 

Sir  Douglas  Haig  was  born  under  so  favorable  a  star 
that  he  has  long  been  known  as  "Lucky"  Haig.  Not  that  he 
has  depended  upon  his  luck  to  push  him  ahead  in  the  army, 
for  his  record  as  a  student  and  a  worker  wholly  disproves  this. 
But  nevertheless  fortune  has  showered  many  favors  upon  him. 
Among  these  favors  the  first  and  by  no  means  the  least  is  his 
very  aristocratic  lineage  and  the  consequent  high  standing  he 
has  had  in  royal  and  influential  circles. 

HAIG'S   FAMILY  TREE. 

Haig's  family  tree  dates  back  at  least  six  centuries  and 
he  comes  of  the  very  flower  of  Scotch  stock.  The  virtues  of 
the  "Haigs  of  Bamersyde"  were  extolled  by  the  poets  of  the 
thirteenth  century.  And  to  discuss  this  feature  of  his  career 
without  giving  due  credit  to  the  position  and  influence  of  his 
wife  would  be  ungallant  as  well  as  unfair.  She  was  the  Hon. 
Dorothy  Vivian,  daughter  of  the  third  Lord  Vivian,  and  maid- 
of -honor  to  Queen  Alexandra,  and  the  pair  were  married  in 
Buckingham  Palace. 

He  did  not  enter  the  army  until  after  his  graduation  from 
Oxford  and  then  he  took  service  in  the  cavalry,  the  usual  choice 
of  the  English  "gentleman."  When  twenty-four  years  old,  he 
received  his  commission  as  a  Lieutenant  in  the  Queen's  Own 
Hussars,  one  of  the  ultra-fashionable  regiments.  Six  years 
later  he  was  made  a  Captain  and  then  decided  to  take  a  regular 
military  course  at  the  Staff  College. 

In  1898  he  took  part  in  Kitchener's  campaign  up  the  Nile 
and  in  the  Soudan  as  a  cavalry  officer.    He  was  then  thirty- 


282  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

seven  years  old.  He  distinguished  himself  in  several  engage- 
ments, was  "mentioned  in  the  dispatches/'  was  awarded  the 
British  medal  and  the  Khedive's  medal  and  was  promoted  to 
Major. 

His  career  in  the  Boer  war,  which  followed  that  in  Egypt, 
was  characterized  by  distinguished  services  and  numerous 
rapid  promotions.  It  was  during  this  latter  war  that  Haig 
became  attached  to  the  staff  of  Sir  John  French,  whom  he 
succeeded  in  France  and  Flanders.  He  came  out  of  the  war 
in  South  Africa  a  full-fledged  Colonel,  and  with  a  fresh  supply 
of  medals  and  "mentions."  Then  he  was  sent  to  India  as 
Inspector  General  of  Cavalry. 

DIRECTOR  OF  MILITARY  TRAINING. 

He  remained  in  the  Indian  service  three  years,  and  thei* 
was  given  a  post  at  the  war  office  in  London,  with  the  title  of 
"Director  of  Military  Training."  He  remained  in  London 
three  years,  when  he  was  sent  to  India  as  Chief  of  the  Staff 
of  the  Indian  Army.  Three  years  later  he  returned  to  Eng- 
land and  was  given  what  was  known  as  the  "Aldershot  Com- 
mand," which,  in  fact,  was  the  command  of  the  real  active 
British  army.  He  had  this  post  when  the  war  broke.  His 
assignment  as  Commander  of  the  First  Army  Corps  under 
Sir  John  French  soon  followed. 

The  man,  who  next  to  the  Kaiser  had  more  to  do  with 
Germany's  plans  for  world  domination,  is  Dr.  Theobold  von 
Bethmann-Hollweg,  Imperial  Chancellor  of  Germany. 

The  elevation  of  Hollweg  to  the  Chancellorship  came  when 
Prince  Bulow  stood  in  the  way  of  complete  domination  of 
Germany's  policies  by  the  militarists,  headed  by  the  Kaiser. 
Prince  Bulow  was  dismissed  and  Bethmann-Hollweg  became 
Chancellor  in  1909.  From  that  time  on  he  dedicated  his  life 
to  the  achievement  of  a  single  aim — the  completion  of  Ger- 
many's plans  of  aggression. 

Bethmann-Hollweg  comes  from  an  old  Prussian  family 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  283 

ennobled  in  1840.     He  was  born  about  1855  and  was  a  student 
with  the  Kaiser  at  the  University  of  Bonn.     He  studied  law 
at  Gottingen,  Strassburg  and  Berlin,  and  for  several  years 
followed  the  law  and  was  appointed  a  judge  at  Potsdam. 
APPOINTED  PRUSSIAN  HOME  SECRETARY. 

In  1905  he  was  appointed  Prussian  Home  Secretary,  and 
it  was  then  that  his  name  first  became  familiar  to  the  man  in 
the  street  in  Berlin.  Shortly  afterward  he  was  appointed 
Assistant  Chancellor  of  Prince  Bulow,  who  was  then  Chan- 
cellor. 

It  was  during  his  sendee  as  Home  Secretary  that  Beth- 
mann-Hollweg  became  largely  converted  to  all  that  the  most 
advanced  Prussian  militarism  stood  for.  Ultimately  be  became 
a  far  more  ardent  Pan-German  even  than  Prince  Bulow.  In 
a  speech  at  Munich  in  1908  he  declared  that  though  Germany 
was  then  happily  free  of  all  immediate  anxiety  so  far  as  her 
foreign  relations  were  concerned,  her  present  and  future  posi- 
tion as  a  great  Power  must  ultimately  rest  on  her  strong  arm, 
and  though  the  strength  of  her  arm  was  greater  than  it  ever 
had  been  it  must  grow  yet  stronger. 

It  was  a  speech  after  the  Kaiser's  own  heart — provocative 
and  boasting  to  a  degree.  It  had,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  said, 
been  prepared  by  the  Emperor,  and  was  delivered  by  the 
Kaiser's  order  for  the  special  benefit  of  Prince  Bulow,  who 
had  at  that  time  fallen  out  of  favor  with  the  Emperor. 

Grand  Admiral  Von  Tirpitz  is  said  to  be  the  man  who 
made  the  German  navy.  Having  won  the  recognition  of  the 
Kaiser  in  1894  he  was  promoted  to  Chief  of  Staff  in  the  Ger- 
man navy,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  Kiel.  He  was  made 
Secretary  of  State  in  1898  and  immediately  began  the  building 
up  of  the  navy.  New  and  modern  methods  of  engineering 
were  developed  and  finally  he  made  such  an  impression  with 
the  Kaiser  that  he  was  ennobled.  Von  Tirpitz  was  the  prin- 
cipal advocate  of  Germany's  plans  during  a  decade  for  having 


284  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

the  navy  powerful  enough  to  equal  the  combined  powers  of 
any  three  great  naval  powers. 

Sir  John  Jellicoe,  Vice  Admiral  and  Commander-in-Chief 
of  the  British  Naval  Home  Fleet  had  served  more  than  forty 
years  in  the  navy  when  the  war  broke  out.  He  was  a  Lieuten- 
ant at  the  bombardment  of  Alexandria  and  was  a  member  of 
the  Naval  Brigade  which  participated  in  the  battle  of  Tel-el- 
Kebir,  for  activity  in  which  he  was  presented  with  the  Khe- 
dive's Bronze  Star  for  gallant  service.  He  was  in  command 
of  the  naval  brigade  which  went  to  China  in  1898  to  help  sub- 
due the  Boxers  and  was  shot  at  Teitsang,  where  he  was  deco- 
rated by  the  German  Emperor,  who  conferred  upon  him  the 
Order  of  the  Red  Eagle.  He  was  Bear- Admiral  of  the  Atlan- 
tic Fleet  in  1907-08,  and  Commander  of  the  Second  Home 
Squadron  in  1911-12.  To  Admiral  Jellicoe  is  given  credit  for 
having  developed  a  high  degree  of  efficiency  among  the  gun- 
ners in  the  English  navy. 

ADMIRAL  HUGO  POHL. 

Admiral  Hugo  Pohl,  of  the  German  navy,  was  born  at 
Breslau  in  1855.  He  became  a  Lieutenant  in  the  Imperial 
German  navy  when  but  21  years  of  age.  He  gained  rapid 
promotion,  and  within  a  few  years  was  Commodore  in  charge 
of  the  scouting  ships.  He  had  charge  of  setting  up  the  now 
famous  German  naval  stations  from  Kiel  to  Sonderberg  in 
Schleswig  in  1908  and  was  afterwards  made  Vice  Admiral. 
He  wears  the  medal  of  the  Order  of  the  Crown,  bestowed  upon 
him  by  the  Kaiser  for  admirable  service. 

One  of  the  men  whose  names  will  be  forever  linked  with 
the  war,  particularly  with  relation  to  the  adoption  of  new 
methods  of  warfare,  is  that  of  Count  Zeppelin,  who  died  on 
March  8,  1917,  and  who  was  the  father  of  the  Zeppelin  or 
dirigible  balloon.  The  idea  for  the  big  airship  did  not  origi- 
nate with  Count  Zeppelin,  but  with  David  Schwartz,  a  young 
Austrian,  who  built  his  first  dirigible  in  1893.      He  tried  to 


THE  WAJ&'S  WHO'S  WHO.  285 

arouse  interest  in  his  aircraft  in  Russia,  but  failed  and  finally 
went  to  Berlin,  where  he  interested  the  then  Baron  Zeppelin. 
A  balloon  was  made,  but  Schwartz  fell  ill  and  died.  Zeppelin 
was  later  accused  of  attempting  to  steal  the  young  Austrian's 
patents,  and  the  courts  made  an  award  to  Schwartz's  widow  of 
$18,000. 

Count  Zeppelin's  first  airship  came  out  about  1898.  It 
was  300  feet  long  and  had  an  aluminum  frame.  Short  cruises 
were  made  in  1899  and  1900,  and  the  craft  maintained  a  speed 
of  about  sixteen  miles  an  hour.  A  second  airship  was  com- 
pleted in  1905,  and  later  a  third  aircraft  was  finished.  This 
dirigible  made  a  cruise  of  200  miles  at  an  average  speed  of 
twenty  miles.  The  success  led  Count  Zeppelin  to  make  his 
most  ambitious  attempt  and  he  tried  to  cross  the  Alps  carrying 
sixteen  passengers. 

IN  THE  AIR  THIRTY-SEVEN  HOURS. 

He  succeeded  and  passing  through  hailstorms,  crossing 
eddies  and  encountering  cross-currents  he  traveled  270  miles 
at  an  average  speed  of  twenty-two  miles  an  hour.  Subse- 
quently he  made  a  flight  to  England,  remaining  in  the  air 
thirty-seven  hours.  Fate  played  him  false,  however,  in  many 
of  his  ventures  and  he  returned  home  after  making  remarkable 
voyages,  only  to  have  his  craft  destroyed  at  its  very  landing 
place. 

The  German  Government  and  the  Kaiser  joined  in  giving 
him  a  grant  of  money  to  carry  on  his  work,  and  a  plant  was 
built  at  Frederichshafen.  But  while  Count  Zeppelin's  name 
will  be  forever  identified  with  aeronautics  the  successes  which 
he  attained  were  not  enduring,  for  the  Zeppelins  proved  not 
entirely  satisfactory  in  military  warfare  in  competition  with 
the  aeroplane. 

In  the  counsels  of  Greece  the  outstanding  figure  from  the 
beginning  of  the  war  was  Eleutherois  Venizelos,  He  is 
credited  with  being  responsible  for  the  national  revival  in 


286  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

Greece  when  the  country  seemed  doomed  after  the  Turkish 
war  of  1897.  He  was  the  leader  of  the  country  in  the  move- 
ment to  join  the  Allies  in  the  fight  against  German  domination 
and  he  swayed  the  nation  and  held  them  as  few  men  have.  He 
was  born  in  the  Island  of  Crete  in  1864,  and  according  to  tra- 
dition, his  family  descended  from  the  medieval  Dukes  of 
Athens.  He  was  educated  in  Greece  and  Switzerland  and 
became  active  in  Cretan  politics,  and  won  recognition  as  the 
strong  man  of  the  "Great  Greek  Island." 

TRANSFORMS  A  NATION. 

In  less  than  three  years  after  the  distress  in  which  the 
country  found  itself  in  1909  he  transformed  the  nation  into 
one  of  solidarity.  There  had  been  meaningless  squabbles  of 
corrupt  politicians  and  a  sordid  struggle  for  preferment.  The 
army  was  degenerating  and  the  popular  fury  became  so  great 
that  there  was  an  uprising  of  the  army,  which  under  the  title 
of  the  "Military  League,"  ousted  the  Government  and  took 
control  of  the  country.  The  heads  of  the  League  brought 
forward  Venizelos.  The  League  dissolved  and  reforms  were 
instituted  which  started  the  country  on  a  new  path,  and  when 
the  Balkan  war  broke  in  1912  Greece  made  a  record  and 
emerged  in  many  respects  the  leader  of  the  Balkan  states. 

Sir  John  French  is  one  of  the  English  commanders  who 
have  rendered  yeoman  service  in  the  war.  He  is  one  of  the 
most  striking  military  figures  in  England.  He  has  seen  serv- 
ice in  India,  Africa  and  Canada,  and  was  one  of  the  uniformly 
successful  commanders  in  the  Boer  war.  At  the  Siege  of  Kim- 
berly  he  was  shut  up  in  Ladysmith  with  the  Boer  lines  drawing 
closer.  He  managed  to  secrete  himself  under  the  seat  of  a 
train  on  which  women  were  being  carried  to  safety.  Outside 
the  lines  he  made  his  way  to  the  Cape,  where  he  was  put  in 
charge  of  cavalry  and  in  a  terrific  drive  he  swept  through  the 
Free  State  and  reached  Ladysmith  in  time  to  save  the  day. 

He  originally  entered  the  navy,  but  remained  for  a  short 


THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO.  287 

time.  He  commanded  the  19th  Hussars  from  1889  to  1903 
and  then  rose  steadily  in  rank  until  he  was  made  General 
Inspector  of  the  Forces  and  finally  Field  Marshal  in  1903. 

There  should  be  no  discrimination  in  naming  those  who 
have  represented  America  in  the  country's  activities  at  war, 
but  because  they  came  into  the  world's  line  of  vision  by  being 
sent  abroad  for  service  there  are  some  American  commanders 
whose  names  will  ever  be  remembered. 

Vice- Admiral  William  S.  Sims  is  one  of  these.  He  is 
a  Pennsylvanian  who  was  born  in  Canada.  His  father  was 
A.  W.  Sims,  of  Philadelphia,  who  married  a  Canadian  and 
lived  at  Port  Hope,  where  Admiral  Sims  first  saw  the  light 
of  day.  He  went  to  Annapolis  when  he  was  17  years  of  age 
and  was  graduated  in  1880.  After  this  he  secured  a  year's 
leave  of  absence  and  went  to  France,  where  he  studied  French. 
Subsequently  he  was  assigned  to  the  Tennessee,  the  flagship 
of  the  North  Atlantic  Squadron  and  passed  through  all  grades 
of  ships.  He  received  promotion  to  a  Lieutenancy  when  he 
was  about  30  years  of  age.  For  a  time  he  was  in  charge  of 
the  Schoolship  Saratoga,  and  later  was  located  at  Charleston 
Navy  Yard,  and  also  with  the  receiving  ship  at  the  League 
Island  Navy  Yard,  Philadelphia.  After  this  he  went  to  Paris 
as  Naval  Attache  at  the  American  Embassy.  He  was  simi- 
larly Attache  at  the  American  Embassy  at  St.  Petersburg. 

Admiral  Sims  was  relieved  of  his  European  assignment 
in  1900  and  joined  the  Asiatic  fleet,  and  while  abroad  studied 
the  methods  of  British  gunnery.  When  he  returned  to 
America  later  he  inaugurated  reforms  which  increased  the 
efficiency  of  the  gunnery  in  the  service  100  per  cent.  His 
successful  efforts  led  to  his  appointment  as  Naval  Aide  to 
President  Roosevelt.  He  made  a  report  on  the  engagement 
between  the  British  and  German  naval  fleets  at  Jutland  which 
was  startling,  and  declared  that  the  British  battle  cruisers  had 
protected  Great  Britain  from  the  invasion  of  the  enemy. 


288  THE  WAR'S  WHO'S  WHO. 

When  he  reached  the  European  waters  in  command  of 
the  United  States  naval  forces,  with  a  destroyer  flotilla,  and 
the  British  officers  who  greeted  him  asked  when  the  flotilla 
would  be  ready  to  assist  in  chasing  the  submarine  and  protect- 
ing shipping,  Admiral  Sims  created  a  surprise  by  tersely 
replying:  "We  can  start  at  once."  And  he  did.  Admiral 
Sims  married  Miss  Anne  Hitchcock,  daughter  of  Former 
Secretary  of  the  Interior.     The  couple  have  five  children. 

Major  General  John  J.  Pershing,  of  the  United  States 
Army,  Commander  of  the  forces  in  France  and  Belgium,  is 
one  of  the  most  picturesque  figures  in  American  military 
circles.  "Black  Jack"  Pershing  is  what  the  officers  call  him, 
because  he  was  for  a  long  time  commander  of  the  famous 
Tenth  Cavalry  of  Negroes,  which  he  whipped  into  shape  as 
Drillmaster,  and  which  saved  the  Rough  Eiders  from  a  great 
deal  of  difficulty  at  San  Juan  Hill  in  the  Spanish- American 
War.  He  was  also  at  the  battle  of  El  Caney  where  he  was 
given  credit  for  being  one  of  the  most  composed  men  in  action 
that  ever  graced  a  battlefield.  He  served  with  signal  results 
in  the  campaign  against  the  little  "brown"  men  in  the  Philip- 
pines ;  was  in  charge  of  the  expedition  which  chased  Villa  into 
Mexico. 

General  Pershing  was  born  in  1864  in  Laclede,  Missouri, 
and  is  tall,  wiry  and  strong.  Every  inch  of  his  six  feet  is  of 
fighting  material.  He  is  a  man  of  action  and  has  a  penchant 
for  utilizing  the  services  of  young  men  rather  than  staid  old 
officers  of  experience.  Pershing  is  a  real  military  man,  and 
has  been  notably  absent  from  such  things  as  banquets  and  other 
functions  where  by  talking  he  might  get  into  the  limelight. 
It  is  true  that  he  was  jumped  over  the  heads  of  a  number  of 
officers  by  President  Roosevelt,  but  he  has  carved  his  way  by 
his  own  efforts,  and  no  man  could  have  more  fittingly  been 
sent  to  take  charge  of  the  American  forces  abroad  than  "Jack" 
Pershing. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 
CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR 

Substitutes   foe   Cotton — Nitrates   Produced  fbom   Ate — Yeast   a  Eeal   Sub- 
stitute fob  Beef — Seaweed  Made  to  Give  up  Potash — A  Gangbene  Pbe- 

VENTTTVE — SODA   MADE    OUT   OF    SALT   WATEB — AMERICA    C  HEMIC  A  ELY   INDEPEN- 
DENT. 

IT  IS  when  men  are  put  to  the  test  that  they  develop  initia- 
tive and  are  inspired  to  great  things.  In  the  stress  of 
circumstances  there  were  created  through  and  in  the  great 
war  many  unusual  devices  and  much  that  will  endure  for  the 
benefit  of  mankind  in  the  future.  It  is  probable  that  the 
advancements  made  in  many  lines  would  not  have  been  attained 
in  years  but  for  the  necessity  which  demanded  the  exertion 
of  men's  ingenuity,  and  in  no  field  was  this  advancement 
greater  than  in  that  of  chemistry. 

Any  struggle  between  men  is,  in  the  last  analysis,  a  battle 
of  wits,  but  it  remained  for  those  planning  and  scheming  to 
defeat  their  fellow  men  or  protect  themselves  in  the  world 
conflict  to  make  for  the  first  time  in  history  the  fullest  use  of 
the  chemist's  knowledge.  Largely  the  successes  of  the  war 
have  been  due  to  the  studies  and  activities  of  the  chemists, 
working  in  their  laboratories  far  from  the  actual  field  of  strife. 

Not  only  has  their  knowledge  been  turned  to  the  creation 
of  tremendously  destructive  explosives,  the  like  of  which  have 
never  before  been  known  in  warfare,  but  the  same  brains  which 
have  been  utilized  to  assist  man  in  his  death-dealing  crusades 
have  been  called  upon  to  thwart  the  efforts  of  the  warring 
humans  and  save  the  lives  of  those  compelled  to  face  the  wither- 
ing fire  of  cannon,  the  flaming  grenade  and  the  asphyxiating 
gas  bomb. 

In  the  food  crisis  which  confronted  the  nations,  chemists 
drew  from  the  very  air  and  the  waters  of  the  river  and  sea, 

H  R  19  289 


290  CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR. 

gases  and  salts  to  take  the  place  of  those  which  became  limited 
in  their  supply  because  of  the  demands  of  the  belligerents. 

The  chemist  is  one  of  those  who  fights  the  battles  at  home. 
The  resisting  steel,  the  penetrating  shell,  the  poisonous  gas,  the 
power-producing  oil,  the  powerful  explosive — all  these  are  his 
contributions  to  the  war's  equipment,  but  he  also  is  the  magician 
who  waves  the  wand  and  out  of  the  apparently  useless  weeds 
and  vegetable  matter  produces  edibles.  He  turns  waste  prod- 
ucts into  valuable  chemicals  or  extracts  needed  chemicals  from 
by-products. 

GERMANY'S  GREAT  PRIVATION. 

Germany,  deprived  of  many  imports  by  the  sea  power  of 
England,  first  transformed  herself  into  a  self-supporting 
nation  through  the  agency  of  the  chemist.  Substitutes  had 
to  be  provided  for  food  products  which  the  Germans  could 
not  get,  and  it  is  said  that  the  ability  of  the  Kaiser  and  his 
henchmen  to  withstand  the  attacks  of  the  Allied  forces  was 
due  as  much  to  the  service  rendered  by  the  chemists  as  by  the 
army  and  navy. 

Not  only  were  artificial  foodstuffs  manufactured,  but 
natural  food  products  previously  neglected  were  prepared  for 
use.  What  had  been  regarded  as  useless  weeds  were  found  to 
possess  food  value.  A  dozen  wild-growing  plants  were  found 
that  might  be  used  as  a  substitute  for  spinach,  while  half  a 
dozen  others  were  shown  to  be  good  substitutes  for  salads. 
Starches  were  obtained  from  roots,  and  cheap  grades  of  oils 
and  fatty  wastes  of  all  sorts  were  turned  into  edibles. 

Up  until  the  advent  of  the  present  war  cotton  formed  the 
base  of  most  of  the  so-called  propellant  explosives  used  in 
advanced  warfare.  Such  terrible  explosives  as  trinitrotoluene 
occasionally  mentioned  in  the  published  war  reports,  as  well  as 
many  others,  have  as  the  principal  agent  of  destructive  force 
guncotton,  which  is  ordinary  raw  cotton  or  cellulose  treated 
with  nitric  or  sulphuric  acid,  though  there  are,  of  course,  other 


CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR.  291 

chemicals  used  in  compounding  the  various  forms  of  deadly 
explosives. 

At  the  same  time  there  are  innumerable  explosives  which 
are  of  a  distinct  class.  Lyddite,  mentioned  occasionally  as 
one  of  the  modern  death-dealing  explosives,  has  for  a  base 
picric  acid.  The  Lyddite  shells  referred  to  occasionally  in 
various  articles  about  the  war  are  shells  in  which  Lyddite  is 
used  as  the  explosive.  The  largest  percentage  of  explosives 
used  in  modern  gunnery  are  those  formed  of  nitrated  cellulose 
— guncotton. 

TWO  GREAT  FACTORS. 

Therefore  any  shortage  in  the  supply  of  cotton  and  cellu- 
lose is  a  serious  matter  in  war  time,  for  the  country  which 
has  the  most  plentiful  supply  of  ammunition  is  the  one  that 
has  the  greatest  relative  advantage.  It  was,  for  instance, 
stated  from  Washington  several  times  after  the  war  started 
and  the  United  States  commercial  and  industrial  forces  were 
being  mobilized,  that  America  could  make  enough  almost  unbe- 
lievably powerful  explosives  to  blow  Germany  off  the  face  of 
the  European  map,  were  it  possible  to  transport  the  dangerous 
materials.  Dozens  of  new  explosive  compounds  were  placed 
before  the  Government  for  consideration  and  in  application 
for  patents.  One  of  the  new  ones,  it  was  said,  was  so  powerful 
that  little  more  than  a  pinch  of  it  exploded  beneath  such  an 
immense  structure  as  the  Woolworth  Building,  New  York, 
would  destroy  the  entire  edifice. 

The  curtailment  of  the  supply  of  cotton  to  Germany  when 
the  war  started,  because  of  England's  blockade,  and  later  when 
America  entered  the  conflict,  threatened  disaster  to  the  "Fath- 
erland." The  German  chemists  began  working  immediately 
to  supply  substitutes  for  cotton,  to  be  used  both  in  the  manu- 
facture of  explosives  and  fabrics.  They  developed  the 
processes  of  producing  cellulose  from  wood  pulp  to  take  the 
place  of  cotton  for  making  guncotton,  and  certain  forms  of 


292  CHEMISTEY  IN  THE  WAR. 

wood  fiber  and  paper  were  used  in  the  textile  trades.  Willow 
bark  was  one  of  the  substances  utilized  to  a  limited  degree  in 
making  fabrics. 

Likewise  synthetic — or  artificial — camphor  to  take  the 
place  of  that  secured  from  nature's  own  laboratory — the  cam- 
phor tree — was  also  produced  of  necessity,  for  camphor  is  an 
ingredient  largely  used  in  making  smokeless  powder.  Before 
the  war  most  of  the  camphor  was  obtained  from  Japan. 

Compounds — alloyed  steel,  iron  and  aluminum — have  also 
been  used  in  the  industrial  world  to  supplant  copper.  In 
America  we  have  been  educated  to  regard  copper  as  the  ideal 
metal  for  conducting  electrical  power,  but  in  Europe  aluminum 
was  used  successfully  in  a  large  way,  even  before  the  war. 
After  the  conflict  started  in  all  of  the  countries  where  there  was 
a  scant  supply  of  copper,  substitutes  were  developed  by  the 
metallurgists  and  chemists. 

POTENCY  OF  MODERN  CHEMISTRY. 

The  acids  and  salts  used  in  powder  making  and  the  crea- 
tion of  explosives  were  also  secured  from  new  places.  Nitric 
acid,  which  is  necessary  to  the  manufacture  of  guncotton,  for 
many  years  was  made  principally  with  saltpeter  and  sulphuric 
acid.  Modern  chemists,  however,  made  it  from  nitrogen  of 
the  very  air  we  breathe,  and  in  Germany  it  was  made  during 
the  war  from  ammonia  and  calcium  cyanamide,  both  of  which 
may  be  obtained  from  the  air. 

Many  such  methods  of  obtaining  acids  were  known  and 
tested  before  the  war,  but  the  processes  had  not  been  perfected 
to  such  an  extent  as  to  make  them  commercially  profitable. 
However,  the  increased  prices  of  chemicals,  due  to  the  exces- 
sive demands  of  war,  and  the  absolute  necessity  for  producing 
them  inspired  the  chemists  to  get  the  required  results,  and 
Germany  by  the  development  of  these  sources  of  supply  found 
the  acids  necessary  for  her  own  use  in  war,  whether  for  explo- 
sive making  or  medical  purposes. 


CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR.  293 

Great  quantities  of  sugar  are  used  in  making  powder  and 
explosives,  too,  and  when  the  supply  became  limited  the  Ger- 
man chemists  began  producing  in  larger  quantities  the  chem- 
ical substitute — saccharine.  Later  even  this  sweet  was  denied 
the  population  because  the  chemicals  were  needed  for  war 
uses.  So  in  every  line  Germany  found  use  for  everything 
which  its  chemists  and  chemical  laboratories  could  produce. 

The  terrible  gas  and  liquid  fire  bombs  which  the  Germans 
were  first  reported  using  contained  chemical  compounds 
invented  for  the  purpose  by  the  chemists.  Some  of  the  chem- 
icals and  the  gases  produced  when  the  bombs  exploded  were 
so  powerful  that  men  and  animals  in  the  range  of  the  fumes 
were  killed  instantly.  The  effect  was  to  paralyze  them  in  some 
cases  and  it  was  reported  that  many  of  the  soldiers  were  found 
dead  standing  upright  in  the  trenches  or  in  the  attitudes  which 
they  had  assumed  at  the  moment  they  were  overcome. 

BASIC  PRINCIPLE  OF  BOMBS. 

Nitrous-oxide,  or  chlorine,  in  some  chemical  form  is 
supposed  to  have  been  the  base  of  the  bombs,  and  concerning 
the  liquid  fire  it  was  reported  in  connection  with  the  dropping 
of  bombs  on  London  from  a  Zeppelin,  that  some  of  the  bombs 
contained  what  is  chemically  known  as  Thermit,  which  is  a  mix- 
ture of  aluminum  and  iron  oxide  used  in  brazing  and  welding. 
When  ignited  the  oxygen  is  freed  from  the  iron  and  combines 
with  the  aluminum  with  great  rapidity.  During  the  chemical 
reaction  an  intense  heat  is  produced — a  heat  so  great  that  it 
almost  equals  that  of  an  electric  arc. 

So  in  the  world  of  agriculture  and  industry  the  German 
chemists,  recognized  leaders  of  the  world,  actually  made  or 
produced  from  the  air  and  other  unsuspected  sources  things 
without  which  they  could  not  have  withstood  the  siege  against 
them  for  a  single  year.  In  the  absence  of  concentrated  foods 
for  cattle  and  humans,  the  chemists  produced  absolute  substi- 
tutes.    They  took  the  residue  or  waste  from  the  breweries  and 


294'  CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR. 

extracting  the  bitter  hops  taste  from  the  dried  yeast  produced 
a  substitute  for  beef  extract. 

So  also  theyi  secured  ammonium  sulphate  by  a  direct 
combination  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  in  the  air.  At  the 
same  time  they  utilized  other  minerals  than  those  usually  avail- 
able for  the  manufacture  of  sulphuric  acid  and  placed  the 
country  on  an  independent  footing. 

But  Germany  was  not  alone  in  its  advancement.  The 
United  States,  which  found  itself  without  quantities  of  dye- 
stuffs  and  many  other  chemically  produced  things  when  the  war 
came  on,  took  the  lesson  unto  itself  and  is  today  nearer  self- 
supporting  than  it  ever  was  in  the  history  of  the  nation.  The 
Department  of  Agriculture  has  experimented  and  produced 
from  yeast,  vegetable  boullion  cubes,  which  taste  like  beef 
extract  and  contain  greater  nutriment. 

DOMESTIC  DYE-STUFFS. 

America,  too,  has  extracted  sulphate  of  ammonium  from 
the  air  and  the  dye-stuffs  which  we  could  not  get  from  abroad 
are  being  made  at  home.  Two  of  the  things  which  America 
found  lacking  when  war  developed  were  potash  and  acetone, 
both  of  which  are  factors  in  powder  and  explosive  making. 
The  former  is  used  in  the  ordinary  black  gunpowder,  but  the 
latter  is  necessary  in  the  making  of  the  smokeless  powder. 
England  wanted  Cordite,  one  form  of  this  powder  which  the 
British  think  is  the  best  propellant  in  the  world.  It  is  made  of 
guncotton  and  nitroglycerine  and  acetone  is  one  of  the  chem- 
icals required  in  its  manufacture.  England  turned  to  the 
United  States  for  quantities  of  this  explosive  and  also  for  the 
acetone,  but  America  did  not  produce  anywhere  near  enough, 
and  England  wanted  this  country  to  make  something  like 
20,000,000  pounds  of  the  explosive. 

A  number  of  mushroom  chemical  plants  were  developed 
by  the  powder  company  to  produce  the  desired  acetone — one 
very  much  like  a  vinegar  plant  near  Baltimore,  and  another  at 


CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR.  295 

San  Diego,  California,  where  the  munitions  maker's  chemists 
refined  acetone  and  potash  extracted  from  kelp,  or  sea  weed, 
and  besides  supplying  the  powder  and  the  chemicals  which  the 
English  needed  America  developed  a  permanent  industry. 

RELIEVED  BY  AMERICAN  INGENUITY. 

Carbolic  acid,  too,  was  one  of  the  badly  needed  chemicals 
of  the  war,  not  only  for  medical  purposes,  but  also  for  explosive 
making.  Again  the  ingenuity  of  America  asserted  itself  and 
Thomas  A.  Edison  produced  the  plans  for  two  benzol-absorb- 
ing plants  which  were  erected  at  great  steel  works  and  within  a 
few  months  these  plants  were  turning  out  benzol  and  Mr. 
Edison's  carbolic-acid  plant  was  being  supplied  with  the  raw 
material. 

And  then  it  was  believed  that  America  could  not  make 
dyes  to  take  the  place  of  those  which  came  from  Germany.  All 
the  United  States,  it  was  said,  would  have  to  wear  white  stock- 
ings. The  country  just  could  not  produce  the  dyes  necessary, 
and  the  product  of  the  American  plants  was  inferior.  But 
America  could  make  the  same  dyes.  She  is  making  them. 
Right  now  she  is  making  practically  as  great  a  variety  as 
Germany  even  sent  over  here. 

A  few  miles  outside  of  Philadelphia,  at  Marcus  Hook,  on 
the  busy  Delaware  river  where  the  ships  of  the  world  are 
being  made,  the  Benzol  Products  Company  turns  out  large 
quantities  of  aniline  oil.  The  aniline  oil,  the  essential  basis  of 
aniline  dyes,  is  made  into  tints  as  fair  and  perfect  as  any  the 
wizards  of  Germany  ever  conjured  out  of  their  test  tubes. 

The  tale  about  America's  inability  was  proved  to  be  a 
fable.  The  Marcus  Hook  plant  is  one  of  three  which  sprang 
up  when  the  war  began.  Others  are  the  Schoellkopf  Aniline 
and  Chemical  Works  at  Buffalo  and  a  third  is  the  Becker 
Aniline  and  Chemical  Works  at  Brooklyn.  The  three  are  now 
merged  into  one  great  operating  company  and  Germany  will 


296  CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR. 

have  some  difficulty  in  getting  back  her  dye  trade  when  she  is 
ready  to  again  fight  for  the  world  markets. 

Moreover,  the  world-famous  duPont  Company,  which 
has  made  powder  and  chemicals  for  all  the  nations,  turned  in 
and  purchased  the  Harrison  Chemical  Works  in  1917,  and 
besides  making  "pigments"  has  entered  the  coal  tar  dye 
industry.  The  company  made  an  intensive  study  of  the  dyeing 
industries — cotton,  calico  printing,  wool,  silk,  leather,  paper, 
paints,  printing  inks,  &c,  and  made  plans  to  meet  the  require- 
ments of  each.  The  Harrison  plant  is  but  one  of  the  immense 
group  operated  by  the  duPont  Company  and  it  has  been 
famous  for  the  manufacture  of  white  lead  and  acids. 

A  CHEMICAL  DISCOVERY. 

There  is  in  fact  no  line  in  which  the  chemists  of  America 
did  not  rise  to  the  emergency,,  and  the  "romances  of  the 
industrial"  world  are  not  more  entrancing  than  are  those  of 
the  medical  and  other  fields.  Chemistry,  for  instance,  dis- 
covered an  anti-toxin  for  the  deadly  gangrene,  or  gas  bacillus, 
poisoning  of  the  battlefields.  The  discovery  was  made  by 
research  workers  in  Rockefeller  Institute. 

It  is  one  of  the  most  important  discoveries  in  medical 
research  as  applied  to  war,  having  an  even  greater  bearing 
on  the  treatment  of  war  wounds  than  the  D akin- Carrel  treat- 
ment of  sluicing  wounds  previously  referred  to.  The  serum 
works  on  the  same  principle  as  the  anti-tetanus  serum  used 
to  prevent  lockjaw.  The  gangrene  antitoxin  is  injected  to 
prevent  the  development  of  gangrene  poisoning. 

The  serum  was  developed  by  Dr.  Carrel  Bull  and  Miss 
Ida  W.  Pritchett,  of  the  Rockefeller  Institute,  by  immunizing 
horses  by  the  application  of  the  bacillus  germs,  then  obtaining 
the  resultant  serum  from  the  horses.  The  new  serum  dis- 
places, in  a  measure,  the  Dakin-Carrel  method  of  treating 
wounds.  As  soon  as  a  soldier  is  picked  up  wounded,  the  plan 
is  to  give  him  an  injection  of  the  serum  so  that  he  can  be 


CHEMISTRY  IN  THE  WAR.  297 

rushed  to  the  rear  ambulances  with  no  fear  that  the  deadly 
gas  infection  will  develop. 

The  use  of  the  serum  means  the  wiping  out  of  the  big 
death  rate  from  infection,  with  death  resulting  merely  from 
wounds  that  are  in  themselves  fatal.  The  gas  bacillus  was 
discovered  by  Dr.  William  H.  Welch,  of  Johns  Hopkins  Uni- 
versity, 25  years  ago.  The  bacillus  frequently  is  present  in 
soil  and  when  carried  to  an  open  wound  germinates  quickly, 
deveiox3ing  into  bubbles  of  gaseous  matter,  whence  comes  the 
name  "gas  bacillus."  The  bubbles  multiply  rapidly,  a  few 
hours  often  being  sufficient  to  cause  death. 

A  WOUND-FLUSHING  SYSTEM. 

Possible  gangrene  poisoning  has  been  offset  by  the  Dakin- 
Carrel  system  of  constantly  flushing  the  open  wounds,  but 
patients  are  requently  too  far  off  to  be  given  the  advantage  of 
the  flushing  method  and  this  is  where  the  serum  is  chiefly  valu- 
able. The  ambulance  or  medical  corps  "shoots"  the  serum 
into  the  wounded  soldier  even  before  they  douse  his  wound 
with  iodine. 

The  progress  that  has  been  made  along  these  lines  is 
indicated  by  the  statement  of  Lord  Xorthcliffe,  who  after  a 
visit  to  the  front  declared  that  the  annual  death  rate  in  the 
English  army  was  3  per  cent  of  1000  and  that  the  average 
illness,  including  colds  and  influenza,  was  less  than  in  London, 
despite  the  discomforts  of  the  trenches. 

In  the  past  disease  has  been  as  destructive  as  battles. 
Biology  and  pathology,  to  say  nothing  of  surgery  and  thera- 
peutics, have  made  such  strides  that  disease  has  been  virtually 
eliminated  as  a  factor  in  warfare.  War  takes  medical  science 
into  the  field,  where  the  control  of  large  masses  of  men  enables 
it  to  develop  the  highest  efficiency. 

Even  in  normal  peace  conditions  biological  and  patholog- 
ical science  has  been  accomplishing  results  not  popularly  under- 
stood.    Individual  cures  by  surgery  and  medicine  appeal  to 


298  CHEMISTEY  IN  THE  WAK. 

personal  interests,  but  these  are  negligible  compared  to  the 
prevention  of  plagues  like  smallpox,  typhus  and  tuberculosis. 
If  such  diseases  had  not  been  successfully  combated  by  science 
three  out  of  four  of  the  present  civilized  population  would  not 
be  in  existence  at  all.  The  organized  and  intensive  application 
and  developments  of  science,  of  preventive  medicine,  constitute 
the  strictly  neutral  work  in  this  war  by  which  all  humanity  will 
profit  for  all  time  to  come. 

In  passing  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  great  power 
supplied  by  Niagara  Falls  is  being  utilized  to  produce  some  of 
the  chemical  marvels.  One  great  industry  there  is  making 
soda  by  the  electrolytic  process.  That  is,  salt  brine  is  pumped 
from  the  saline  deposits  in  western  New  York  and  piped  to  the 
works.  This  is  run  into  electric  cells  and  through  these  a 
current  of  electricity  is  led.  The  salt,  which  is  composed  of 
chlorine  and  sodium,  decomposes  under  the  electric  attack. 
The  sodium  goes  to  one  pole  and  combines  with  water  to  form 
caustic  soda,  whereas  the  chlorine  escapes  at  the  other  pole. 
Let  us  follow  the  chlorine,  which  is  a  yellowish-green  gas,  more 
than  twice  as  heavy  as  air,  and  has  found  a  new  use  as  poison 
gas  in  the  great  war — for  which  all  the  world  should  be 
ashamed. 

It  is  collected  and  compressed  to  a  liquid  form  and  shipped 
in  containers  under  pressure  for  use  in  chemical  works  and 
bleacheries  and  for  the  purification  of  drinking  water.  It  has 
been  found  above  all  things  effective  in  destroying  noxious 
bacilli.  A  surprisingly  small  amount  of  the  gas  dissolved  in 
the  water  is  enough.  In  New  York  city  the  water  has  been 
chlorinated  and  no  single  case  of  typhoid  fever  has  been  traced 
to  the  supply. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 
OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

Canada's  Recruiting — Raise  33,000  Tboops  in  Two  Months — First  Expedi- 
tionary Force  to  Cross  Atlantic — Bravery  at  Ypres  and  Lens — Meeting 
Difficult  Problems) — Quebec  Aroused  by  Conscription. 

THE  world  has  marvelled  at  the  achievement  of  Canada 
at  Valcartier  camp  near  Quebec  and  the  dispatch  across 

the  Atlantic  Ocean  of  a  fully  equipped  expeditionary 
force  of  33,000  men  within  two  months  of  the  outbreak  of  war 
between  Great  Britain  and  Germany.  But  the  magnitude  of 
that  feat  cannot  be  appreciated  properly  until  one  considers 
that  on  August  4, 1914,  Canada  had  a  permanent  force  of  only 
about  3500  men. 

These  soldiers,  who  for  the  most  part  were  instructors  and 
men  on  guard  duty,  provided  a  nucleus  for  a  training  organiza- 
tion. In  addition  to  its  "standing  army,"  the  Dominion  had 
an  active  militia  numbering  approximately  60,000  men.  Their 
training  consisted  of  what  has  been  aptly  called  "after-supper 
soldiering."  Members  of  city  regiments  drilled  for  one  night 
each  week,  participated  in  an  annual  church  parade  and  spent 
two  weeks  every  year  in  summer  camp. 

The  training  of  the  rural  regiments  consisted  almost 
entirely  of  the  two  weeks  in  summer  camp.  Yet  from  these 
militia  units  were  drawn  a  large  proportion  of  the  men  in  the 
first  Canadian  oversea  contingent,  while  the  militia  regiments, 
to  a  large  extent,  formed  the  basis  of  Canada's  recruiting 
organization  after  the  outbreak  of  hostilities. 

Enlistments  during  the  first  two  years  in  the  expeditionary 
force  numbered  approximately  415,000,  while  probably  150,000 
applicants  were  rejected  as  physically  unfit. 

Immediately  upon  the  declaration  of  war  Major  General 
Sir  Sam  Hughes,  Minister  of  Militia,  telegraphed  the  officers 
commanding  the  militia  regiments  to  commence  recruiting  for 

299 


300  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

oversea  service.  After  the  recruits  were  signed  up  and 
accepted,  they  lived  at  home  and  drilled  during  the  day  at  the 
armories  throughout  the  Dominion. 

Meanwhile,  Valcartier  camp  was  being  prepared  for  the 
gathering  army.  The  building  of  this  great  military  center 
almost  overnight  was  an  engineering  feat  of  no  mean  magni- 
tude. Two  weeks  after  work  was  started,  troops  recruited  by 
the  militia  regiments  began  to  arrive,  and  before  the  end  of  a 
month  Valcartier  was  a  tented  city  of  25,000  soldiers. 

There  were  some  complaints,  of  course.  They  were  inevit- 
able in  an  encampment  so  hastily  prepared.  But  the  essentials 
were  there,  and  when  the  contingent  sailed  from  Gaspe,  on  the 
coast  of  Quebec,  on  October  3,  it  was  a  well-trained,  efficient 
body  of  soldiers,  besides  being  the  largest  army  that  ever 
crossed  the  Atlantic  at  one  time. 

AN  EFFICIENT  COMMANDER. 

The  contingent  was  in  command  of  Lieutenant-General 
Edwin  Alfred  Hervey  Alderson.  He  was  born  at  Ipswich 
in  1859  and  began  his  military  career  with  the  Militia,  going 
to  the  regular  army  in  1878.  He  joined  the  Royal  West  Kent 
Regiment  as  Second  Lieutenant  and  rapidly  won  promotion. 
He  served  in  the  Transvaal,  later  in  Egypt  and  participated  in 
actions  at  Kassassin  and  Tel-el- Kebir,  receiving  the  Khedive's 
bronze  star.  Service  in  South  Africa  and  in  India  followed, 
during  which  General  Alderson  successively  became  Captain, 
Major  and  Lieutenant  Colonel.  He  became  a  Colonel  in  1903 
and  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  Second  Infantry  Brigade,  and 
in  1908  commanded  the  Sixth  Division,  Southern  Army  of 
India,  having  meantime  been  given  the  rank  of  Major  General. 

After  the  departure  of  the  first  contingent  recruiting  was 
continued  by  the  militia  regiments,  and  during  the  winter  the 
men  were  quartered  in  exhibition  grounds,  Y.  M.  C  As.,  sheds, 
etc.  In  the  spring  of  1915  existing  camps  were  enlarged  and 
new  ones  opened. 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  301 

During  this  period  the  recruiting  machinery  developed 
from  the  militia  regiments.  Through  the  latter  officers  were 
recommended  to  command  new  battalions.  These  O.  Cs. 
selected  most  of  their  subordinate  officers  from  their  own  militia 
regiments  and  used  the  parent  organization  as  a  general  basis 
for  recruiting  operations,  headquarters  being  located  at  the 
regimental  armories. 

The  keen  competition  existing  between  the  militia  units 
was  maintained  between  the  new  oversea  formations,  and 
battalions  were  raised  in  a  few  weeks.  For  months  enlist- 
ments all  over  Canada  averaged  more  than  1000  men  daily, 
and  with  recruits  coming  forward  at  this  rate,  there  was  no 
necessity  of  protracted  delay  in  bringing  battalions  up  to 
strength. 

DIFFICUTY  OF   RECRUITING. 

There  was  a  disposition,  especially  in  military  circles,  to 
attribute  the  increasing  difficulty  of  the  recruiting  situation 
during  the  winter  of  1915-16  and  since  to  a  change  of  system 
and  the  introduction  of  the  so-called  "political  colonels."  The 
change,  however,  was  rather  the  result  of  new  conditions  than 
the  cause  of  it.  Recruiting  had  slowed  down — largely  from 
natural  causes. 

A  new  appeal  was  needed  to  reach  a  class  of  eligible  men 
who  had  not  yet  enlisted.  The  recruiting  problem  apparently 
had  outgrown  the  facilities  of  the  militia  organizations. 
Rightly  or  wrongly,  the  government  commissioned  a  number 
of  well-known  men,  without  military  experience,  to  raise 
battalions.  Their  popularity  and  local  confidence  in  them  were 
the  excuses  for  their  appointment — and  the  experiment  was 
in  the  main  successful. 

Perhaps  there  was  a  suggestion  of  politics  about  it, 
although  it  may  be  stated  emphatically  that  politics  had  not 
been  a  serious  influence  in  connection  with  the  recruiting, 
training  or  leadership  of  Canada's  oversea  forces.     That  such 


302  OUR.  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

is  the  case  stands  to  the  enduring  credit  of  Major  General 
Hughes, 

The  attempt  to  "popularize"  recruiting  was  soon  found 
to  entail  serious  evils.  Competition  for  recruits  in  an  already 
well-combed  field  became  very  keen.  The  new  political 
colonels  realized  that  their  reputations  were  at  stake,  and  in 
the  effort  to  fill  up  their  battalions  various  undignified  and 
regrettable  expedients  were  employed.  Cabarets,  bean-count- 
ing contests,  lotteries  and  callithumpian  methods  generally 
marked  a  period  in  Canada's  recruiting  history  not  pleasant 
to  review,  and  which  brought  discredit  upon  the  entire  vol- 
untary enlistment  system  as  a  permanent  method  of  filling 

up  armies. 

TRAINING  SERIOUSLY   DELAYED. 

Besides  the  moral  influence  of  such  schemes  to  get  men  in 
khaki,  the  recruiting  efforts  of  the  political  colonels  had  a 
serious  effect  in  delaying  the  training  of  new  men.  With  their 
personal  reputations  as  organizers  involved,  the  commanding 
officers  were  reluctant  to  admit  inability  to  fill  up  the  ranks  of 
their  units,  and  repeatedly  pleaded  for  more  time. 

For  months  partly  recruited  battalions  made  little  or  no 
progress  with  their  training,  while  the  officers  devised  new 
recruiting  "stunts"  and  while  men  were  being  sought  in  the 
highways  and  byways. 

The  situation  was  complicated  by  allowing  a  number  of 
infantry  battalions  to  recruit  in  the  same  area  at  the  same  time, 
with  the  result  that  the  new  men  came  in  driblets,  valuable  time 
was  lost  and  much  money  wasted.  In  some  cases  it  has  taken 
well  over  a  year  from  the  date  when  they  were  authorized  before 
battalions  were  dispatched  oversea — due  very  largely  to 
ineffective  recruiting  methods.  Battalions  were  allowed  to 
continue  the  heart-breaking  quest  for  recruits  long  after  they 
should  have  been  amalgamated  and  sent  to  England.  Such 
amalgamations  came  ultimately,  battalions  retaining  their  iden- 
tity when  leaving  Canada  only  when  600  or  more  strong. 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  303 

The  high  cost  of  recruits  was  a  direct  consequence  of  com- 
petition among  battalions  recruiting  independently  in  the  same 
territory  at  the  same  time.  The  government  allowance  was  not 
adequate  to  maintain  the  pace  and  had  to  be  supplemented  by 
private  funds. 

There  was  in  Toronto  a  certain  group  of  fifty  recruits 
referred  to  as  the  "$10,000  squad,"  because  it  is  estimated  that 
the  cost  of  recruiting  them  averaged  nearly  $200  each,  the 
money  coming  from  private  funds  of  officers  and  their  friends. 
Perhaps  the  estimate  involves  some  exaggeration,  but  many 
units  added  to  their  ranks  only  at  a  cost  of  $50  or  more  per 
recruit. 

Some  idea  of  the  waste  of  such  a  system  may  be  secured 
when  it  is  stated  that,  with  men  coming  forward  freely,  the  cost 
of  recruiting  is  considerably  less  than  $10  per  man,  even  after 
allowing  a  generous  bonus  to  the  recruiting  sergeants.  More 
serious  than  the  cost  in  money  was  the  delay  in  training  men 
needed  at  the  front. 

A  POLITICAL  IMPOSSIBILITY, 
Canada's  experience  constitutes  a  severe  indictment  of  the 
voluntary  system  of  recruiting,  although  sterner  measures  at 
the  outset  were  a  political  impossibility.  The  free-will  enlist- 
ment plan  had  to  be  given  a  thorough  test,  and  its  inadequacy 
demonstrated  and  repeatedly  emphasized  before  public  opinion 
would  support  resort  to  compulsion. 

English-speaking  Canada  at  least  learned  that  lesson,  and 
it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  the  United  States  would 
have  adopted  the  selective  draft  system  at  the  commencement 
of  its  participation  in  the  war,  if  it  had  not  been  that  the  experi- 
ence of  Canada  and  the  United  Kingdom  established  the  weak- 
ness inherent  in  the  voluntary  system. 

Besides  the  camp  at  Valcartier,  a  great  artillery  camp  was 
set  up  at  Petewawa,  where  the  best  facilities  existed  for  long 
range  gun  practice.    Ontario  saw  two  camps  at  Niagara  and 


304  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

Camp  Borden ;  Manitoba  saw  one  on  the  plains,  Alberta  another 
in  the  picturesque  district  near  Calgary,  while  British  Columbia 
had  its  camp  at  Vernon. 

INADEQUATE  RECRUITING. 

The  volunteer  recruiting  in  Canada,  in  its  incipiency,  while 
resultful,  was  soon  found  to  be  not  adequate.  Under  it,  how- 
ever, there  was  a  widespread  response  that  stirs  the  blood,  for 
men  hurried  to  the  lines  from, the  Yukon  and  the  Peace  Rivers ; 
from  Hudson's  Bay  and  the  farther  hinterlands,  from  prairie 
and  mountain;  white  men  and  the  red  men;  cowboys  and  city 
chaps,  harvesters  and  hunters,  mechanics  and  mountaineers, 
backwoodsmen  and  frontwoodsmen.  And  also  among  the  en- 
listers  were  thousands  of  Americans  who  fought  side  by  side 
with  Canadian,  Briton  and  Frenchman. 

Canada  has  large  German  settlements,  including  300,000 
German  and  Austrian  settlers  in  the  western  provinces.  Prompt 
action  was  taken  on  the  outbreak  of  the  war  to  deal  with  the 
alien  element  that  might  prove  dangerous  and  disloyal.  Nearly 
10,000  were  speedily  interned,  from  Nova  Scotia  to  British 
Columbia.  A  large  proportion  were  Austrian  laborers  who 
had  been  railway  navvies.  These  wTere  placed  in  western  camps 
and  used  in  building  trails  and  roads  in  national  parks,  or  in 
clearing  the  forest  for  future  settlement  in  Northern  Ontario. 

Many  individuals  of  known  pro-German  sympathies  were 
also  put  out  of  harm's  way,  and  some  famous  trials  were  held 
which  served  to  give  salutary  warnings  to  all  others  that  free- 
dom of  speech  has  its  limitations  in  times  of  war,  and  that  the 
rumors  that  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  was  being  celebrated 
behind  closed  doors  was  hardly  palatable. 

Others,  again,  were  caught  in  attempts  to  destroy  prop- 
erty and  it  is  to  the  credit  of  police  and  military  vigilance  that 
few  succeeded  in  their  nefarious  designs.  The  internment 
camp  proved  a  wholesome  example,  and  the  pro-German  in 
Canada  took  the  advice  of  the  United  States  Government  to  its 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  305 

German  subjects  "to  keep  their  mouths  shut."  It  is  also  a  fact 
that  the  occupants  of  the  detention  camps  in  the  Dominion  were 
well  fed  and  treated,  in  striking  contrast  to  the  disturbing 
reports  that  leaked  through  as  to  the  way  Canadian  war 
prisoners  in  Germany  fared. 

CANADA'S  WAR  FINANCIERING. 

Next,  the  story  of  how  Canada  is  financing  her  share  of 
the  war,  for  it  is  a  costly  business.  Three  domestic  war  loans, 
totaling  $450,000,000,  were  voluntarily  subscribed,  each  in  fact 
being  doubly  underwritten,  and  yet  the  savings  of  the  people  in 
the  banks  is  (1917)  the  highest  on  record — over  a  billion  and  a 
quarter.  Part  of  the  war  revenue  is  being  raised  by  war  taxes 
on  letters,  checks,  legal  documents  and  some  articles  of  import. 
Happily  the  normal  revenue  of  the  country  was  never  so  large 
nor  the  trade  of  the  Dominion  so  buoyant.  All  these  factors 
are  helping  to  carry  the  war  burden. 

The  generosity  of  the  people,  under  the  heavy  strain,  was 
most  marked.  Many  millions  were  given  to  the  various  war 
help  funds,  chiefly  to  the  Red  Cross  and  the  Canadian  Patriotic 
Fund,  of  700  branches,  which  supplements  the  Government 
separation  allowance  to  soldiers'  dependents  by  other  grants. 
Canada  had,  up  to  that  time,  by  the  way,  the  highest  paid  sol- 
diery in  the  world,  privates  getting  $33  a  month. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  there  are  several  branches  of 
the  Canadian  Patriotic  Fund  in  the  United  States,  which  looked 
after  the  families  and  dependents  of  Americans  who  enlisted  in 
the  Canadian  ranks. 

Canadian  total  givings  in  cash  and  kind  to  their  own,  as  well 
as  to  the  Belgians,  French,  Servian,  Armenian  and  other  funds 
and  Governmental  grants  of  grain  and  provision,  would  repre- 
sent a  very  much  larger  figure  than  that  here  mentioned. 

The  orders  placed  in  Canada  averaged  $1,500,000  worth 
for  every  day  in  the  year. 

The  women  of  Canada  in  every  way  render  practical 

H  E— 20 


306  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

patriotic  service.  Hundreds  of  nurses  were  placed  in  overseas 
and  home  hospitals.  The  farmers'  wives  raised  large  sums  of 
money  as  did  the  school  children.  Organizations  of  all  kinds 
came  into  existence,  not  alone  collecting  money,  but  contribut- 
ing vast  quantities  of  war  material  and  soldiers'  comforts,  and 
sending  packages  of  food  and  clothing  regularly  to  Canadian 
prisoners  in  German  camps. 

Still  another  war  problem  was  the  care  of  the  returned 
wounded  soldiers,  and  a  serious  problem  it  was.  The  proces- 
sion of  the  disabled  was  a  pathetic  one.  Military  convalescent 
hospitals  were  set  up  in  many  centres,  in  addition  to  the  open- 
ing of  private  homes  for  the  same  beneficent  purpose. 

CANADA  PART  OF  AMERICA. 

Canada  may  be  an  English  possession,  but  to  us  it  is  part 
of  America,  and  certainly  no  two  countries  have  rested  side  by 
side  in  greater  friendship  than  the  "Dominion"  and  the  United 
States.  You  can  find  no  great  fortifications  along  the  3000 
odd  miles  of  border  between  Canada  and  the  United  States. 
The  countries  have  lived  in  peace  and  harmony  and  together,  or 
side  by  side  they  have  battled  for  peace  on  the  fields  of 
Flanders. 

All  the  world  knows  what  Canada  has  done  on  the  battle- 
fields abroad,  fighting  with  those  troops  from  Australia,  New 
Zealand,  India  and  lesser  English  territory,  to  drive  the  ruth- 
less Germans  back  and  crush  the  Empire  to  wEich  they  swear 
allegiance. 

/The  Canadian  troops  were  taken  after  landing  in  France 
to  a  point  within  the  country  between  St.  Omer  and  Ypres, 
where  they  served  with  honor  to  themselves,  their  presence 
having  a  salutary  effect  on  the  British  soldiery,  who  had  been 
facing  the  German  forces.  At  the  battle  of  Neuve  Chapelle 
the  Canadians  held  part  of  the  line  allotted  to  the  first  army, 
and  while  not  engaged  in  the  main  attack,  rendered  valuable 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  307 

help,  their  artillery  being  very  active,  and  at  the  battle  of  Ypres 
in  April,  1915,  they  took  a  notable  part. 

In  the  latter  part  of  April,  the  Canadian  division  held  a 
line  of  about  5000  yards,  connecting  with  that  of  the  French 
troops,  and  faced  the  memorable  gas  attack  of  the  Germans, 
which  was  the  first  noted  in  the  war.  The  asphyxiating  gas  was 
projected  into  the  trenches  by  means  of  force  pumps  and  pipes 
laid  under  the  parapets,  the  German  sappers  having  carefully 
placed  these  conductors.  The  bulk  of  the  gas  was  directed 
against  the  French,  largely  made  up  of  Turcos  and  Zouaves, 
who  were  driven  back,  suffering  agonies. 

POSITION  BRAVELY  HELD. 

The  Canadians  suffered  to  some  extent  from  the  poison, 
and  though  there  were  in  the  commands  lawyers,  college  pro- 
fessors, business  men,  clerks  and  workers  of  a\l  sorts,  who  had 
been  turned  into  soldiers  within  a  few  months,  and  without  pre- 
vious military  experience,  they  held  their  position  bravely.  The 
Canadians  were,  of  course,  compelled  to  change  their  position 
after  the  French  fell  back,  and  the  Allied  troops  were,  to  all 
effects  and  purposes,  routed.  But  when  the  Germans,  recog- 
nizing the  weakened  position  of  the  Canadians,  attempted  to 
force  a  series  of  attacks,  the  Canadian  division,  as  a  matter  of 
record,  fought  through  the  day  and  through  the  night,  for 
forty-eight  consecutive  hours,  and  finally,  in  a  counter  attack, 
drove  the  Germans  back  and  regained  a  position  which  had  been 
lost  by  the  British  troops  in  the  earlier  conflict. 

Later,  in  the  face  of  a  devastating  fire,  in  which  many 
officers  were  killed,  battalions  of  the  Canadians  carried  warfare 

I  to  the  first  line  of  German  trenches,  and  in  a  desperate  hand-to- 
hand  struggle  won  the  trench.  This  attack,  it  is  said,  secured 
and  maintained  during  the  most  critical  moment  of  the  cam- 
paign the  integrity  of  the  Allied  line. 
In  connection  with  the  experience  of  the  Canadians  with 
the  gas  fumes,  it  is  necessary  to  note  that  at  that  time  they  were 


308  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

unprovided  with  gas  masks,  or  means  of  protecting  themselves 
against  the  fumes,  and  the  best  they  could  do  was  to  stuff  wet 
handkerchiefs  in  their  mouths.  The  fumes,  although  extremely 
poisonous,  were  not  so  effective  with  the  Canadians  as  on  the 
French  lines,  largely  because  of  the  position  of  the  Canadians, 
and  the  direction  of  the  wind,  but  in  the  several  attacks  a  num- 
ber of  the  Canadians  were  asphyxiated. 

HEROES  WIN  RECOGNITION. 

So,  all  through  the  Ypres  campaign,  the  Canadians  faced 
the  shot,  shell  and  poisonous  gases  of  the  Germans,  and  won 
recognition  for  their  heroic  conduct  which  will  stand  to  the 
credit  of  Canada  for  all  time.  At  Festubert,  Givenchy,  and, 
last  but  not  least,  Lens,  the  Canadians,  step  by  step,  kept  pace 
with  the  Allied  advances. 

In  their  general  advance  on  Lens  the  Canadians  occupied 
the  strongest  outpost  in  the  defense  of  that  place,  and  pushing 
their  troops  on  toward  La  Coulotte,  entered  that  village.  The 
Germans  withdrew  in  this  neighborhood  from  a  line  about  one 
and  three-quarters  miles  long. 

The  task  of  the  Canadians  was  to  capture  German  out- 
posts southwest  of  Reservoir  Hill.  The  attack  was  evidently 
expected.  The  Germans  scuttled,  abandoning  ground  upon 
which  machine  gun  fire  was  immediately  turned  by  Germans 
located  on  the  hill.  This  was  speedily  followed  by  heavy  artil- 
lery fire,  which  continued  during  the  night  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Lens  electric  station. 

The  enemy's  dugouts  were  searched,  found  to  be  empty, 
and  wrecked. 

The  German  retirement  ceased  during  the  night.  Patrols 
sent  out  opposite  Mericourt  and  to  the  south  found  the  enemy's 
front  line  strongly  held.  The  Germans  made  huge  craters  at 
all  cross  roads  in  Avion  and  leading  towards  Lens. 

Patrols  which  were  sent  out  reached  the  summit  of  Reser- 
voir Hill  without  opposition  and  pushed  on  down  the  eastern 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  309 

slope  and  the  strong  Lens  outpost  was  effectively  occupied. 
Meanwhile,  south  of  the  Souchez  River  the  Canadians  drove 
forward  on  the  heels  of  the  retiring  Germans.  Railway  em- 
bankments east  of  Lens  electric  station  were  occupied.  The 
advance  was  then  continued  toward  La  Coulotte.  As  night  fell 
strong  parties  were  sent  out  to  consolidate  the  positions  occu- 
pied, while  patrols  were  sent  forward  to  keep  in  touch  with  the 
Germans. 

WANTON  DESTRUCTION. 

Several  days  previous  the  Germans  were  known  to  be 
destroying  houses  in  the  western  part  of  Lens,  with  the  object 
of  giving  a  wider  area  of  fire  for  their  guns.  It  was  their  inten- 
tion of  clinging  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  city  and  prolonging 
the  struggle  by  house-to-house  fighting. 

Under  a  protecting  concentration  of  artillery  fire,  Cana- 
dian troops  successfully  stormed  and  captured  the  German 
front  line  before  Avion,  a  suburb  of  Lens.  By  the  advance  the 
British  line  was  carried  forward  to  within  one  mile  of  the  centre 
of  Lens. 

The  Canadians,  heartened  by  successes  gained  in  a  few 
days  at  a  relatively  small  cost,  decided  to  attack  across  the  open 
ground  sloping  upwards  to  Avion  and  the  village  of  Leauvette, 
near  the  Souchez  River.  They  met  with  opposition  of  a  serious 
character  at  only  one  point,  where  a  combination  of  machine 
gun  fire  and  uncut  wires  delayed  the  advance.  The  attack  was 
not  intended  to  be  pressed  home  at  this  particular  spot,  as  the 
ground  specially  favored  the  Germans,  so  that  the  delay  did  no 
harm.  The  assaulting  troops  comprised  men  from  British 
Columbia,  Manitoba,  Central  Ontario  and  Xova  Scotia. 

The  attack  was  made  along  a  two-mile  front.  On  the 
extreme  left,  Xova  Scotians  pushed  their  way  up  the  Lens- 
Arras  road  to  the  village  of  Leauvette.  Here  they  took  a  num- 
ber of  prisoners.  At  the  other  end  of  the  line,  east  of  the  rail- 
way tracks,  enemy  dugouts  were  bombed.     Their  occupants 


310  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

belonged  to  the  crack  Prussian  Guards  Corps,  the  Fifth  Guard 
Grenadiers,  who  refused  in  most  cases  to  come  out  and  sur- 
render. 

At  daybreak,  Canadian  airplanes,  flying  low  over  Avion, 
saw  few  Germans  there.  Craters  which  had  been  made  by  mine 
exposions  at  the  crossroads,  seriously  hindered  them  in  bring- 
ing up  troops  from  Lens  for  counter  attacks. 

GERMAN  AVIATIK  DEFEATED. 

In  an  air  duel  fought  at  probably  the  highest  altitude  at 
which  aviators,  up  until  that  time,  had  met  in  combat,  nearly 
four  miles,  a  Canadian  triplane  pursued  and  defeated  a 
German  two-seated  Aviatik.  The  German  machine  had  sought 
safety  by  climbing  upward  and  the  triplane  pursued.  At  a 
height  of  20,000  feet  the  pilot  of  the  German  craft  either  fell 
or  jumped  from  it  and  disappeared  at  the  moment  of  the  first 
burst  of  fire  from  the  gun  on  the  Canadian.  The  German 
observer  then  was  seen  to  climb  out  upon  the  tail  of  the  machine, 
where  he  lost  his  hold  and  plunged  headlong.  The  Aviatik 
turned  its  nose  down  and  fell. 

It  is  meet  that  some  note  be  taken  of  the  fact  that  while 
the  Canadian  soldiers  were  battling  for  humanity  and  the 
preservation  of  the  British  Empire  in  Flanders  there  was 
being  celebrated  in  their  native  land  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of 
the  founding  of  the  Dominion.  All  Canada  took  part  in  the 
celebration  on  June  1,  1917,  as  did  large  numbers  of  men  from 
the  United  States  officers'  training  camp  at  Niagara,  where 
recruits  were  preparing  to  receive  Commissions  in  Uncle  Sam's 
Army. 

Up  until  1867  Canada  had  been  the  scene  of  bitter  strife 
between  the  French  and  British.  At  that  time  the  provinces 
were  brought  quite  closely  together,  and  commenced  a  new  era 
of  prosperity.  The  foundation  was  then  laid  for  a  wonderfully 
prosperous  country,  one  filled  with  almost  limitless  possibilities. 

The  confederation  of  Canada  had  its  birth  in  a  meeting  of 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  311 

delegates  from  all  over  British  North  America,  which  was  held 
in  1864,  and  these  delegates,  after  deliberating  for  nearly  three 
weeks,  passed  a  large  number  of  resolutions  which  formed  the 
basis  of  what  eventually  became  the  Act  of  Union.  In  the  f  ol- 
lowig  January  these  resolutions  were  submitted  to  the  Legis- 
lature of  Canada  and  after  due  debate  there  was  passed  in  both 
chambers  of  Parliament  a  measure  for  the  purpose  of  uniting 
the  provinces  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Quebec 
resolutions.    The  meeting  was  in  Quebec. 

PLAN  OF  UNION  PASSED. 

A  number  of  difficulties  were  encountered,  so  that  it  was 
1867  before  the  plan  of  union  was  submitted  to  the  Imperial 
Parliament,  where  it  was  warmly  received  and  passed  without 
alteration  of  any  description  within  a  few  days.  The  royal 
assent  was  given  on  March  29,  and  the  act  constituting  the  new 
Canada  went  into  effect  on  July  1,  which  day  has  since  become 
known  as  Dominion  Day,  and  is  the  chief  of  all  Canadian  holi- 
days. 

The  federal  Constitution  of  Canada  is  contained  in  an 
Imperial  Act  of  Parliament,  known  as  the  British  North 
America  Act,  and  it  is  based  very  largely  upon  that  of  the 
mother  country.  The  ministry  of  the  day  holds  office  at  the 
pleasure  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  members  of  which  are 
elected  by  the  people.  At  the  head  of  the  affairs  is  a  Governor- 
General,  who  is  appointed  by  the  crown  and  paid  by  the  people 
of  Canada.  As  is  the  case  with  the  British  sovereigns,  he  acts 
with  and  on  the  advice  of  the  ministers  for  the  time  being,  and 
also  like  the  King,  he  can  dissolve  the  Parliament. 

The  number  of  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  is 
regulated  by  the  following  clauses  of  the  act:  "On  the  comple- 
tion of  the  census  in  the  year  1871,  and  of  each  subsequent 
decennial  census,  the  representation  of  the  four  provinces  shall 
be  readjusted  by  such  authority  in  such  a  manner,  and  from 


312  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

such  time  as  the  Parliament  of  Canada  from  time  to  time  pro- 
vides. 

Previous  to  the  passing  of  the  British  North  America  Act, 
the  great  Dominion  had  consisted  of  a  conglomeration  of 
provinces,  some  of  them  of  almost  fabulous  extent,  into  which 
the  white  man  from  the  West  had  penetrated.  Tradition  has 
it  that  some  thousand  years  ago  a  Norseman,  by  name  Leif 
Ericson,  coming  in  his  great  beaked  galley,  through  the 
northern  seas,  from  Greenland,  was  the  first  white  man  to 
stand  on  Canadian  soil. 

Another  five  centuries  were,  however,  to  pass  before  John 
Cabot,  sailing  from  Bristol,  in  the  days  of  Henry  Bolingbroke, 
brought  the  first  British  ship  into  a  Canadian  port.  After  him 
the  fishermen  of  Europe  came  in  increasing  numbers  to  the 
great  banks,  with  the  result  that  little  by  little,  as  their  tiny 
vessels  touched  the  American  shores,  the  great  continent  began 
to  be  known  to  the  people  of  Europe. 

DOMINION'S  FOUNDATIONS  LAID. 

It  was  not  really,  however,  until  the  year  1534  that  the 
foundations  of  the  Dominion  may  be  said  to  have  been  sunk. 
In  that  year  Jacques  Cartier  sailed  from  the  port  of  St.  Malo, 
with  two  little  ships,  intending  to  attempt  the  northwest 
passage  to  Japan.  Francis  the  First  was  then  ruling  in  Paris, 
and  there  was  great  adventure  in  the  air  of  France.  Cartier 
did  not  make  the  northwest  passage,  but  he  did  touch  the  coast 
of  Canada,  or,  to  be  more  exact,  the  coasts  of  Labrador  and 
Newfoundland.  It  was  then  the  10th  of  Ma}'-,  and  having 
sailed  around  the  island,  he  steered  south,  and  crossing  the  gulf 
entered  the  bay  which,  by  reason  of  the  great  heats  of  midsum- 
mer, he  named  Des  Chaleurs.  Holding  along  the  coast,  he 
came  to  the  little  inlet  of  Gaspe,  and  here,  at  the  entrance  to 
the  harbor,  he  erected  a  huge  cross  surmounted  by  the  arms  and 
lilies  of  France.     He  could  find  no  passage,  however,  to  the 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  313 

northwest,  and  so  he  turned  his  ship,  and  sailed  back  to  St. 
Malo. 

The  Court  in  Paris  heard  his  story  with  interest.  His 
cause  was  taken  up  by  the  King;  and,  as  a  result,  in  the  suc- 
ceeding May,  he  sailed  again  to  the  new  world  with  three  well 
found  ships.  On  the  day  of  Saint  Lawrence  he  entered  the 
great  bay,  to  which  he  at  once  gave  the  name  of  the  Saint,  and 
passing  on  came,  in  September,  to  anchor  in  the  Isle  of  Orleans. 

REAL  FOUNDER  OF  CANADA. 

The  man,  however,  with  whose  name  the  early  history  of 
Canada  is  most  fully  connected,  had  not  as  yet  been  born.  Nor 
was  it  until  the  year  1567  that,  at  Erouage  in  Saintonge, 
Samuel  de  Champlain  came  upon  the  scene.  In  the  year  1603, 
when  Elizabeth  was  ruling  in  England,  and  Henry  of  Navarre 
in  France,  Champlain  came  to  Canada.  He  had  been  a  soldier 
of  le  Bearnais,  in  the  great  wars  with  the  League,  an  officer  of 
marine,  and  a  man  with  no  little  knowledge  of  natural  science, 
as  knowledge  was  then  accounted.  He  came  now  in  command 
of  an  expedition,  fitted  out  by  the  merchants  of  Rouen,  with 
the  idea  of  forming  a  Canada  company,  as  England  had  her 
Barbary  Company,  her  Eastland  Company,  her  Muscovie 
Company,  or  her  Turkey  Company.  And  in  this  way  the 
French  came  into  Canada. 

Thus  there  began  those  American  wars  between  the  two 
countries,  divided  at  home  only  by  the  English  Channel,  which 
went  on  century  by  century,  largely  through  the  employment 
of  the  Indian  tribes,  until  that  September  night  when  Wolfe's 
boats  drifted  in,  from  the  fleet  to  the  shore,  and  the  battle  on 
the  Plains  of  Abraham  permanently  settled  the  question  of 
domination  in  favor  of  the  British. 

The  British  conquest  of  Canada  did  not,  however,  mean  the 
cessation  of  fighting.  There  came,  presently,  the  war  between 
Great  Britain  and  the  American  colonies,  one  of  the  most  amaz- 
ing exploits  of  which  was  the  marvelous  march  of  Arnold  and 


314  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

Montgomery  through  the  forests  of  Maine  to  the  St.  Law- 
rence, ending  in  the  wonderful  siege,  of  the  year  1775,  and  the 
heroic  failure  to  storm  the  defenses  by  scaling  the  rocks  from 
the  river  bed.  Eventually  the  boundary  between  the  United 
States  and  the  British  possessions  was  settled  by  the  Treaty  of 
Paris,  in  1783,  just  twenty  years  after  an  earlier  Treaty  of 
Paris  had  recorded  the  surrender  of  Canada  by  France  to  Great 
Britain. 

CANADA,  FROM  COLONY  TO  DOMINION. 

For  the  last  century  and  a  half  the  story  of  Canada  has  been 
the  story  first  of  a  British  colony  and  then  of  a  British 
Dominion.  A  great  flood  of  new  colonists  had  come  into  the 
country  after  the  victory  of  the  States  in  the  War  of  Independ- 
ence, when  many  of  the  royalists  of  New  England  crossed  the 
border.  As  a  result,  there  had  grown  up  the  two  new  provinces 
of  Upper  Canada,  now  known  as  Ontario,  and  TsTew  Bruns- 
wick. The  relations  between  all  the  provinces  were,  however, 
far  from  harmonious,  with  the  result  that  what  between  quar- 
rels among  themselves  and  risings  against  the  British  author- 
ity, the  condition  of  Canada  was  anything  but  promising,  when, 
after  the  Rebellion  of  1837,  Lord  Durham  was  sent  over  to  try 
to  evolve  order  out  of  chaos. 

He  found  the  "habitant"  still  unreconciled  to  the  British 
rule;  he  found  a  condition  of  many  little  Pontiacs,  all  very 
much  as  was  that  famous  village  on  the  summer  evening  when 
Valmond  threw  the  hot  pennies  to  the  children,  as  the  auctioneer 
and  monsieur  le  cure  came  down  the  street;  he  found  another 
Canada  of  British  colonists  with  so  little  sympathy  for  the 
habitant,  that,  he  declared,  the  two  never  met  save  in  the  jury 
box,  and  there  only  to  obstruct  justice. 

It  was  then  that  Lord  Durham,  by  a  great  stroke  of  states- 
manship, brought  peace  to  Canada.  A  democratic  form  of 
representative  government  was  bestowed  on  the  people.  The 
division  of  Quebec  into  two  provinces,  which  the  habitant  had 


OUE  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  315 

desired  when  they  were  one,  and  resented  when  they  were  two, 
was  annulled,  with  the  result  that  the  ground  was  prepared  for 
the  union  which  was  to  come  just  thirty  years  later. 

Lord  Durham  made  history  and  made  a  nation,  for  the 
confederation,  when  it  came,  was  the  inevitable  superstructure 
built  upon  the  foundations  of  his  laying,  but  he  ruined  a  repu- 
tation. His  contempt  for  the  conventions  of  politics,  the  radi- 
calism of  his  methods,  his  failure  to  make  any  obeisance  to  the 
governmental  deities,  official  or  ex-official,  combined  with  his 
almost  superhuman  tactlessness,  gave  his  enemies  every  oppor- 
tunity they  could  desire. 

He  was  viciously  attacked,  and  finally  throwing  up  his 
mission,  returned  to  England  and  gave  up  politics. 

REPORT  NOT  TO  BE  DISPOSED  OF. 

The  good,  however,  men  do  lives  after  them.  Lord  Dur- 
ham's report,  drafted  for  him  by  two  master  hands,  those  of 
Charles  Buller  and  Edward  Wakefield,  could  not  be  disposed 
of  by  perfervid  orators  or  ill-informed  editors.  It  passes  into 
the  category  of  historic  and  illuminating  state  papers.  And, 
though  Lord  Durham  fell,  when,  on  the  first  of  July,  1867,  the 
British  North  America  Act  became  operative,  it  was  the  handle 
of  his  trowel  that  struck  that  great  cornerstone  of  liberty  and 
empire,  and  declared  it  well  and  truly  laid:  the  first  of  the 
Dominions,  now  having  a  population  of  approximately 
8,000,000. 

Thrown  upon  their  own  resources,  when  Great  Britain 
began  to  draw  in  its  loans  of  1911-12,  the  people  of  Canada 
were  temporarily  at  a  loss  as  to  how  to  meet  the  situation;  the 
hardships  which  followed,  however,  prepared  them  to  meet, 
with  resolute  determination,  the  greater  problems  that  crowded 
upon  them  in  1915-16.  Canada,  through  all  the  past,  had  been 
a  dependent  and  a  debtor  nation;  the  war  made  it  self-reliant, 
spurred  its  people  on  to  the  development  of  natural  resources, 
and  assured  them,  not  onlv  that  the  Dominion  could  stand 


316  OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY. 

alone,  but  that,  throughout  all  the  future,  it  can  be  a  pillar  of 
strength  to  the  Empire  and  to  democracy. 

There  were  times  when  she  was  threatened  by  more  than 
the  ordinary  difficulties  which  come  to  a  nation,  as  when  it 
became  necessary  in  1917  to  pass  a  Conscription  Act,  the  Pro- 
vince of  Quebec  threatened  to  secede.  Quebec  is  a  French  ter- 
ritory, and  it  was  a  matter  of  world-wide  comment  that  the 
volunteer  enlistments  for  the  Canadian  army  from  the  province 
were  insignificant. 

While  the  French  Canadians  were  proud  of  France  and 
their  cousins  across  the  seas,  they  were  opposed  to  being  com- 
pelled to  fight  for  England,  and  the  proposal  to  secede  was 
largely  advocated  by  the  French-Canadian  clergy. 
RECIPIENTS  OF  UNSTINTED  HONORS. 

Among  the  heroic  troops  that  faced  the  Germans  in 
Flanders  none  was  more  honored  in  all  Canada  and  England 
than  the  Princess  Patricia's  Light  Infantry.  Out  of  this  bat- 
talion, which  sailed  away  from  Canada's  shores  with  the  first 
expeditionary  force,  scarcely  one-fourth  of  the  proud  number 
lived  through  the  terrible  campaigns  of  Flanders,  in  which  the 
Dominion  forces  participated. 

The  battalion  constituted  what  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
most  efficient  military  units  in  Canada,  and  in  August,  1914, 
had  been  presented  with  colors  wrought  by  the  hand  of  Princess 
Patricia,  daughter  of  the  Governor  General  of  Canada,  the 
Duke  of  Connaught.  The  Princess,  standing  beside  her 
mother,  the  Duchess  of  Connaught,  in  Lansdowne  Park, 
Ottawa,  presented  the  colors  to  the  little  force,  wishing  them  a 
safe  return,  while  thousands  applauded  and  the  spirit  of  patri- 
otism ran  high. 

The  "Princess  Pats,"  as  they  came  to  be  known,  had  with- 
in the  organization  a  large  portion  of  men  of  military  experi- 
ence who  had  seen  service  in  South  Africa  and  elsewhere,  and 
consequently  when  they  landed  in  France  they  were  the  first  to 


OUR  NEIGHBORING  ALLY.  317 

be  sent  into  the  trenches  and  to  action.  In  the  winter  and 
spring  of  1914-15  they  had  some  bitter  experiences  and  parti- 
cipated in  several  desperate  attacks  and  defenses,  but  it  was 
not  until  the  campaign  at  Ypres  that  the  organization  was 
almost  annihilated,  when  it  faced  one  of  the  most  terrific  bom- 
bardments of  the  war,  and  fought  in  a  section  largely  cut  off 
from  the  main  line.  Here  Lieutenant- Colonel  Farquhar,  com- 
mander of  the  battalion,  lost  his  life  and  nearly  all  of  the  officers 
were  wounded. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE  HEROIC  ANZAC. 

FOBCES  THAT  STIBBED  THE  WOBLD  IN  THE  GaLLIPOLI  CAMPAIGNS — FAMOUS  AS   SAP- 

pebs — The  Blasting  of  Messines   Ridge — Two  Yeabs   Tunneling — 30,000 
Gebmans  Blown  to  Atoms — 1,000,000  Pounds  of  Explosives  Used — Tboops 

THAT   WEBE  TfiANSPOBTED  11,000  MlLES. 

WHEN  the  final  history  of  the  war  is  written,  and  the 
years  have  passed  into  ages,  the  story  of  the  Anzac  will 
form  a  brilliant  passage  in  the  book  of  nations.  The 
Anzac  in  the  campaigns  at  Gallipoli,  the  Dardanelles,  and  in 
Flanders  served  England  with  a  loyalty  and  heroism  not  excel- 
led by  any  other  force.  And  what  were  the  Anzacs?  They 
were  the  soldiers  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Xet  A  repre- 
sent Australia,  N.  Z.,  New  Zealand,  and  A.  C,  army  corps, 
and  you  have  the  basis  of  the  word  Anzac. 

Generally  in  the  news  dispatches,  the  Anzacs  have  been 
referred  to  as  Australians.  They  are  described  as  fearless,  dar- 
ing and  fierce  fighters,  whose  presence  added  pep  to  every 
engagement  in  which  they  participated.  No  more  picturesque 
group  has  ever  been  written  into  the  history  of  armies.  Com- 
posed of  men  who  were  bushrangers,  cattlemen,  miners  and 
hardy  outdoor  workers,  many  of  whom  served  in  Egypt,  India 
and  wherever  the  British  flag  floats,  their  character  is  indicated 
by  the  fact  that  they  have  been  at  times  called  the  "Ragtime 
Army." 

The  description  of  the  landing  of  these  troops  at  the  Dar- 
danelles, where  in  a  rain  of  artillery  fire,  they  dashed  into  the 
Turkish  trenches,  is  one  of  the  most  thrilling  of  the  war.  With 
the  shells  from  the  ships  falling  upon  the  Turkish  forces  the 
Anzacs  chased  the  Turks  step  by  step  inland,  engaging  in  the 
most  desperate  hand-to:hand  encounters. 

Perhaps  the  story  of  that  first  battle  might  have  been  dif- 
ferent had!  not   Turkish  reinforcements   appeared  upon  the 

318 


THE  HEKOIC  ANZAC.  319 

scene.  As  it  was  the  British  men  of  Anzac  were  temporarily 
driven  back,  retiring  with  terrible  loss.  For  hours  the  Austra- 
lians engaged  in  solid  fighting  through  a  broken  and  hilly 
country,  digging  at  night  to  establish  entrenchments,  with  a 
renewal  of  the  defense  at  daybreak,  and  then  repeating  the 
program.  This  is  what  the  Australians  and  New  Zealanders 
did,  living  upon  short  rations  the  while. 

In  all  of  the  campaigns  in  which  the  Angacs  have  parti- 
cipated their  work  as  sappers  has  been  a  feature.  Sappers,  by 
the  way,  are  those  men  who,  in  modern  warfare,  burrow  in  the 
earth,  planting  mines,  digging  trenches,  dugouts  and  fortifica- 
tions. The  Australians  are  fitted  for  this  work  for  a  large  per- 
centage of  them  had  civil  experience  in  the  mines,  and  on 
extensive  contract  and  excavation  work. 

AUSTRALIAN  AND  NEW  ZEALAND  SAPPERS. 

Probably  one  of  the  most  effective  attacks  of  the  English 
against  a  German  stronghold  in  Belgium  was  made  possible 
through  the  work  of  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  sappers. 
That  was  the  blowing  up  of  the  Messines  Ridge  in  June,  1917. 
In  this  action  the  Anzac  shone  in  a  manner  that  can  never  be 
forgotten. 

On  June  7, 1917,  the  British,  with  one  terrible  stroke,  tore 
asunder  the  strong  German  position  south  of  Ypres.  This 
stroke  was  in  a  little  corner  of  Belgium,  where  the  armies  of  the 
Allies  had  successfully  outgeneralled  the  enemy  for  two  and  a 
half  years. 

During  almost  two  years  of  this  time  several  companies 
of  Australian,  New  Zealand  and  British  sappers  were  busily 
but  silently  engaged  in  mining  the  hills  of  the  Messines- 
Wytschaete  Ridge,  on  which  were  the  guns  of  the  Germans 
which  had  been  raking  the  troops  of  the  Allies  all  this  time. 
Nineteen  great  mines  which  contained  a  total  of  1,000,000 
pounds  of  ammonite  upon  their  completion,  had  been  dug  into 
the  vitals  of  these  hills.    Great  charges  of  this  new  and  power- 


320  THE  HEROIC  ANZAC. 

ful  explosive  had  been  placed  in  the  mines  nearly  one  year 
before  their  completion,  yet  no  one  except  those  actually 
engaged  in  the  work  knew  of  it.  The  secret  was  kept  and  the 
troops  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand  worked  directly  beneath 
the  great  German  fortifications. 

Then  came  the  crucial  moment.  At  exactly  3.10  o'clock 
in  the  morning  of  June  7,  the  whole  series  of  mines  were  dis- 
charged by  electrical  contact,  and  the  hilltops  were  blown  high 
in  the  air  in  one  terrific  burst  of  flame,  which  poured  forth  as 
from  craters  of  volcanoes.  The  ground  for  miles  around  was 
rocked  as  in  an  earthquake,  and  the  roar  emitted  was  distinctly 
heard  in  England  by  Lloyd  George,  the  Prime  Minister,  listen- 
ing for  it  at  his  country  home  140  miles  away. 

A  PRE-ARRANGED  SIGNAL. 

The  explosion  of  the  mines  was  a  pre-arranged  signal  for 
the  beginning  of  a  heavy  shell  fire  by  the  artillery.  The  whole 
section  affected  by  the  mines  was  subjected  to  a  most  intense 
shellfire,  and  following  up  this  death-dealing  storm  came  the 
troops  of  General  Haig,  under  Sir  Herbert  Plumer,  who  fin- 
ished the  work  of  the  great  mines  and  big  guns  with  a  brilliant 
charge  of  men,  who  used  rifle  and  bayonet  most  effectively. 
Within  a  few  hours  the  whole  of  the  Messines  Ridge  was 
securely  in  the  hands  of  the  British,  and  they  had  captured  7000 
prisoners  and  many  guns.  The  German  casualties  were  esti- 
mated at  30,000,  those  of  the  British  being  about  10,000. 

Rushing  the  whole  sector  south  of  Ypres,  from  Observa- 
tion Ridge  to  Ploegsteert  Wood,  north  of  Armentieres,  the 
British  forces  succeeded  in  capturing  that  position  with  little 
loss.  Then  came  the  assault  of  the  rear  defenses,  which  were 
formed  by  the  ridge  itself.  The  natural  formation  of  the  land 
greatly  helped  the  Germans  in  arranging  their  defenses,  and  the 
fighting  was  very  fierce.  The  work  of  British  troops,  in  which 
were  many  Australians  and  New  Zealanders,  together  with 
English  and  Irish,  all  under  the  command  of  General  Sir 


THE  HEROIC  ANZAC.  321 

Herbert  CO.  Plumer,  was  given  great  credit  in  the  reports  of 
the  commander  to  the  War  Office. 

The  British  War  Office  summarized  the  attack  as  follows 
in  its  report  of  June  8 : 

"The  position  captured  by  us  yesterday  was  one  of  the 
enemy's  most  important  strongholds  on  the  western  front. 
Dominating  as  it  did  the  Ypres  salient  and  giving  the  enemy 
complete  observation  over  it,  he  neglected  no  precautions  to 
render  the  position  impregnable.  These  conditions  enabled  the 
enemy  to  overlook  all  our  preparations  for  attack,  and  he  had 
moved  up  reinforcements  to  meet  us.  The  battle,  therefore, 
became  a  gauge  of  the  ability  of  the  German  troops  to  stop  our 
advance  under  conditions  as  favorable  to  them  as  an  army  can 
ever  hope  for,  with  every  advantage  of  ground  and  preparation 
and  with  the  knowledge  that  an  attack  was  impending. 

GERMAN  FORWARD  DEFENSE. 

"The  German  forward  defenses  consisted  of  an  elaborate 
and  intricate  system  of  well-wired  trenches  and  strong  points 
forming  a  defensive  belt  over  a  mile  in  depth.  Numerous 
farms  and  woods  were  thoroughly  prepared  for  the  defense, 
and  there  were  large  numbers  of  machine  guns  in  the  German 
garrisons.  Guns  of  all  calibers,  recently  increased  in  numbers, 
were  placed  to  bear  not  only  on  the  front  but  on  the  flanks  of  an 
attack.  Numerous  communicating  trenches  and  switch  lines, 
radiating  in  all  directions,  were  amply  provided  with  strongly 
constructed  concrete  dugouts  and  machine-gun  emplacements 
designed  to  protect  the  enemy  garrison  and  machine  gunners 
from  the  effect  of  our  bombardment.  In  short,  no  precaution 
was  omitted  that  could  be  provided  by  the  incessant  labor  of 
years,  guided  by  the  experience  gained  by  the  enemy  in  his 
previous  defeats  on  the  Somme,  at  Arras,  and  on  Vimy  Ridge. 

"Despite  the  difficulties  and  disadvantages  which  our 
troops  had  to  overcome,  further  details  of  yesterday's  fighting 
show  that  our  first  assault  and  the  subsequent  attacks  were  car- 

HE— 21 


322  THE  HEBOIC  ANZAC. 

ried  out  in  almost  exact  accordance  with  the  timetable  pre- 
viously arranged.     *     *     * 

"Following  on  the  great  care  and  thoroughness  in  prepara- 
tions made  under  the  orders  of  General  Sir  Herbert  Plumer, 
the  complete  success  gained  may  be  ascribed  chiefly  to  the 
destruction  caused  by  our  mines,  to  the  violence  and  accuracy 
of  our  bombardment,  to  the  very  fine  work  of  the  Royal  Flying 
Corps,  and  to  the  incomparable  dash  and  courage  of  the  infan- 
try. The  whole  force  acted  in  perfect  combination.  Excellent 
work  was  done  by  the  tanks,  and  every  means  of  offense  at  our 
disposal  was  made  use  of,  so  that  every  arm  of  the  service  had  a 
share  in  the  victory." 

A  good  description  of  the  Australian  soldier,  as  he  follows 
up  his  victory,  was  given  in  a  story  of  an  American  war  corre- 
spondent, who  wrote  concerning  Flanders : 

NEW  LAND  OF  WARFARE. 

"After  these  many  months  of  trench  warfare  there  is  keen 
delight  for  the  Australian  soldier  in  this  new  land  of  warfare 
which  the  German  retirement  has  opened  up.  The  fighting  is 
in  open  country  now,  over  gently  rolling  downs  of  what  looks 
like  grass  land.  It  is  really  most  of  it  wheat  or  turnip  land 
which  has  not  been  cultivated  for  a  year  or  two.  The  country  is 
as  open  as  the  Australian  central  plains. 

"It  is  quite  a  new  sort  of  battlefield  for  the  Australians. 
They  march  down  to  it  through  valleys  almost  exactly  like  the 
valleys  in  the  peaceful  parts  of  France.  There  are  whole  acres 
in  which  one  cannot  see  a  single  shell  hoje.  Back  across  the 
green  country  or  down  the  open  roads  come  men  in  twos  or 
threes  occasionally,  sauntering  as  one  might  find  them  on  a 
country  road.  They  are  the  wounded  helping  one  another 
back  to  the  dressing  station.  The  walking  wounded  have  to 
help  each  other  back  in  these  modern  battles.  It  is  no  longer 
looked  upon  as  meritorious  for  an  unwounded  combatant  to 
leave  the  field  and  help  a  wounded  comrade  to  the  rear. 


THE  HEROIC  ANZAC.  323 

"Nearest  the  front  the  country  becomes  more  feverish. 
Angry  bursts  of  tawny  color  are  seen  in  a  haphazard  sort  of 
way  dotting  the  horizon  and  the  countryside.  Here  and  there 
are  Australians  standing  behind  mounds  of  earth  with  their 
rifles  pointed  over  the  top,  bayonets  always  fixed.  Frequently, 
when  there  is  no  other  shelter  there  are  hastily  scooped  trenches. 
A  quarter  of  a  mile  away  another  party  is  lining  a  roadside,  flat 
on  their  stomachs  in  the  ditch,  bayonets  peeping  over  the  top. 
Shells  are  whizzing  by  at  the  rate  of  two  or  three  a  minute,  high 
explosives  bursting  on  contact  behind  their  backs  about  as  far 
away  as  the  other  side  of  a  cottage  parlor. 

PRISONER  AND  ESCORT. 

"Frequently  one  meets  a  prisoner  being  escorted  to  the 
rear.  There  is  something  very  impressive  about  these  little  pro-i 
cessions  of  two  men,  prisoner  and  escort.  The  prisoner,  usually 
a  young  German  private  in  neat  gray  uniform  and  steel  helmet, 
walks  in  front.  After  him,  grasping  his  rifle  with  both  hands 
across  his  chest,  his  weatherbeaten  brows  puckered  as  he  picks 
his  way  over  the  tumbled  stones,  comes  the  living  embodiment 
of  the  Australian  back  country.  Nine  cases  out  of  ten,  some- 
how, the  soldier  who  escorts  a  prisoner  seems  to  be  that  bit  of 
pure  Australian,  either  Western  Australia  or  South  Australia, 
the  Warrego  or  the  Burdskin. 

"He  is  an  earnest  man,  intent  on  executing  his  errand  with 
dispatch  and  exactitude.  'Can  you  tell  me  the  way  to  head- 
quarters?' he  asks  as  he  passes.  Then  he  disappears  slowly  up 
the  street  on  the  heels  of  his  silent  companion. 

"These  Australians  are  just  as  good  fighters  in  this  new 
warfare  as  they  were  at  Gallipoli  or  in  the  trenches,  perhaps 
even  better.  They  had  their  first  encounter  with  German 
cavalry  the  other  day,  but  it  was  only  a  feint  at  a  flank  and 
lasted  but  a  few  minutes." 

"Australia  is  ambitious,  some  might  even  say  self -centered, 
and  Germany  undoubtedly  made  the  mistake  of  considering 


324  THE  HEROIC  ANZAC. 

that  Australia  was  awaiting  a  chance  to  become  unfriendly  to 
Great  Britain  when  she  started  to  fight.  But  no  nation  ever 
made  a  greater  mistake.  As  soon  as  the  House  of  Hohenzol- 
lern  placed  the  mother  country  in  a  perilous  position  Australia 
was  at  the  command  of  Great  Britain.  Notwithstanding  the 
fact  that  the  Australians  are  primarily  peace-loving,  most  in- 
tent on  attending  to  their  own  affairs,  the  response  to  the  call 
was  immediate  and  whole-hearted. 

AUSTRALIA'S  COMMENDABLE  PROMPTNESS. 

The  Australian  centers  buzzed  with  activity,  and  within 
two  months  after  war  was  declared  the  Australian  fleet,  which 
consisted  of  five  unarmored  cruisers,  three  torpedo-boat 
destroyers,  and  three  light  gunboats,  which  had  been  built  and 
manned  at  the  expense  of  the  Australians,  were  in  possession  of 
the  German  Pacific  Islands — Samoa,  Marshall,  Carolines, 
Pelew,  Ladrones,  New  Guinea,  New  Britain — had  broken  the 
wireless  system  of  the  Germans,  and  had  captured  eleven  of  the 
vessels  of  Germany.  She  also  forced  twenty-five  other  ships 
to  intern,  and  prevented  the  destruction  of  a  British  ship  in 
Australian  waters. 

Then  came  the  scouring  of  the  seas  by  the  German  ship 
Emden,  and  her  trip  to  Australian  waters,  with  the  object  of 
carrying  on  the  work  of  destruction  which  had  marked  her 
career  in  South  American  waters.  She  lay  in  wait  for  Aus* 
tralian  transports,  with  the  result  that  the  Australian  warship 
Sydney  sent  her  to  the  bottom  but  three  months  after  war  had 
been  declared.  Shortly  after  this  the  Australian  fleet  drove 
von  Spree's  squadron  from  the  Pacific  directly  into  the  trap  set 
by  Admiral  Sturdee  at  the  Falkland  Islands. 

The  fact  that  all  the  troops  of  Australia  must  be  trans- 
ported to  London — a  distance  via  the  Suez  route  of  approxi- 
mately 11,000  miles,  and  through  the  Panama  Canal  of  12,734 
miles — did  not  keep  back  these  brave  men  from  quickly  enlist- 
ing.    The  great  distance  made  fighting  extremely  expensive. 


THE  HEROIC  ANZAC.  325 

but  the  task  was  loyally  assumed  by  the  military  of  the  far  con- 
tinent. Universal  military  service  was  inaugurated  for  the  first 
time  by  an  English-speaking  community,  and  war  loans  were 
offered  and  quickly  accepted.  Transports  were  immediately 
constructed  out  of  seventy  steamers  which  were  requisitioned. 
At  the  declaration  of  war  in  November,  1914,  the  entire 
Australian  army,  which  consisted  of  20,000  men,  left  Australia 
for  Egypt,  and  at  the  end  of  the  first  year  of  the  conflict  there 
were  76,000  men  in  the  field.  By  July,  1916,  nearly  300,000 
volunteers  had  been  recruited  and  had  crossed  the  seas.  The 
creation,  equipment,  and  supplying  of  this  army  by  the  people 
of  Australia,  a  task  involving  enormous  cost  and  personal  sac- 
rifice, constitutes  a  thrilling  chapter  in  the  history  of  loyalty. 

GEOGRAPHICALLY  ALIKE. 

To  those  who  think  that  Australia  is  a  little  island  situated 
in  the  Pacific  ocean  it  might  be  interesting  to  know  that  this 
continent,  in  size  and  shape,  is  almost  the  exact  duplicate  of  the 
United  States.  There  are  also  outlying  provinces,  that  of 
Papua,  a  tropical  land,  offsetting  Alaska.  Then  there  is  the 
rich  little  Lord  Howe  Island,  and  Norfolk  Island.  The  sur- 
face of  Australia  is  the  most  level  in  surface  and  regular  in 
outline  of  all  the  continents,  and  is  the  lowest  continent,  with 
an  average  elevation  of  Ohio. 

There  are  2,974,581  square  miles  in  Australia,  while  the 
land  area  of  the  United  States  is  2,973,890  square  miles,  a  dif- 
ference of  691  square  miles.  This,  of  course,  is  only  the  con- 
tinental United  States.  Only  about  one-twentieth  of  the  total 
area  of  Australia  lies  in  a  latitude  farther  removed  from  the 
Equator  than  Chattanooga,  Tennessee ;  Clarendon,  Texas ;  and 
Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  and  there  is  less  than  one-third  of 
the  area  of  this  unique  continent  which  lies  in  a  cooler  latitude 
than  the  sugar-cane  lands  of  Louisiana. 

The  streams  of  Australia  are  fewer  and  carry  less  water 
than  those  of  any  other  continent.     The  heart  of  this  great 


326  THE  HEROIC  ANZAC. 

island  is  dry  and  barren  and  thinly  populated.  Most  of  the 
inhabitants  are  found  within  easy  reach  of  the  coastline.  The 
population  of  this  great  land,  at  the  census  of  1911,  was  4,568,- 
707  persons. 

New  Zealand  is  situated  a  little  more  than  1200  miles  to 
the  east  of  Sydney,  which  is  in  the  southeastern  section  of 
Australia.  It  consists  of  three  fairly  large  islands,  together 
with  a  number  of  small  adjacent  islands.  The  area  is  105,340 
square  miles,  the  population  being,  in  1911,  815,862.  The 
surface  of  the  principal  islands  is  diversified,  being  mountainous 
in  some  parts,  and  undulating  in  others.  The  best  harbors 
are  in  the  northern  district. 


CHAPTER  XX 

AMERICA  STEPS  IK 

President  Wilson's  Famous  Message  to  Congress — The  War  Resolution — 
April  6,  1917  Sees  the  United  States  at  War — Review  of  the  Negotia- 
tions Between  Germany  and  America — The  U-Boat  Restricted  Zone  An- 
nouncement of  Germany — Premier  Lloyd  George  on  America  in  the  Con- 
flict. 

THE  hoisting  of  the  American  flag  to  the  top  of  the  staff 
as  the  emblem  of  world-wide  Liberty  followed  the  action 

of  Congress  in  authorizing  President  Wilson  to  declare  a 
state  of  war  existed  between  Germany  and  the  United  States. 
What  the  conditions  were  which  developed  during  the  months 
in  which  Germany  to  all  intents  and  purposes  "laughed  up  her 
sleeve"  at  the  United  States,  ignored  our  protests  against  her 
wanton  disregard  of  human  rights  on  land  and  sea,  can  no  bet- 
ter be  told  than  in  the  words  of  President  Wilson  himself  in 
his  message  stating  the  position  which  the  Government  took. 

His  message  to  Congress  will  go  down  in  history,  not  only 
as  an  instrument  of  world-wide  importance,  but  as  a  classic  in 
literature.  Its  effect  on  the  Nations  was  greater  than  that  of 
any  other  message  issued  by  any  one  country,  probably  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  and  while  there  were  critics  who  regarded 
some  of  President  Wilson's  utterances  as  too  idealistic,  time 
proved  that  his  vision  was  greater  than  that  of  those  who  criti- 
cised him,  and  within  a  short  time  the  eyes  of  the  entire  world 
were  turned  toward  Washington,  which  became  the  active 
centre  from  which  the  campaign  for  world-wide  democracy  was 
waged. 

The  hands  of  Liberty  stretched  out  to  Russia,  Serbia, 
Italy,  France,  Belgium,  England,  little  Montenegro,  and  they 
were  given  help  in  the  most  critical  periods  of  their  careers. 
The  President's  message  was  presented  to  Congress  on  April 
3,  1917,  as  follows: 

"I  have  called  the  Congress  into  extraordinary  session  be- 

327 


328  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

cause  there  are  serious,  very  serious,  choices  of  policy  to  be 
made,  and  made  immediately,  which  it  was  neither  right  nor 
constitutionally  permissible  that  I  should  assume  the  responsi- 
bility of  making. 

"On  the  third  of  February  last  I  officially  laid  before  you 
the  extraordinary  announcement  of  the  Imperial  German  Gov- 
ernment that  on  and  after  the  first  day  of  February  it  was  its 
purpose  to  put  aside  all  restraints  of  law  or  of  humanity  and 
use  its  submarines  to  sink  every  vessel  that  sought  to  approach 
either  the  ports  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  or  the  western 
coasts  of  Europe  or  any  of  the  ports  controlled  by  the  enemies 
of  Germany  within  the  Mediterranean. 

COMMANDERS  UNDER  RESTRAINT. 

"That  had  seemed  to  be  the  object  of  the  German  sub- 
marine warfare  earlier  in  the  war,  but  since  April  of  last  year 
the  Imperial  Government  had  somewhat  restrained  the  com- 
manders of  its  undersea  craft  in  conformity  with  its  promise 
then  given  to  us  that  passenger  boats  should  not  be  sunk  and 
that  due  warning  would  be  given  to  all  other  vessels  which  its 
submarines  might  seek  to  destroy  when  no  resistance  was  of- 
fered or  escape  attempted,  and  care  taken  that  their  crews  were 
given  at  least  a  fair  chance  to  save  their  lives  in  their  open  boats. 

"The  precautions  taken  were  meager  and  haphazard 
enough,  as  was  proved  in  distressing  instance  after  instance  in 
the  progress  of  the  cruel  and  unmanly  business ;  but  a  certain 
degree  of  restraint  was  observed. 

"The  new  policy  has  swept  every  restriction  aside.  Vessels 
of  every  kind,  whatever  their  flag,  their  character,  their  cargo, 
their  destination,  their  errand,  have  been  ruthlessly  sent  to  the 
bottom  without  warning  and  without  thought  of  help  or  mercy 
for  those  on  board,  the  vessels  of  friendly  neutrals  along  with 
those  of  belligerents. 

"Even  hospital  ships  and  ships  carrying  relief  to  the  sorely 
bereaved  and  stricken  people  of  Belgium,  though  the  latter 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  329 

were  provided  with  safe-conduct  through  the  prescribed  areas 
by  the  German  Government  itself  and  were  distinguished  by 
unmistakable  marks  of  identity,  have  been  sunk  with  the  same 
reckless  lack  of  compassion  or  of  principle. 

"I  was  for  a  little  while  unable  to  believe  that  such  things 
would  in  fact  be  done  by  any  government  that  had  hitherto 
subscribed  to  the  humane  practices  of  civilized  nations.  Inter- 
national law  had  its  origin  in  the  attempt  to  set  up  some  law 
which  would  be  respected  and  observed  upon  the  seas,  where 
no  nation  had  the  right  of  domination  and  where  lay  the  free 
highways  of  the  world. 

"By  painful  stage  after  stage  has  that  law  been  built  up, 
with  meager  enough  results,  indeed,  after  all  was  accomplished 
that  could  be  accomplished,  but  always  with  a  clear  view,  at 
least,  of  what  the  heart  and  conscience  of  mankind  demanded. 

SWEEPS  RIGHT  ASIDE. 

"This  minimum  of  right  the  German  Government  has 
swept  aside  under  the  plea  of  retaliation  and  necessity  and  be- 
cause it  had  no  weapons  which  it  could  use  at  sea  except  those 
which  it  is  impossible  to  employ  as  it  is  employing  them  with- 
out throwing  to  the  winds  all  scruples  of  humanity  or  of  respect 
for  the  understandings  that  were  supposed  to  underlie  the  in- 
tercourse of  the  world. 

"I  am  not  now  thinking  of  the  loss  of  property  involved, 
immense  and  serious  as  this  is,  but  only  of  the  wanton  and 
wholesale  destruction  of  the  lives  of  noncombatants,  men, 
women  and  children,  engaged  in  pursuits  which  have  always, 
even  in  the  darkest  periods  of  modern  history,  been  deemed 
innocent  and  legitimate.  Property  can  be  paid  for;  the  lives 
of  peaceful  and  innocent  people  cannot  be. 

"The  present  German  submarine  warfare  against  com- 
merce is  a  warfare  against  mankind.  It  is  a  war  against  all 
nations.  American  ships  have  been  sunk,  American  lives  taken, 
in  ways  which  it  has  stirred  us  very  deeply  to  learn  of,  but  the 


330  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

ships  and  people  of  other  neutral  and  friendly  nations  have 
been  sunk  and  overwhelmed  in  the  waters  in  the  same  way. 
There  has  been  no  discrimination.  The  challenge  is  to  all  man- 
kind.    Each  nation  must  decide  for  itself  how  it  will  meet  it. 

"The  choice  we  make  for  ourselves  must  be  made  with  a 
moderation  of  counsel  and  a  temperateness  of  judgment  be- 
fitting our  character  and  our  motives  as  a  nation.  We  must 
put  excited  feeling  away.  Our  motive  will  not  be  revenge  or 
the  victorious  assertion  of  the  physical  might  of  the  nation,  but 
only  the  vindication  of  human  right,  of  which  we  are  only  a 
single  champion. 

ARMED  NEUTRALITY  IMPRACTICABLE. 

"When  I  addressed  the  Congress  on  the  twenty-sixth  of 
February  last  I  thought  it  would  suffice  to  assert  our  neutral 
rights  with  arms,  our  right  to  use  the  seas  against  unlawful 
interference,  our  right  to  keep  our  people  safe  against  unlaw- 
ful violence.  But  armed  neutrality,  it  now  appears,  is  imprac- 
ticable. 

"Because  submarines  are  in  effect  outlaws  when  used  as 
the  German  submarines  have  been  used  against  merchant  ship- 
ping, it  is  impossible  to  defend  ships  against  their  attacks  as 
the  law  of  nations  has  assumed  that  merchantmen  would  defend 
themselves  against  privateers  or  cruisers,  visible  craft  giving 
chase  upon  the  open  sea.  It  is  common  prudence  in  such  cir- 
cumstances, grim  necessity,  indeed,  to  endeavor  to  destroy  them 
before  they  have  shown  their  own  intention.  They  must  be 
dealt  with  upon  sight,  if  dealt  with  at  all. 

"The  German  Government  denies  the  right  of  neutrals 
to  use  arms  at  all  within  the  areas  of  the  sea  which  it  has  pro- 
scribed, even  in  the  defense  of  rights  which  no  modern  publicist 
has  ever  questioned  their  right  to  defend.  The  intimation  is 
conveyed  that  the  armed  guards  which  we  have  placed  on  our 
merchant  ships  will  be  treated  as  beyond  the  pale  of  law  and 
subject  to  be  dealt  with  as  pirates  would  be. 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  331 

"Armed  neutrality  is  ineffectual  enough  at  best;  in  such 
circumstances  and  in  the  face  of  such  pretensions  it  is  worse 
than  ineffectual ;  it  is  likely  once  to  produce  what  it  was  meant 
to  prevent ;  it  is  virtually  certain  to  draw  us  into  the  war  with- 
out either  the  rights  or  the  effectiveness  of  belligerents. 

"There  is  one  choice  we  cannot  make,  we  are  incapable 

of  making ;  we  will  not  choose  the  path  of  submission  and  suffer 

the  most  sacred  rights  of  our  nation  and  our  people  to  be 

ignored  or  violated.    The  wrongs  against  which  we  now  array 

ourselves  are  not  common  wrongs;  they  cut  to  the  very  roots 

of  human  life. 

A  CONSTITUTIONAL  DUTY. 

"With  a  profound  sense  of  the  solemn  and  even  tragical 
character  of  the  step  I  am  taking  and  of  the  grave  responsi- 
bilities which  it  involves,  but  in  unhesitating  obedience  to  what 
I  deem  my  constitutional  duty,  I  advise  that  the  Congress 
declare  the  recent  course  of  the  Imperial  German  Government 
to  be  in  fact  nothing  less  than  war  against  the  Government  and 
people  of  the  United  States ;  that  it  formally  accept  the  status 
of  belligerent  which  has  thus  been  thrust  upon  it  and  that  it 
take  immediate  steps  not  only  to  put  the  country  in  a  more 
thorough  state  of  defense,  but  also  to  exert  all  its  power  and 
employ  all  its  resources  to  bring  the  Government  of  the  Ger- 
man Empire  to  terms  and  end  the  war. 

"What  this  will  involve  is  clear.  It  will  involve  the  utmost 
practicable  co-operation  in  counsel  and  action  with  the  Govern- 
ments now  at  war  with  Germany,  and  as  incident  to  that,  the 
extension  to  those  Governments  of  the  most  liberal  financial 
credits,  in  order  that  our  resources  may,  so  far  as  possible,  be 
added  to  theirs.  It  will  involve  the  organization  and  mobiliza- 
tion of  all  the  material  resources  of  the  country  to  supply  the 
material  of  war  and  serve  the  incidental  needs  of  the  nation  in 
the  most  abundant  and  yet  the  most  economical  and  efficient 
way  possible. 


332  AMEEICA  STEPS  IN. 

"It  will  involve  the  immediate  full  equipment  of  the  navy 
in  all  respects,  but  particularly  in  supplying  it  with  the  best 
means  of  dealing  with  the  enemy's  submarines.  It  will  involve 
the  immediate  addition  to  the  armed  forces  of  the  United  States 
already  provided  for  by  law  in  case  of  war  at  least  500,000 
men,  who  should,  in  my  opinion,  be  chosen  upon  the  principle 
of  universal  liability  to  service,  and  also  the  authorization  of 
subsequent  additional  increments  of  equal  force  so  soon  as  they 
may  be  needed  and  can  be  handled  in  training. 
WELL-CONCEIVED  TAXATION. 

"It  will  involve,  also,  of  course,  the  granting  of  adequate 
credits  to  the  Government,  sustained,  I  hope,  so  far  as  they  can 
equitably  be  sustained  by  the  present  generation,  by  well-con- 
ceived taxation.  I  say  sustained  so  far  as  may  be  equitably 
by  taxation  because  it  seems  to  me  that  it  would  be  most  unwise 
to  base  the  credits  which  will  now  be  necessary  entirely  on 
money  borrowed.  It  is  our  duty,  I  most  respectfully  urge,  to 
protect  our  people  so  far  as  we  may  against  the  very  serious 
hardships  and  evils  which  would  be  likely  to  arise  out  of  the 
inflation  which  would  be  produced  by  vast  loans. 

"In  carrying  out  the  measures  by  which  these  things  are 
to  be  accomplished  we  should  keep  constantly  in  mind  the  wis- 
dom of  interfering  as  little  as  possible  in  our  own  preparation 
and  in  the  equipment  of  our  own  military  forces  with  the  duty 
— for  it  will  be  a  very  practical  duty — of  supplying  the  nations 
already  at  war  with  Germany  with  the  materials  which  they 
can  obtain  only  from  us  by  our  assistance.  They  are  in  the 
field  and  we  should  help  them  in  every  way  to  be  effective  there. 

"I  shall  take  the  liberty  of  suggesting,  through  the  several 
executive  departments  of  the  Government,  for  the  considera- 
tion of  your  committees  measures  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
several  objects  I  have  mentioned.  I  hope  that  it  will  be  your 
pleasure  to  deal  with  them  as  having  been  framed  after  very 
careful  thought  by  the  branch  of  the  Government  upon  which 


AMERICA  STEPS  IS.  333 

the  responsibility  of  conducting  the  war  and  safeguarding  the 
nation  will  most  directly  fall. 

"While  we  do  these  things — these  deeply  momentous 
things — let  us  be  very  clear,  and  make  very  clear  to  all  the 
world,  what  our  motives  and  our  objects  are.  My  own  thought 
has  not  been  driven  from  its  habitual  and  normal  course  by  the 
unhappy  events  of  the  last  two  months,  and  I  do  not  believe 
that  the  thought  of  the  nation  has  been  altered  or  clouded  by 
them. 

FIRM  STAND  FOR  VINDICATION. 

"I  have  exactly  the  same  things  in  mind  now  that  I  had  in 
mind  when  I  addressed  the  Senate  on  the  twenty-second  of 
January  last;  the  same  that  I  had  in  mind  when  I  addressed 
the  Congress  on  the  third  of  February  and  on  the  twenty-sixth 
of  Februaiy.  Our  object  now,  as  then,  is  to  vindicate  the 
principles  of  peace  and  justice  in  the  life  of  the  world  against 
selfish  and  autocratic  power  and  to  set  up  among  the  really 
free  and  self-governed  peoples  of  the  world  such  a  concert  of 
purpose  and  action  as  will  henceforth  insure  the  observance  of 
those  principles. 

£CXeutralitv  is  no  longer  feasible  or  desirable  where  the 
peace  of  the  world  is  involved  and  the  freedom  of  its  peoples 
and  the  menace  to  that  peace  and  freedom  lies  in  the  existence 
of  autocratic  governments  backed  by  organized  force  which  is 
controlled  wholly  by  their  will,  not  by  the  will  of  their  people. 
We  have  seen  the  last  of  neutrality  in  such  circumstances. 

''We  are  at  the  beginning  of  an  age  in  which  it  will  be 
insisted  that  the  same  standards  of  conduct  and  of  responsi- 
bility for  wrongdoing  shall  be  observed  among  nations  and 
their  Governments  that  are  observed  among  the  individual 
citizens  of  civilized  States. 

"We  have  no  quarrel  with  the  German  people.  We  have 
no  feeling  toward  them  but  one  of  sympathy  and  friendship. 
It  was  not  upon  their  impulse  that  their  Government  acted  in 


334  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

entering  this  war.     It  was  not  with  their  previous  knowledge 
or  approval. 

"It  was  a  war  determined  upon  as  wars  used  to  be  deter- 
mined upon  in  the  old,  unhappy  days  when  peoples  were  no- 
where consulted  by  their  rulers  and  wars  were  provoked  and 
waged  in  the  interest  of  dynasties  or  of  little  groups  of  am- 
bitious men  who  were  accustomed  to  use  their  fellow-men  as 
pawns  and  tools. 

"Self -governed  nations  do  not  fill  their  neighbor  States 
with  spies,  or  set  the  course  of  intrigue  to  bring  about  some 
critical  posture  of  affairs  which  will  give  them  an  opportunity 
to  strike  and  make  conquest.  Such  designs  can  be  successfully 
worked  out  only  under  cover  and  where  no  one  has  the  right  to 
ask  questions. 

PRECONCEIVED  DECEPTION. 

"Cunningly  contrived  plans  of  deception  or  aggression 
carried  it  may  be  from  generation  to  generation,  can  be  worked 
out  and  kept  from  the  light  only  within  the  privacy  of  courts 
or  behind  the  carefully  guarded  confidences  of  a  narrow,  privi- 
leged class.  They  are  happily  impossible  where  public  opinion 
commands  and  insists  upon  full  information  concerning  all  the 
nation's  affairs. 

"A  steadfast  concert  for  peace  can  never  be  maintained 
except  by  a  partnership  of  democratic  nations.  No  autocratic 
Government  could  be  trusted  to  keep  faith  within  it  or  observe 
its  covenants.  It  must  be  a  league  of  honor,  a  partnership  of 
opinion.  Intrigue  would  eat  its  vitals  away;  the  plotting  of 
inner  circles  who  could  plan  what  they  would  and  render  ac- 
count to  no  one  would  be  a  corruption  seated  at  its  very  heart. 
Only  free  peoples  can  hold  their  purpose  and  their  honor  steady 
to  a  common  end  and  prefer  the  interests  of  mankind  to  any 
narrow  interest  of  their  own. 

Does  not  every  American  feel  that  assurance  has  been 
added  to  our  hope  for  the  future  peace  of  the  world  by  the 


AMERICA  STEPS  IK  335 

wonderful  and  heartening  things  that  have  been  happening 
within  the  last  few  weeks  in  Russia?  Russia  was  known  by 
those  who  know  it  best  to  have  been  always  in  fact  democratic 
at  heart  in  all  the  vital  habits  of  her  thought,  in  all  the  intimate 
relationships  of  her  people  that  spoke  their  natural  instinct, 
their  habitual  attitude  toward  life. 

POLITICAL  AUTOCRACY. 

"The  autocracy  that  crowned  the  summit  of  her  political 
structure,  long  as  it  had  stood  and  terrible  as  was  the  reality 
of  its  power,  was  not,  in  fact,  Russian  in  origin,  character  or 
purpose ;  and  now  it  has  been  shaken  off  and  the  great,  gener- 
ous Russian  people  have  been  added  in  all  their  native  majesty 
and  might  to  the  forces  that  are  fighting  for  freedom  in  the 
world,  for  justice  and  for  peace.  Here  is  a  fit  partner  for  a 
league  of  honor. 

"One  of  the  things  that  have  served  to  convince  us  that 
the  Prussian  autocracy  was  not  and  could  never  be  our  friend, 
is  that  from  the  very  outset  of  the  present  war  it  has  filled 
our  unsuspecting  communities  and  even  our  offices  of  Govern- 
ment with  spies  and  set  criminal  intrigues  everywhere  afoot 
against  our  national  unity  and  counsel,  our  peace  within  and 
without  our  industries  and  our  commerce. 

"Indeed,  it  is  now  evident  that  its  spies  were  here  even 
before  the  war  began ;  and  it  is  unhappily  not  a  matter  of  con- 
jecture,  but  a  fact  proved  in  our  courts  of  justice,  that  the 
intrigues  which  have  more  than  once  come  perilously  near  to 
disturbing  the  peace  and  dislocating  the  industries  of  the  coun- 
try have  been  carried  on  at  the  instigation,  with  the  support, 
and  even  under  the  personal  direction  of  official  agents  of  the 
Imperial  Government  accredited  to  the  Government  of  the 
United  States. 

"Even  in  checking  these  things  and  trying  to  extirpate 
them,  we  have  sought  to  put  the  most  generous  interpretation 
possible  upon  them  because  we  knew  that  their  source  lay,  not 


336  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

in  any  hostile  feeling  or  purpose  of  the  German  people  toward 
us  (who  were,  no  doubt,  as  ignorant  of  them  as  we  ourselves 
were) ,  but  only  in  the  selfish  designs  of  a  Government  that  did 
what  it  pleased  and  told  its  people  nothing.  But  they  have 
played  their  part  in  serving  to  convince  us  at  last  that  that 
Government  entertains  no  real  friendship  for  us  and  means  to 
act  against  our  peace  and  security  at  its  convenience.  That  it 
means  to  stir  up  enemies  against  us  at  our  very  doors  the 
intercepted  note  to  the  German  Minister  at  Mexico  City  is 
eloquent  evidence. 

"We  are  accepting  this  challenge  of  hostile  purpose  be- 
cause we  know  that  in  such  a  Government,  following  such 
methods,  we  can  never  have  a  friend ;  and  that  in  the  presence 
of  its  organized  power,  always  lying  in  wait  to  accomplish  we 
know  not  what  purpose,  there  can  be  no  assured  security  of  the 
democratic  Governments  of  the  world. 

NATURAL  FOE  TO  LIBERTY. 

"We  are  now  about  to  accept  gage  of  battle  with  this 
natural  foe  to  liberty,  and  shall,  if  necessary,  spend  the  whole 
force  of  the  nation  to  check  and  nullify  its  pretensions  and  its 
power.  We  are  glad,  now  that  we  see  the  facts  with  no  veil 
of  false  pretense  about  them,  to  fight  thus  for  the  ultimate 
peace  of  the  world  and  for  the  liberation  of  its  peoples,  the 
German  peoples  included;  for  the  rights  of  nations  great  and 
small  and  the  privilege  of  men  everywhere  to  choose  their  way 
of  life  and  of  obedience.  The  world  must  be  made  safe  for 
democracy.  Its  peace  must  be  planted  upon  the  tested  founda- 
tions of  political  liberty. 

"We  have  no  selfish  ends  to  serve.  We  desire  no  con- 
quest, no  dominion.  We  seek  no  indemnities  for  ourselves,  no 
material  compensation  for  the  sacrifices  we  shall  freely  make. 
We  are  but  one  of  the  champions  of  the  rights  of  mankind. 
We  shall  be  satisfied  when  those  rights  have  been  as  secure  as 
the  faith  and  the  freedom  of  the  nations  can  make  them. 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  337 

"Just  because  we  fight  without  rancour  and  without  selfish 
object,  seeking  nothing  for  ourselves  but  what  we  shall  wish  to 
share  with  all  free  people,  we  shall,  I  feel  confident,  conduct 
our  operations  as  belligerents  without  passion  and  ourselves 
observe  with  proud  punctilio  the  principles  of  right  and  of  fair 
play  we  profess  to  be  fighting  for. 

UNDISGUISED  WARFARE. 

"I  have  said  nothing  of  the  Governments  allied  with  the 
Imperial  Government  of  Germany  because  they  have  not  made 
war  upon  us  or  challenged  us  to  defend  our  right  and  our  honor. 
The  Austro-Hungarian  Government  has,  indeed,  avowed  its 
unqualified  indorsement  and  acceptance  of  the  reckless  and 
lawless  submarine  warfare  adopted  now  without  disguise  by 
the  Imperial  German  Government,  and  it  has,  therefore,  not 
been  possible  for  this  Government  to  receive  Count  Tarnowski, 
the  Ambassador  recently  accredited  to  this  Government  by  the 
Imperial  and  Royal  Government  of  Austria-Hungary;  but 
that  Government  has  not  actually  engaged  in  warfare  against 
citizens  of  the  United  States  on  the  seas,  and  I  take  the  liberty, 
for  the  present  at  least,  of  postponing  a  discussion  of  our  rela- 
tions with  the  authorities  at  Vienna.  We  enter  this  war  only 
where  we  are  clearly  forced  into  it  because  there  are  no  other 
means  of  defending  our  rights. 

"It  will  be  all  the  easier  for  us  to  conduct  ourselves  as 
belligerents  in  a  high  spirit  of  right  and  fairness  because  we  act 
without  animus,  not  in  enmity  toward  a  people  or  with  the 
desire  to  bring  any  injury  or  disadvantage  upon  them,  but  only 
in  armed  opposition  to  an  irresponsible  Government  which  has 
thrown  aside  all  considerations  of  humanity  and  of  right  and 
is  running  amuck. 

"We  are,  let  me  say  again,  the  sincere  friends  of  the  Ger- 
man people,  and  shall  desire  nothing  so  much  as  the  early  re- 
establishment  of  intimate  relations  of  mutual  advantage  be- 

h  R— 22 


338  AMEEICA  STEPS  IN. 

tween  us,  however  hard  it  may  be  for  them,  for  the  time  being, 
to  believe  that  this  is  spoken  from  our  hearts. 

"We  have  borne  with  their  present  Government  through 
all  these  bitter  months  because  of  that  friendship,  exercising  a 
patience  and  forbearance  which  would  otherwise  have  been  im- 
possible. We  shall,  happily,  still  have  an  opportunity  to  prove 
that  friendship  in  our  daily  attitude  and  actions  toward  the 
millions  of  men  and  women  of  German  birth  and  native  sym- 
pathy who  live  among  us  and  share  our  life,  and  we  shall  be 
proud  to  prove  it  toward  all  who  are  in  fact  loyal  to  their  neigh- 
bors and  to  the  Government  in  the  hour  of  test. 
TRUE  AND  LOYAL  AMERICANS. 

"They  are,  most  of  them,  as  true  and  loyal  Americans  as 
if  they  had  never  known  any  other  fealty  or  allegiance.  They 
will  be  prompt  to  stand  with  us  in  rebuking  and  restraining 
the  few  who  may  be  of  a  different  mind  and  purpose. 

"If  there  should  be  disloyalty  it  will  be  dealt  with  with  a 
firm  hand  of  stern  repression;  but  if  it  lifts  its  head  at  all  it 
will  lift  it  only  here  and  there,  and  without  countenance  except 
from  a  lawless  and  malignant  few. 

"It  is  a  distressing  and  oppressive  duty,  gentlemen  of  the 
Congress,  which  I  have  performed  in  thus  addressing  you. 
There  are,  it  may  be,  many  months  of  fiery  trial  and  sacrifice 
ahead  of  us.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  lead  this  great,  peaceful 
people  into  war — into  the  most  terrible  and  disastrous  of  all 
wars,  civilization  itself  seeming  to  be  in  the  balance. 

"But  the  right  is  more  precious  than  peace,  and  we  shall 
fight  for  the  things  which  we  have  always  carried  nearest  our 
hearts — for  democracy,  for  the  right  of  those  who  submit  to 
authority  to  have  a  voice  in  their  own  government,  for  the 
rights  and  liberties  of  small  nations,  for  a  universal  dominion 
of  right  by  such  a  concert  of  free  peoples  as  shall  bring  peace 
and  safety  to  all  nations  and  make  the  world  itself  at  last  free. 

"To  such  a  task  we  can  dedicate  our  lives  and  our  fortunes, 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  339 

everything  that  we  are  and  everything  that  we  have,  with  the 
pride  of  those  who  know  that  the  day  has  come  when  America 
is  privileged  to  spend  her  blood  and  her  might  for  the  princi- 
ples that  gave  her  birth  and  happiness  and  the  peace  which 
she  has  treasured.  God  helping  her,  she  can  do  no  other." 

While  all  the  world  knew  that  an  actual  state  of  war  had 
existed  between  the  two  countries  for  months,  the  resolution 
declaring  war  as  adopted  by  Congress  on  the  plea  of  Presi- 
dent Wilson  and  signed  by  the  President  shortly  after  1  o'clock 
on  the  afternoon  of  April  6,  1917 — Good  Friday — was  as  fol- 
lows: 

"Whereas,  The  Imperial  German  Government  has  com- 
mitted repeated  acts  of  war  against  the  government  and  the 
people  of  the  United  States  of  America;  therefore,  be  it 

A  WAR  RESOLUTION. 

"Resolved,  By  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  United  States  of  America,  in  Congress  assembled,  that 
the  state  of.  war  between*  the  United  States  and  the  Imperial 
German  Government  which  has  thus  been  thrust  upon  the 
United  States  is  hereby  formally  declared;  and  that  the  Presi- 
dent be,  and  he  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed  to  employ 
the  entire  naval  and  military  forces  of  the  United  States  and 
the  resources  of  the  government  to  carry  on  war  against  the 
Imperial  German  Government;  and  to  bring  the  conflict  to  a 
successful  termination  all  of  the  resources  of  the  country  are 
hereby  pledged  by  the  Congress  of  the  United  States." 

Immediately  President  Wilson  issued  a  proclamation  in 
which  he  called  upon  the  people  of  the  country  to  co-operate 
and  give  their  support,  pointing  out  the  necessity  for  doing 
things  other  than  putting  men  upon  the  firing  line.  And  in 
his  brief  proclamation  he  outlined  the  entire  comprehensive 
plan  which,  within  a  few  months,  was  well  under  way. 

The  placing  of  the  navy  upon  a  war  footing;  the  creating 


340  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

and  equipping  of  an  adequate  army;  the  supplying  of  ships; 
creating  of  loans ;  the  financing  of  the  Allies ;  the  conservation 
of  food  products;  the  development  of  food  and  material  re- 
sources ;  the  providing  of  munitions  and  supplies  for  the  fight- 
ing forces  abroad — all  of  these  things  were  pointed  to  as  neces- 
sary in  the  President's  proclamation. 

Thus  America,  which  had  endeavored  to  remain  neutral 
during  months  when  Germany  was  arrogant  and  insulting,  be- 
came aligned  with  the  Allies  in  the  struggle  which  for  nearly 
three  years  had  been  waged  in  Europe. 

NEGOTIATIONS  CARRIED  ON. 

The  negotiations  between  this  country  and  Germany 
over  the  question  of  submarine  warfare  as  affecting  the  lives 
of  non-combatants  and  the  rights  of  neutrals  on  the  high  seas 
in  time  of  war  had  been  carried  on  for  two  years.  They  had 
their  origin  on  February  10,  1915,  when,  following  the  Ger- 
man announcement  of  February  4  that  "the  waters  around 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  including  the  whole  English  Chan- 
nel, are  declared  a  war  zone  on  and  after  February  18,  1915," 
William  J.  Bryan,  then  Secretary  of  State,  sent  the  "strict 
accountability' '  note  to  Berlin. 

Through  successive  stages  the  exchange  of  diplomatic 
papers  continued,  with  growing  feeling  on  both  sides,  because 
of  the  acts  of  German  submarines,  until  the  torpedoing  of  the 
cross-Channel  steamer  Sussex,  on  March  24,  1916,  when  the 
lives  of  twenty-five  American  citizens  were  imperiled  and  sev- 
eral suffered  bodily  injuries  or  shock.  This  attack  resulted  in 
the  "Sussex  note,"  or  so-called  "ultimatum"  to  Germany. 

The  Sussex  note,  signed  by  Secretary  Lansing,  and  sent 
to  Germany  April  19,  1916,  concluded  with  the  following 
declaration : 

"Unless  the  Imperial  Government  should  now  imme- 
diately declare  and  effect  an  abandonment  of  its  present  meth- 
ods of  submarine  warfare  against  passenger  and  freight-carry- 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  341 

ing  vessels,  the  Government  of  the  United  States  can  have  no 
choice  but  to  sever  diplomatic  relations  with  the  German  Em- 
pire altogether." 

QUESTIONS  GERMANY'S  RIGHT. 

The  first  American  note  to  the  Imperial  Government,  of 
February  10,  1915,  disputed  the  right  of  Germany  to  declare 
such  a  war  zone  as  it  had  announced  the  week  before,  and  con- 
tended for  the  international  procedure  of  "visit  and  search" 
before  attack  on  or  capture  of  a  neutral  vessel.  It  embodied 
this  phrase: 

"If  such  a  deplorable  situation  should  arise  (wanton  de- 
struction of  an  American  ship)  the  Imperial  German  Govern- 
ment can  readily  appreciate  that  the  Government  of  the  Unit- 
ed States  would  be  constrained  to  hold  the  Imperial  German 
Government  to  a  strict  accountability  for  such  acts  of  their 
naval  authorities  and  to  take  any  steps  it  might  be  necessary 
to  take  to  safeguard  American  lives  and  property  and  to  se- 
cure to  Americans  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  acknowledged 
rights  on  the  high  seas." 

In  reply  the  German  Government  sent  a  note  under  date 
of  February  16,  1915,  setting  forth  that  the  war  zone  procla- 
mation was  in  reprisal  for  the  "blockade"  of  Great  Britain  and 
that  if  "at  the  eleventh  hour"  the  United  States  should  prevail 
upon  Germany's  enemies  to  abandon  their  methods  of  mari- 
time warfare,  Germany  would  modify  its  order.  It  charged 
misuse  of  neutral  flags  and  the  arming  of  merchant  ships  by 
Great  Britain. 

On  February  20,  in  an  identic  note  to  Germany  and  Great 
Britain,  the  American  Government  suggested  that  both  Powers 
cease  their  illegal  activities.  Such  an  agreement  this  Govern- 
ment proposed  as  a  "modus  vivendi"  giving  opportunity  for 
further  discussion  of  the  points  in  controversy.  Berlin  accepted 
this  note  as  "new  evidence  of  the  friendly  feelings  of  the  Amer- 
ican Government,"  but  reserved  a  "definite  statement"  of  the 


342  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

position  of  the  Imperial  Government  until  it  learned  "what 
obligations  the  British  Government  are  on  their  part  willing  to 
assume.'' 

Subsequently,  on  March  28,  the  British  steamship  Falaba 
was  sunk,  with  the  loss  of  163  lives,  including  one  American. 
On  April  28  the  American  steamship  Gushing  was  attacked  by 
an  aeroplane,  and  on  May  1  the  American  tanker  Gulilight  was 
attacked  by  a  submarine  and  three  United  States  citizens  were 
lost. 

On  May  1,  also,  the  German  Embassy  at  Washington 
caused  to  be  inserted  in  many  of  the  leading  American  news- 
papers the  now  famous  advertisement  warning  Americans  and 
others  from  taking  passage  on  the  Cunard  liner  Lusitania, 
intimating  that  it  would  be  attacked.  This  was  the  day  the 
Lusitania  sailed  on  her  ill-fated  voyage.  A  number  of  the 
prominent  passengers  received  personal  notes  when  they 
reached  the  pier,  advising  them  not  to  go,  but  most  of  them 
scouted  the  thought  of  danger. 

SUBMARINE   ISSUE  AND  DIPLOMACY. 

After  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania,  on  May  7,  off  Fastnet, 
Ireland,  with  the  loss  of  more  than  1100  persons,  among  them 
115  Americans,  the  submarine  issue  assumed  a  large  and 
gravely  important  place  in  the  realm  of  diplomacy. 

The  accumulation  of  cases  affecting  Americans  was  taken 
up  in  the  first  "Lusitania  note"  to  Germany,  which  was  dis- 
patched May  15,  1915.  It  characterized  the  attacks  on  the 
Falaba,  Gushing,  Gulflight  and  Lusitania  as  "a  series  of  events 
which  the  United  States  has  observed  with  growing  concern, 
distress  and  amazement."  It  pointed  to  Germany's  hitherto 
expressed  "humane  and  enlightened  attitude"  in  matters  of 
international  right,  and  expressed  the  hope  that  submarine 
commanders  engaged  in  torpedoing  peaceful  ships  without 
warning  were  in  such  practice  operating  without  the  sanction 
of  their  Governmnet.  The  note  closed  with  these  words : 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  343 

"The  Imperial  German  Government  will  not  expect  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  to  omit  any  word  or  act 
necessary  to  the  performance  of  its  sacred  duty  of  maintaining 
the  rights  of  the  United  States  and  its  citizens  and  of  safeguard- 
ing their  free  exercise  and  enjoyment." 

On  May  28, 1915,  Germany  replied  with  a  note  which  cov- 
ered a  wide  range  of  argument  and  was  in  every  respect  unsatis- 
factory. It  alleged  that  the  Lusitania  had  masked  guns  aboard ; 
that  she  in  effect  was  a  British  auxiliary  cruiser ;  that  she  carried 
munitions  of  war ;  that  her  owning  company,  aware  of  the  dam- 
ages she  risked  in  the  submarine  war  zone,  was  in  reality  respon- 
sible for  the  loss  of  American  lives,  and  referred  to  the  fact 
that  the  British  Admiralty  had  offered  large  rewards  to  ship 
captains  who  rammed  or  destroyed  submarines. 

PROMISED  TO  PAY  DAMAGES. 

The  note  met  none  of  the  contentions  of  the  United  States 
so  far  as  the  Lusitania  and  Falaba  incidents  were  concerned, 
although  a  supplementary  note  did  acknowledge  that  Germany 
was  wrong  in  the  attacks  on  the  Cushing  and  the  Gulflight, 
expressed  regret  for  these  two  cases  and  promised  to  pay  dam- 
ages. While  the  American  reply  to  the  note  was  being  framed 
dissension  in  the  Cabinet  resulted  in  the  resignation  of  Secre- 
tary Bryan,  who  contended  for  a  policy  of  warning  Americans 
off  belligerent  ships.  He  resigned  because  he  thought  he  could 
not  sign  the  next  note  to  Germany,  which  he  feared  would  lead 
the  United  States  into  war. 

Meanwhile  several  sensational  incidents  cropped  up  in  con- 
nection with  the  negotiations,  chief  of  which  was  the  sending  of 
a  message  to  the  Berlin  Foreign  Office  by  Doctor  Dumba,  the 
Austrian  Ambassador,  afterward  recalled  at  the  request  of 
President  Wilson,  which  was  represented  as  stating  substan- 
tially that  Mr.  Bryan  had  intimated  to  the  Ambassador  that 
the  vigorous  tone  of  the  American  notes  should  not  be  regarded 
in  Berlin  as  too  warlike. 


344  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

Secretary  Lansing  took  office  as  Mr.  Bryan's  successor, 
and  his  reply  to  the  German  note  took  issue  with  every  conten- 
tion Germany  had  set  up  in  the  Falaba  and  Lusitania  cases, 
denied  flatly  the  contention  that  the  Lusitania  was  armed  or 
was  to  be  treated  as  other  than  a  peaceful  merchant  ship. 

The  note  averred  that  the  declaration  of  a  submarine  war 
zone  could  not  abbreviate  the  rights  of  Americans  on  lawful 
journeys,  and  added:  "The  Government  of  the  United  States 
therefore  very  earnestly  and  solemnly  renews  the  representa- 
tions of  its  note  transmitted  to  the  Imperial  German  Gov- 
ernment on  May  15,  and  relies  in  these  representations  upon 
the  principles  of  humanity,  the  universally  recognized  under- 
standings of  international  law  and  the  ancient  friendship  of 
the  German  nation." 

JAGOW'S  EVASIVE   ANSWER. 

To  that  note  Germany  did  not  reply  until  July  8,  and 
the  German  rejoinder  was  preponderately  characterized  by 
American  newspapers  not  as  a  note,  but  as  an  address  by  For- 
eign Minister  von  Jagow  to  the  American  people.  In  official 
circles  it  was  said  to  come  no  nearer  to  meeting  the  American 
contentions  than  did  the  former  German  note. 

The  nature  of  the  reply  was  regarded  officially  as  con- 
vincing evidence  that  Germany  was  holding  the  submarine  war- 
fare negotiations  as  a  club  over  the  United  States  to  force 
this  Government  into  some  action  to  compel  Great  Britain  to 
relax  the  food  blockade.  President  Wilson  steadfastly  refused 
to  permit  the  diplomatic  negotiations  of  the  United  States 
with  one  belligerent  to  become  entangled  with  the  relations  with 
another. 

To  that  the  United  States  replied  on  July  21  that  the 
German  note  was  "very  unsatisfactory,"  because  it  failed  to 
meet  "the  real  differences  between  the  two  Governments."  The 
United  States,  it  declared,  was  keenly  disappointed  with  Ger- 
many's attitude.    Submarine  attacks  without  warning,  endan- 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  345 

gering  Americans  and  other  neutrals,  were  characterized  as 
illegal  and  inhuman  and  manifestly  indefensible.  The  German 
retaliation  against  the  British  blockade,  it  maintained,  must 
not  interfere  with  the  rights  of  neutrals,  which  the  note  declared 
were  "based  upon  principles,  not  expediency,  and  the  prin- 
ciples are  immutable."  It  declared  that  the  United  States 
would  continue  to  contend  for  the  freedom  of  the  seas  "from 
whatever  quarter  violated,  without  compromise  and  at  any 
cost."  The  American  note  concluded  with  these  words  of 
warning ; 

"Friendship  itself  prompts  it  (the  United  States  Govern- 
ment) to  say  to  the  Imperial  Government  that  repetition  by 
the  commanders  of  German  naval  vessels  of  acts  in  contra- 
vention of  those  rights  must  be  regarded  by  the  Government 
of  the  United  States,  when  they  affect  American  citizens,  as 
deliberately  unfriendly." 

"INFORMAL  CONVERSATIONS." 

The  negotiations  at  this  point  seemed  to  have  come  to 
such  an  impasse  that  the  exchanges  of  notes  between  Washing- 
ton and  Berlin  were  stopped  and  the  controversy  was  brought 
into  the  realm  of  "informal  conversations"  between  Secretary 
Lansing  and  Count  von  Bernstorff,  the  German  Ambassador. 
It  was  thought  that  much  could  be  accomplished  by  personal 
contact  which  was  lost  in  a  cold  exchange  of  documents. 

Meanwhile  the  Arabic  was  sunk  on  August  19.  Coming 
close  on  the  unsuccessful  Lusitania  negotiations  and  a  continu- 
ation of  submarine  attacks  in  which  Americans  had  suffered, 
it  seemed  that  the  United  States  and  Germany  had  at  last 
reached  the  point  of  a  break.  Then,  on  September  1,  came 
the  first  rift  in  the  threatening  situation.  Count  von  Bern- 
storff presented  this  written  assurance  to  Secretary  Lansing: 

"Liners  will  not  be  sunk  by  our  submarines  without  warn- 
ing and  without  safety  of  noncombatants,  provided  that  the 
liners  do  not  try  to  escape  or  offer  resistance." 


346  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

The  United  States  had  agreed  all  along  that  ships  hailed 
for  visit  and  search  by  a  war  vessel  took  a  risk  if  they  attempted 
to  flee,,  but  it  contended  not  for  the  safety  of  "liners"  alone, 
but  for  the  immunity  of  all  peaceful  merchant  vessels.  The 
word  "liners"  was  the  perplexing  point  in  Germany's  assur- 
ances and  a  complete  agreement  on  what  it  actually  meant 
never  was  finally  reached. 

More  hopefulness  was  added  to  the  situation  when,  on 
October  5,  the  Arabic  case  was  disposed  of  by  Germany  dis- 
avowing the  sinking  and  giving  renewed  assurances  that  sub- 
marine commanders  had  been  again  instructed  to  avoid  repeti- 
tion of  the  acts  which  provoked  American  condemnation. 
Count  von  BernstorfT  delivered  to  Secretary  Lansing  this  com- 
munication : 

BERNSTORFF'S   COMMUNICATION. 

"The  orders  issued  by  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  to  the 
commanders  of  submarines — of  which  I  notified  you  on  a 
previous  occasion — have  been  made  so  stringent  that  the  re- 
currence of  incidents  similar  to  the  Arabic  case  is  considered 
out  of  the  question.  The  Imperial  Government  regrets  and  dis- 
avows this  act  and  has  notified  Commander  Schneider  accord- 
ingly." 

With  that  the  negotiations  reverted  to  the  Lusitania  case. 
Germany  already  had  agreed  to  pay  indemnity  for  American 
lives  lost,  but  the  negotiations  were  delayed  by  a  seeming  dead- 
lock over  the  words  in  which  Germany  should  acknowledge  the 
illegality  of  the  destruction  of  the  liner.  Germany,  unwilling  to 
use  the  word  "illegal,"  substituted  a  declaration  that  "reprisals 
must  not  be  directed  at  others  than  enemy  subjects."  A  formal 
communication,  including  such  a  declaration  and  expressing  re- 
gret for  loss  of  American  lives,  assuming  liability  and  offering 
reparation  in  the  form  of  indemnity,  was  submitted  to  Secretary 
Lansing. 

A  favorable  settlement  of  the  long  and  threatened  con- 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  347 

troversy  seemed  to  be  in  sight  when  all  the  progress  that  had 
been  made  was  reduced  to  nothing  by  Germany's  declaration  of 
a  new  submarine  policy  of  sinking  without  warning  all  armed 
merchant  ships.  That  precipitated  a  new  situation  so  vitally 
interwoven  with  the  whole  structure  of  the  Lusitania  case  that 
President  Wilson  declined  to  close  the  Lusitania  settlement 
while  the  other  issue  was  pending,  and  there  the  whole  matter 
rested  while  German  submarine  warfare  was  contained  and  new 
cases  involving  loss  of  American  lives  piled  up. 

Finally  the  accumulation  of  evidence  reached  such  propor- 
tions with  the  torpedoing  of  the  Sussex  that  President  Wilson, 
convinced  that  assurances  given  in  the  Lusitania  and  Arabic 
cases  were  being  violated,  dispatched  another  note  to  Ger- 
many, and  went  before  Congress,  reviewed  the  entire  situation 
from  the  beginning,  and  made  this  declaration : 
PRESIDENT'S  DECLARATION. 

"I  have  deemed  it  my  duty  to  say  to  the  Imperial  German 
Government  that  if  it  is  still  its  purpose  to  prosecute  relentless 
and  indiscriminate  warfare  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  is  at  last  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  only  one 
course  it  can  pursue;  and  that,  unless  the  Imperial  German 
Government  should  now,  immediately,  declare  and  effect  an 
abandonment  of  its  present  methods  of  warfare  against  pas- 
senger and  freight-carrying  vessels  this  Government  can  have 
no  choice  but  to  sever  diplomatic  relations  altogether." 

It  will  be  noted  that  the  President  went  further  than 
"liners,"  and  said  "passenger  and  freight-carrying  vessels." 

In  the  note  sent  at  this  time  the  President  said : 

"No  limit  of  any  kind  has  in  fact  been  set  to  the  indis- 
criminate pursuit  and  destruction  of  merchantmen  of  all  kinds 
and  nationalities  within  the  waters  constantly  extending  in 
area  where  these  operations  have  been  carried  on,  and  the  roll 
of  Americans  who  have  lost  their  lives  on  ships  thus  attacked 
and  destroyed  has  grown  month  by  month  until  the  ominous 


348  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

toll  has  mounted  into  the  hundreds.  Again  and  again  the  Im- 
perial German  Government  has  given  this  Government  its 
solemn. assurances  that  at  least  passenger  ships  would  not  be 
thus  dealt  with,  and  yet  it  has  again  and  again  permitted  its 
undersea  commanders  to  disregard  those  assurances  with  entire 
impunity." 

OPPOSED  TO   SUBMARINE   WARFARE. 

During  all  the  negotiations  the  Berlin  Foreign  Office 
looked  to  Count  von  Bernstorff  to  prevent  a  break.  His  atti- 
tude was  represented  as  propitiatory  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
United  States  and  opposed  to  the  submarine  warfare  of  Von 
Tirpitz.  On  several  occasions  he  is  said  to  have  warned  his 
Emperor  personally  that  a  continuance  of  the  warfare  against 
which  the  United  States  protested  would  surely  lead  to  a 
break.  Meanwhile  the  Ambassador's  own  position  was  embar- 
rassed by  the  operations  of  German  sympathizers  in  the  United 
States  plotting  against  American  neutrality.  Some  of  these 
operations  were  traced  directly  to  the  military  and  naval  at- 
taches of  the  embassy,  who  were  withdrawn. 

Germany's  final  note  in  the  Sussex  case,  received  in  Wash- 
ington on  May  5,  said  that  "the  German  naval  forces  have  re- 
ceived the  following  order" : 

"In  accordance  with  the  general  principles  of  visit  and 
search  and  the  destruction  of  merchant  vessels  recognized  by 
international  law,  such  vessels,  both  within  and  without  the 
area  declared  a  naval  war  zone,  shall  not  be  sunk  without  warn- 
ing and  without  saving  human  lives,  unless  the  ship  attempts 
to  escape  or  offers  resistance." 

Contending  that  the  Imperial  Government  was  unwilling 
to  restrict  an  effective  weapon  if  "the  enemy  is  permitted  to 
apply  at  will  methods  of  warfare  violating  the  rules  of  inter- 
national law,"  the  note  expressed  the  hope  that  the  United 
States  would  "demand  and  insist  that  the  British  Government 


AMEKICA  STEPS  IN.  349 

shall  observe  forthwith  the  rules  of  international  law."  The 
communication  added : 

"Should  the  steps  taken  by  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  not  attain  the  object  it  (the  German  Government)  de- 
sires, to  have  the  laws  of  humanity  followed  by  all  belligerent 
nations,  the  German  Government  would  then  be  facing  a  new 
situation  in  which  it  must  reserve  to  itself  complete  liberty  of 
decision." 

To  any  such  reservations  the  United  States  demurred  in 
no  uncertain  terms. 

PRESIDENT  WILSON'S  REPLY. 

"The  United  States  feels  it  necessary  to  state,"  said  Presi- 
dent Wilson's  reply,  "that  it  takes  it  for  granted  that  the  Im- 
perial German  Government  does  not  intend  to  imply  that  the 
maintenance  of  its  newly  announced  policy  is  any  way  contin- 
gent upon  the  course  or  result  of  diplomatic  negotiations  be- 
tween the  Government  of  the  United  States  and  any  other 
belligerent  Government,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  certain 
passages  in  the  Imperial  Government's  note  might  appear  to  be 
susceptible  of  that  construction." 

In  completing  the  declaration  that  there  must  be  no  mis- 
understanding that  rights  of  American  citizens  must  not  be 
made  subject  to  the  conduct  of  some  other  Government,  the 
note  concluded  by  saying:  "Responsibility  in  such  matters  is 
single,  not  joint;  absolute,  not  relative." 

The  climax  came  on  February  1,  1917,  when  Count  von 
BernstorfT,  German  Ambassador  at  Washington,  handed  to 
Secretary  Lansing  a  note  from  Germany  on  the  U-boat  policy, 
supplemented  by  the  "order"  and  declaration  that  the  Imperial 
Government  proposed  to  stop  sea  traffic  in  the  "zones"  which  it 
marked  as  prohibited,  by  every  means  at  its  command.  This  is 
the  restricted  zone  order: 

"From  February  1,  1917,  sea  traffic  will  be  stopped  with 
every  available  weapon  and  without  further  notice  in  the  fol- 


350 


AMEEICA  STEPS  IN. 


lowing  blockade  zones  around  Great  Britain,  France,  Italy  and 
in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean. 

"In  the  North:  The  zone  is  confined  by  a  line  at  a  distance 
of  twenty  sea  miles  along  the  Dutch  coast  to  Terschelling  fire- 
ship,  the  degree  of  longitude  from  Terschelling  fireship  to 
Udsire  (Norway),  a  line  from  there  across,  the  point  62  de- 


THE  BLOCKADE  ZONES. 

grees  north  0  degrees  longitude  to  62  degrees  north  5  degrees 
west,  further  to  a  point  three  sea  miles  south  of  the  southern 
point  of  the  Farve  (Faroe?)  Islands,  from  there  across  a  point 
62  degrees  north  10  degrees  west  to  61  degrees  north  15  degrees 
west,  then  57  degrees  north  20  degrees  west  to  47  degrees  north 
20  degrees  west,  further  to  43  degrees  north,  15  degrees  west, 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  351 

then  along  the  degree  of  latitude  43  degrees  north  to  20  sea 
miles  from  Cape  Finisterre  and  at  a  distance  of  20  sea  miles 
along  the  north  coast  of  Spain  to  the  French  boundary. 

"In  the  south  (Mediterranean)  : 

"For  neutral  ships  remains  open:  The  sea  west  of  the  line 
Pt  des'  Espiquette  to  38  degrees  20  minutes  north  and  6  de- 
grees east,  also  north  and  west  of  a  zone  61  sea  miles  wide  along 
the  North  African  coast,  beginning  at  2  degrees  longitude  west. 
For  the  connection  of  this  sea  zone  with  Greece  there  is  provided 
a  zone  of  a  width  of  20  sea  miles  north  and  east  of  the  following 
line:  38  degrees  north  and  6  degrees  east  to  38  degrees  north 
and  10  degrees  west  to  37  degrees  north  and  11  degrees  30 
minutes  east  to  34  degrees  north  and  22  degrees  30  minutes 
east.  From  there  leads  a  zone  20  sea  miles  wide  west  of  22  de- 
grees 30  minutes  eastern  longitude  into  Greek  territorial 
waters. 

NEUTRAL,  SHIPS'  RISK. 

"Neutral  ships  navigating  these  blockade  zones  do  so  at 
their  own  risk.  Although  care  has  been  taken  that  neutral  ships 
which  are  on  their  way  toward  ports  of  the  blockade  zones  on 
February  1,  1917,  and  which  have  come  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
latter,  will  be  spared  during  a  sufficiently  long  period,  it  is 
strongly  advised  to  warn  them  with  all  available  means  in  order 
to  cause  their  return. 

"Neutral  ships  which  on  February  1  are  in  ports  of  the 
blockade  zones  can  with  the  same  safety  leave  them. 

'The  instructions  given  to  the  commanders  of  German  sub- 
marines provide  for  a  sufficiently  long  period  during  which  the 
safety  of  passengers  on  unarmed  enemy  passenger  ships  is 
guaranteed. 

"Americans  en  route  to  the  blockade  zone  on  enemy  freight 
steamships  are  not  endangered,  as  the  enemy  shipping  firms 
€an  prevent  such  ships  in  time  from  entering  the  zone. 


352  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

"Sailing  of  regular  American  passenger  steamships  may 
continue  undisturbed  after  February  1, 1917,  if 

"  (a)     The  port  of  destination  is  Falmouth. 

"  (b)  Sailing  to  or  coming  from  that  port  course  is  taken 
via  the  Scilly  Islands  and  a  point  50  degrees  north,  20  degrees 
west. 

"(c)  The  steamships  are  marked  in  the  following  way, 
which  must  not  be  allowed  to  other  vessels  in  American  ports : 
On  ship's  hull  and  superstructure  three  vertical  stripes  one 
meter  wide  each  to  be  painted  alternately  white  and  red.  Each 
mast  should  show  a  large  flag  checkered  white  and  red  and  the 
stern  the  American  national  flag.  Care  should  be  taken  that 
during  dark  national  flag  and  painted  marks  are  easily  recog- 
nizable from  a  distance,  and  that  the  boats  are  well  lighted 
throughout. 

"(d)  One  steamship  a  week  sails  in  each  direction,  with 
arrival  at  Falmouth  on  Sunday  and  departure  from  Falmouth 
on  Wednesday. 

"(e)  United  States  Government  guarantees  that  no  con- 
traband (according  to  German  contraband  list)  is  carried  by 
those  steamships." 

Immediately  after  the  signing  of  the  Congressional  reso- 
lution declaring  America  at  war,  President  Wilson  ordered  the 
mobilization  of  the  United  States  Navy,  and  the  Senate  voted 
an  emergency  war  fund  of  $100,000,000  for  the  use  of  the 
President.  The  forces  of  the  United  States  on  land  and  sea  and 
in  every  country  under  the  sun  were  notified  that  a  state  of  war 
existed. 

The  entrance  of  America  was  regarded  throughout  the 
world  as  one  of  the  most  significant  moves  in  the  history  of 
nations,  and  it  filled  the  Allied  forces  with  enthusiasm.  Typical 
of  the  expressions  on  the  part  of  the  representatives  of  the 
Governments  at  war  with  Germany  was  that  of  Lloyd  George, 
Premier  of  England,  who  said : 


AMERICA  STEPS  IN.  353 

"America  has  at  one  bound  become  a  world  power  in  a 
sense  she  never  was  before.  She  waited  until  she  found  a  cause 
worthy  of  her  traditions.  The  American  people  held  back 
until  they  were  fully  convinced  that  the  fight  was  not  a  sordid 
scrimmage  for  power  and  possessions,  but  an  unselfish  strug- 
gle to  overthrow  a  sinister  conspiracy  against  human  liberty 
and  human  rights. 

"Once  that  conviction  was  reached,  the  great  Republic  of 
the  West  has  leaped  into  the  arena,  and  she  stands  now  side  by 
side  with  the  European  democracies,  who,  bruised  and  bleeding 
after  three  years  of  grim  conflict,  are  still  fighting  the  most 
savage  foe  that  ever  menaced  the  freedom  of  the  world. 

"The  glowing  phrases  of  the  President's  noble  deliverance 
illumine  the  horizon  and  make  clearer  than  ever  the  goal  we 
are  striving  to  reach. 

DEMOCRACY,  FREEDOM  AND  PEACE. 

"There  are  three  phrases  which  will  stand  out  forever  in 
the  story  of  this  crusade.  The  first  is  that  'the  world  must  be 
made  safe  for  democracy,'  the  next,  'the  menace  to  peace  and 
freedom  lies  in  the  existence  of  autocratic  governments  backed 
by  organized  force,  which  is  controlled  wholly  by  their  will  and 
not  by  the  will  of  their  people,'  and  the  crowning  phrase  is 
that  in  which  he  declares  that  'a  steadfast  concert  for  peace 
can  never  be  maintained  except  by  the  partnership  of  demo- 
cratic nations.' 

"These  words  represent  the  faith  which  inspires  and  sus- 
tains our  people  in  the  tremendous  sacrifices  they  have  made 
and  are  still  making.  They  also  believe  that  the  unity  and 
peace  of  mankind  can  only  rest  upon  democracy,  upon  the 
right  to  have  a  voice  in  their  own  Government;  upon  respect 
for  the  right  and  liberties  of  nations  both  great  and  small,  and 
upon  the  universal  dominion  of  public  right. 

"To  all  of  these  the  Prussian  military  autocracy  is  an  im- 
placable foe. 

HB- 23 


354  AMERICA  STEPS  IN. 

"The  Imperial  War  Cabinet,  representative  of  all  the 
peoples  of  the  British  Empire,  wish  me  on  their  behalf  to  rec- 
ognize the  chivalry  and  courage  which  call  the  people  of  the 
United  States  to  dedicate  the  whole  of  their  resources  to  the 
greatest  cause  that  ever  engaged  human  endeavor," 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

Makes  World's  Biggest  War  Loan — Seize  German  Ships — -Intrigue  Exposed — 
General  Pershing  and  Staff  in  Europe — The  Navy  on  Duty  in  North  Sea 
— Fikst  United  States  Troops  Eeach  France — Germany's  Attempts  to 
Sink  Troop  Ships  Thwarted  by  Navy's  Guns. 

SCARCELY  had  the  ink  had  time  to  dry  on  the  Nation's 
command  to  begin  war  than  Congress  voted  an  appropria- 
tion of  $7,000,000,000  for  war  purposes.  This,  the  largest 
single  appropriation  ever  made  by  a  government  in  the  world, 
was  passed  without  a  dissenting  vote.  Still  later,  a  deficiency 
bill  of  $2,827,000,000  for  war  expenses  was  passed.  Other 
legislative  measures  provided  for  the  increase  of  the  army  and 
navy  a^nd  for  "selective  conscription,"  although  the  latter  was 
passed  in  the  face  of  considerable  opposition  on  the  part  of 
many  who  believed  that  in  a  democracy  armies  should  be  raised 
by  volunteer,  recruiting.  Many  felt  that  compulsory  service 
was  not  in  accordance  with  the  ideals  of  liberty. 

The  Conscription  Act  provided  for  the  registration  of 
every  male  citizen  or  resident  in  the  United  States  between  the 
ages  of  21  and  31  years,  and  was  enacted  on  May  19,  1917. 
Registration  of  these  military  available  was  made  on  June  5, 
when  10,000,000  names  were  entered  on  the  rolls  as  subject  to 
draft  by  the  Government.  The  principle  of  "selective  con- 
scription" is  that  the  authorities  shall  have  the  right  to  exempt 
from  military  duty  among  those  registered  such  persons  whose 
employment  in  civil  life  is  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  the, 
industries  and  business  of  the  country,  as  well  as  those  who, 
though  physically  fit,  have  others  dependent  upon  them  for 
support. 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Government  after  the  declara- 
tion of  war  was  the  seizure  of  the  German  merchant  vessels 
interned  in  United  States  ports.     These  vessels  had  a  ton- 

355 


356  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

nage  of  upward  of  629,000  tons  and  were  estimated  as  being 
worth  in  the  neighborhood  of  $100,000,000.  The  seizure  was 
notable  in  that  it  was  the  largest  ever  made  by  a  country  at 
war. 

When  the  Government  went  to  take  charge  of  the  vessels 
it  was  found  that  the  German  officers  had  destroyed  parts  of 
the  machinery  in  many  of  them  in  an  attempt  to  put  them  out 
of  commission.  The  condition  of  the  boats  was  such  that  all 
of  them  had  to  be  put  in  drydock,  and  it  was  several  months 
before  some  of  them  could  be  put  in  condition  for  use. 

SIXTY  RINGLEADERS  ARRESTED. 

Immediately  the  ships  had  been  seized  an  order  was  issued 
by  Attorney  General  Gregory  for  the  arrest  of  sixty  alleged 
ringleaders  in  German  plots,  conspiracies  and  machinations 
throughout  the  United  States.  The  Department  of  Justice, 
which  had  long  been  gathering  evidence  in  connection  with  the 
suspects,  had  complete  reports  about  their  activities.  They 
were  all  German  citizens,  had  participated  in  German 
intrigues,  and  all  were  regarded  as  dangerous  persons  to  be 
at  large. 

They  were  all  arrested,  bail  was  refused  them,  and  they 
were  locked  up  for  safekeeping.  This  was  the  first  step  in  the 
general  rounding  up  of  the  conspirators  throughout  the  coun- 
try. The  men  were  placed  in  three  groups:  Those  having 
previously  been  arrested  charged  with  violation  of  American 
neutrality  in  furthering  German  plots  of  various  sorts  and 
who  were  at  liberty  under  bond  awaiting  the  action  of  higher 
courts;  those  who  had  been  indicted  by  Federal  Grand  Juries 
for  similar  offenses  and  were  at  liberty  under  bond  awaiting 
the  action  of  the  higher  courts,  and  persons  who,  although  they 
had  never  been  indicted  or  convicted,  had  long  been  under 
surveillance  by  the  Secret  Service,  or  the  investigators  of  the 
Department  of  Justice. 

These  arrests  were  the  first  of  alien  enemies  made  in 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  357 

this  country  in  more  than  a  century,  under  the  direct  order  of 
the  Attorney  General  without  reference  to  the  courts  or  obtain- 
ing warrants.  Under  an  act  of  Conqress  passed  in  1798  the 
President  is  empowered  to  adopt  this  course.  The  right  had 
not  been  invoked,  however,  since  the  war  with  Great  Britain 
in  1812. 

ARREST  OF  GERMAN  PLOTTERS. 

The  arrests  were  only  the  beginning  of  the  work  of  the 
Secret  Service  Department  in  a  complete  investigation  of  the 
activities  of  the  thousands  of  German  reservists,  stationed  in 
the  United  States,  and  suspected  of  being  connected  with  plots 
which  daily  were  cropping  out.  These  plots  were  being 
exposed  constantly.  Some  were  abandoned  before  being 
completely  worked  out,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Germans 
suspected  they  wrere  being  shadowed.  It  was  estimated  that 
there  were  in  the  United  States  at  the  time  of  the  discoveries 
of  conspiracies  between  15,000  and  18,000  German  reservists 
in  the  prime  of  life,  whose  energies  were  undoubtedly  being 
employed  in  the  spreading  of  the  German  propaganda.  It 
was  upon  this  army  that  the  Secret  Service  men  ke|3t  a  close 
watch,  and  who  were  generally  found  to  have  within  their 
ranks  the  men  wanted  at  various  times  in  connection  with  the 
advancement  of  German  plans. 

Many  of  the  Germans  arrested  were  quasi-officials  of  the 
German  government.  Some  of  them,  it  is  alleged,  were  the 
instrumentalities  through  which  Captain  Boy-Ed  and  Captain 
von  Papen  had  carried  out  their  activities  in  this  country 
against  the  Allies.  A  number  of  those  arrested  were  prop- 
erly classed  as  spies.  Camps  were  established  for  the  sailors 
taken  from  the  interned  German  vessels,  and  many  of  them 
were  sent  to  Fort  Oglethorpe,  Georgia,  where  they  wrere  held. 

The  far-reaching  influence  of  the  German  spy  system 
was  at  this  time  laid  before  the  American  public,  with  all  of 
its  startling  ramifications.    For  months  there  had  been  stories 


358  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

of  German  intrigue  and  conspiracies,  and  the  Secret  Service 
had  unearthed  innumerable  plots  to  destroy  ammunition 
plants  and  industrial  establishments,  which  would  have  the 
effect  of  making  it  difficult  for  America  to  supply  ammu- 
nition to  the  Allies. 

The  most  insidious  scheme  unearthed  by  the  government 
was  that  which  had  to  do  with  the  attempt  of  Germany  to 
secure  the  alliance  of  Mexico  and  Japan  to  make  war  on  the 
United  States. 

Japan,  through  Mexican  mediation,  was  to  be  urged  to 
abandon  her  allies  and  join  in  the  attack  on  the  United  States. 

Mexico,  for  her  reward,  was  to  receive  general  financial 
support  from  Germany,  reconquer  Texas,  New  Mexico  and 
Arizona — lost  provinces — and  share  in  the  victorious  peace 
terms  Germany  contemplated. 

MACHINATIONS  OF  GERMAN  MINISTER. 

Details  were  left  to  German  Minister  von  Eckhardt  in 
Mexico  City,  who  by  instructions  signed  by  German  Foreign 
Minister  Zimmerman,  at  Berlin,  January  19,  1917,  was  di- 
rected to  propose  the  alliance  with  Mexico,  to  General  Car- 
ranza,  and  suggest  that  Mexico  seek  to  bring  Japan  into  the 
plot. 

These  instructions  were  transmitted  to  von  Eckhardt 
through  Count  von  Bernstorff,  former  German  Ambassador. 

Germany  pictured  to  Mexico,  by  broad  intimation,  Eng- 
land and  the  entente  allies  defeated,  Germany  and  her  allies 
triumphant  and  in  world  domination  by  the  instrument  of 
unrestricted  submarine  warfare. 

A  copy  of  Zimmerman's  instructions  to  von  Eckhardt, 
sent  through  von  Bernstorff,  is  in  possession  of  the  United 
States  government,    ilt  is  as  follows: 

"Berlin,  January  19,  1917. 
"On  the  first  of  February  we  intend  to  begin  submarine 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  359 

warfare  unrestricted.     In  spite  of  this,  it  is  our  intention  to 
endeavor  to  keep  neutral  the  United  States  of  America. 

"If  this  attempt  is  not  successful  we  propose  an  alliance 
on  the  following  basis  with  Mexico :  That  we  shall  make  war 
together  and  together  make  peace.  We  shall  give  general 
financial  support,  and  it  is  understood  that  Mexico  is  to  re- 
conquer the  lost  territory  in  New  Mexico,  Texas  and  Ari- 
zona.   The  details  are  left  to  you  for  settlement. 

"You  are  instructed  to  inform  the  President  of  Mexico 
of  the  above,  in  the  greatest  confidence,  as  soon  as  it  is  cer- 
tain that  there  will  be  an  outbreak  of  war  with  the  United 
States,  and  suggest  that  the  President  of  Mexico,  on  his  own 
initiative,  should  communicate  with  Japan,  suggesting  adher- 
ence at  once  to  this  plan;  at  the  same  time,  offer  to  mediate 
between  Germany  and  Japan. 

"Please  call  to  the  attention  of  the  President  of  Mexico 
that  the  employment  of  ruthless  submarine  warfare  now  prom- 
ises to  compel  England  to  make  peace  in  a  few  months. 

"ZIMMERMAN." 

BETHMANN-HOLLWEG'S  FALSE  STATEMENT. 

This  document  was  in  the  possession  of  the  government 
at  the  very  time  Chancellor  von  Eethmann-Hollweg  was  de- 
claring that  the  United  States  had  placed  an  interpretation 
on  the  submarine  declaration  "never  intended  by  Germany," 
and  that  Germany  had  promoted  and  honored  friendly  rela- 
tions with  the  United  States  "as  an  heirloom  from  Frederick 
the  Great." 

Of  itself,  if  there  were  no  other,  it  is  considered  a  suffi- 
cient answer  to  the  German  Chancellor's  plaint  that  the 
United  States  "brusquely"  broke  off  relations  without  giving 
"authentic"  reasons  for  its  action. 

The  document  supplies  the  missing  link  to  many  sepa- 
rate chains  of  circumstances,  which  until  then  had  seemed  to 
lead  to  no  definite  point.     It  shed  new  light  upon  the  fre- 


360  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

quently  reported  but  indefinable  movements  of  the  Mexican 
government  to  couple  its  situation  with  the  friction  between 
the  United  States  and  Japan. 

It  added  another  chapter  to  the  celebrated  report  of 
Jules  Cambon,  French  Ambassador  in  Berlin  before  the  war, 
of  Germany's  world-wide  plans  for  stirring  strife  on  every 
continent  where  they  might  aid  her  in  the  struggle  for  world 
domination,  which  she  dreamed  was  close  at  hand.  It  added 
a  climax  to  the  operations  of  Count  von  Bernstorff  and  the 
German  Embassy  in  this  country,  which  had  been  colored  with 
passport  frauds,  charges  of  dynamite  plots  and  intrigue,  the 
full  extent  of  which  never  had  been  published. 

And  last  but  not  least,  it  explained  in  a  very  large  de- 
gree the  attitude  of  the  Mexican  government  toward  the 
United  States  on  many  points. 

UNCLE  SAM  NOT  BOTHERED. 

But  the  efforts  of  the  German  enthusiasts,  which  carried 
them  beyond  the  bounds  of  reasonable  safety  in  the  United 
States,  did  not  bother  Uncle  Sam  much  in  the  prosecution  of 
his  war  plans.  Within  a  short  period  after  the  declaration  of 
war  the  country  had  written  a  chapter  in  national  achieve- 
ment unrivalled  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

American  destroyers  were  mobilized,  outfitted  and  sent 
to  the  North  Sea  within  a  few  days  after  the  nation  entered 
the  conflict.  With  them  went  their  own  supply  vessels  and 
numerous  converted  craft  adapted  to  naval  use.  Their  num- 
ber and  the  exact  duty  they  have  assumed  never  have  been  re- 
vealed, but  that  they  have  been  recognized  as  a  formidable  part 
of  the  grand  allied  fleet  was  evidenced  by  the  designation  of 
American  Vice  Admiral  Sims  to  command  all  the  forces  in  the 
important  zone  off  Ireland. 

The  fleet  began  actual  duty  in  the  European  waters  on 
May  4,  and  the  presence  of  the  vessels  and  the  American  sail- 
ors was  the  subject  of  official  correspondence.     The  British 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  361 

Admiralty  announced  the  arrival  of  the  American  destroyers 
as  follows: 

"The  British  Admiralty  states  that  a  flotilla  of  United 
States  destroyers  recently  arrived  in  this  country  to  co-oper- 
ate with  our  naval  forces  in  the  prosecution  of  the  war. 

"The  services  which  the  American  vessels  are  rendering 
to  the  allied  cause  are  of  the  greatest  value  and  are  deeply 
appreciated." 

Vice  Admiral  Sir  David  Beatty,  commander  of  the 
British  Grand  Fleet,  sent  the  following  message  to  Admiral 
Henry  T.  Mayo,  commander  of  the  United  States  Atlantic 
Fleet: 

"The  Grand  Fleet  rejoices  that  the  Atlantic  Fleet  will 
now  share  in  preserving  the  liberties  of  the  world  and  main- 
taining the  chivalry  of  the  sea." 

Admiral  Mayo  replied: 

"The  United  States  Atlantic  Fleet  appreciates  the  mes- 
sage from  the  British  Fleet  and  welcomes  opportunities  for 
work  with  the  British  Fleet  for  the  freedom  of  the  seas." 

GENERAL  PERSHING  IN  ENGLAND. 

Less  than  a  month  later  Major  General  John  J.  Persh- 
ing, with  his  staff,  were  safely  in  England  ready  to  take  com- 
mand of  the  first  expeditionary  force  that  ever  set  foot  on  the 
European  shores  to  make  war.  General  Pershing's  personal 
staff  and  the  members  of  the  General  Staff  who  went  to  per- 
form the  preliminary  work  for  the  first  fighting  force,  num- 
bered 57  officers  and  about  50  enlisted  men,  together  with  a 
civilian  clerical  force. 

The  party  landed  at  Liverpool  on  June  8,  after  an  un- 
eventful trip  on  the  White  Star  liner  Baltic.  The  party  was 
received  with  full  military  honors  and  immediately  entrained 
for  London,  where  it  was  welcomed  by  Lord  Derby,  the  Min- 
ister of  War;  Viscount  French,  commander  of  the  British 
home  forces,  and  a  large  body  of  American  officials. 


362  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

In  London  General  Pershing  was  later  received  at  Buck- 
ingham Palace  by  King  George. 

He  was  presented  to  the  King  by  Lord  Brooke,  com- 
mander of  the  Twelfth  Canadian  Infantry  Brigade.  General 
Pershing  was  accompanied  to  the  palace  by  his  personal  staff 
of  twelve  officers.  After  the  audience  the  officers  paid  a  for- 
mal call  at  the  United  States  embassy. 

PERSHING  RECEIVES  ROYAL  GREETING. 

After  the  formal  reception  the  King  shook  hands  with 
General  Pershing  and  the  members  of  his  staff,  and  expressed 
pleasure  at  welcoming  the  advance  guard  of  the  American 
army.  King  George  chatted  for  a  few  moments  with  each 
member  of  General  Pershing's  staff.  In  addressing  General 
Pershing  the  King  said : 

' 'It  has  been  the  dream  of  my  life  to  see  the  two  great 
English-speaking  nations  more  closely  united.  My  dreams 
have  been  realized.  It  is  with  the  utmost  pleasure  that  I 
welcome  you,  at  the  head  of  the  American  contingent,  to  our 
shores." 

Major  General  Pershing's  staff  has  been  characterized  as 
"one  of  live  wires."  Most  of  the  officers  are  West  Pointers, 
but  there  are  among  them  some  who  rose  from  the  ranks,  in- 
cluding Major  James  G.  Harbord,  chief  of  staff. 

General  Pershing  reached  France  on  June  13,  where  he 
was  given  a  tumultuous  welcome.  He  landed  at  Boulogne  in 
the  morning  and  was  met  by  General  Pelletier,  representing 
the  French  government  and  General  Headquarters  of  the 
French  army;  Commandant  Hue,  representing  the  Minister 
of  War;  General  Lucas,  commanding  the  northern  region; 
Colonel  Daru,  Governor  of  Lille;  the  Prefect  of  the  Somme 
and  other  officials. 

Among  the  latter  were  Rene  Besnard,  Under  Secretary 
of  War,  representing  the  Cabinet;  Commandant  Thouzellier, 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  363 

representing  Marshal  Joffre,  and  Vice- Admiral  Ronarch,  rep- 
resenting the  navy. 

The  scene  in  the  harbor  as  General  Pershing  set  foot  on 
French  soil  was  one  of  striking  beauty  and  animation.  The 
day  was  bright  and  sunny.  The  quays  were  crowded  with 
townspeople  and  soldiers  from  all  Entente  armies,  with 
[French  and  British  troops  predominating. 

The  shipping  was  gay  with  flags  and  bunting,  many  mer- 
chant craft  hoisting  American  flags,  while  along  the  crowded 
quays  the  American  colors  were  everywhere  shown  as  a  token 
of  the  French  welcome. 

PERSHING  RECEIVES  AN  OVATION. 

A  great  wave  of  enthusiasm  came  from  the  crowds  as 
General  Pershing  stepped  upon  the  quay  and  as  the  band 
played  the  "Marseillaise"  he  and  the  members  of  his  staff 
stood  uncovered.  M.  Besnard,  in  greeting  the  American 
commander  in  behalf  of  the  government,  said  the  Americans 
had  come  to  France  to  combat  with  the  Allies  for  the  same 
cause  of  right  and  civilization.  General  Pelletier  extended 
a  greeting  to  the  Americans  in  behalf  of  the  army. 

General  Dumas,  commandant  of  the  region  in  which 
Boulogne  is  located,  said: 

"Your  coming  opens  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  the  world. 
The  United  States  of  America  is  now  taking  its  part  with 
the  United  States  of  Europe.  Together  they  are  about  to 
found  the  United  States  of  the  World,  which  will  definitely 
and  finally  end  the  war  and  give  a  peace  which  will  be  endur- 
ing and  suitable  for  humanity." 

General  Pershing  stood  at  parade  as  the  various  ad- 
dresses were  delivered  and  acknowledged  each  with  a  salute. 

British  soldiers  and  marines  lined  up  along  the  quays  had 
rendered  military  honors  as  the  vessel  flying  the  Stars  and 
Stripes,  preceded  by  destroyers  and  accompanied  by  hydro- 
planes and  dirigible  balloons,  steamed  up  the  channel.    Mili- 


364  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

tary  bands  played  "The  Star- Spangled  Banner"  and  the 
"Marseillaise"  as  General  Pelletier  and  his  party  boarded  the 
boat  to  welcome  General  Pershing. 

After  the  representatives  of  the  French  authorities  had 
been  presented  to  the  American  officers,  the  party  landed  and 
reviewed  the  French  territorials.  The  Americans  then  entered 
motor  cars  for  a  ride  around  the  city.  All  along  the  route 
they  were  followed  by  crowds  of  people  who  greeted  General 
Pershing  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm. 

PERSHING  IN  PARIS. 

The  General  and  his  staff  were  taken  in  a  special  train  to 
Paris,  where  General  Pershing  was  received  by  Marshal 
Joffre,  Ambassador  Sharp  and  Paul  Painleve,  French  Min- 
ister of  War.  In  the  French  capital  General  Pershing  and 
staff  were  received  by  the  populace  with  wild  enthusiasm,  and 
for  several  days  they  were  feted  and  entertained. 

There  were,  during  the  short  period  of  entertainment, 
several  incidents  which  will  long  be  noted  in  history,  as  when 
General  Pershing  visited  the  Tomb  of  Napoleon  and  when  he 
took  from  its  case  the  sword  of  the  world  conqueror  and  kissed 
it,  and  again  when  he  plaeed  a  wreath  on  the  grave  of 
Lafayette. 

Within  a  few  days  General  Pershing  had  established  the 
army  headquarters  in  the  Rue  De  Constantine  and  began  the 
work  preliminary  to  the  campaign  on  the  firing  line. 

Second  only  to  the  enthusiastic  reception  tendered  Gen- 
eral Pershing  and  his  staff  was  that  accorded  the  first  United 
States  Medical  Unit,  which  reached  London  in  June.  The 
vanguard  of  the  American  army,  composed  of  26  surgeons 
and  60  nurses,  in  command  of  Major  Harry  L.  Gilchrist,  was 
received  by  King  George  and  Queen  Mary,  the  Prince  of 
Wales  and  Princess  Mary,  at  Buckingham  Palace. 

The  reception  to  General  Pershing  and  the  Medical 
branch  was,  however,  nothing  as  compared  to  the  popular 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  365 

demonstration  which  marked  the  arrival  of  the  first  of  the 
American  armed  forces  on  European  shores  to  participate  in 
war.  The  vanguard  of  the  army  reached  France  on  June  27. 
No  official  announcement  was  ever  made  of  the  number  of 
men  in  the  first  expeditionary  force,  but  it  is  an  incident  of 
modern  history  that  the  United  States  made  a  record  for  the 
transportation  of  troops  across  the  seas  scarcely  equalled  by 
that  of  any  other  country. 

ABSOLUTE  SECRECY  OBSERVED. 

All  America  knew  that  troops  were  being  sent  to  France, 
but  no  information  had  been  given  as  to  the  time  of  departure 
or  as  to  their  destination.  The  world  was,  therefore,  fairly 
electrified  when  the  announcement  was  made  that  in  defiance 
of  the  German  submarines,  thousands  of  seasoned  regulars 
and  marines,  trained  fighting  men,  with  the  tan  of  long  service 
on  the  Mexican  border,  in  Haiti,  or  Santo  Domingo  still  on 
their  faces,  had  arrived  in  France  to  fight  beside  the  French, 
the  British,  the  Belgians,  the  Russians,  the  Portuguese  and 
the  Italian  troops  on  the  Western  front. 

Despite  the  enormous  difficulties  of  unpreparedness  and 
the  submarine  dangers  that  faced  them,  the  plans  of  the  army 
and  navy  were  carried  through  with  clock-like  precision. 

When  the  order  came  to  prepare  immediately  an  expe- 
ditionary force  to  go  to  France,  virtually  all  of  the  men  who 
first  crossed  the  seas  were  on  the  Mexican  border.  General 
Pershing  himself  was  at  his  headquarters  in  San  Antonio. 
There  were  no  army  transports  available  in  the  Atlantic.  The 
vessels  that  carried  the  troops  were  scattered  on  their  usual 
routes.  Army  reserve  stores  were  still  depleted  from  the  bor- 
der mobilization.  Regiments  were  below  war  strength.  That 
was  the  condition  when  President  Wilson  decided  that  the  plea 
of  the  French  high  Commission  should  be  answered  and  a  force 
of  regulars  sent  at  once  to  France. 

At  his  word  the  War  Department  began  to  move.    Gen- 


366  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

eral  Pershing  was  summoned  quietly  to  Washington.  His 
arrival  created  some  speculation  in  the  press,  but  at  the  re- 
quest of  Secretary  Baker  the  newspapers  generally  refrained 
from  discussion  of  this  point. 

There  were  a  thousand  other  activities  afoot  in  the  de- 
partment at  the  time.  All  the  business  of  preparing  for  the 
military  registration  of  10,000,000  men,  of  providing  quarters 
and  instructors  for  nearly  50,000  prospective  officers,  for  find- 
ing arms  and  equipment  for  millions  of  troops  yet  to  be  or- 
ganized, of  expanding  the  regular  army  to  full  war  strength, 
of  preparing  and  recruiting  the  National  Guard  for  war  was 

at  hand. 

PERSHING  SETS  UP  HEADQUARTERS. 

General  Pershing  dropped  quietly  into  the  department 
and  set  up  the  first  headquarters  of  the  American  expedition- 
ary forces  in  a  little  office,  hardly  large  enough  to  hold  him- 
self and  his  personal  staff.  There,  with  the  aid  of  the  general 
staff,  of  Secretary  Baker  and  of  the  chiefs  of  the  War  De- 
partment bureaus,  the  plans  were  worked  out. 

Announcement  of  the  sending  of  the  force  under  Gen- 
eral Pershing  was  made  May  18.  The  press  gave  the  news 
to  the  country  and  there  were  daily  stories. 

There  came  a  day  when  General  Pershing  no  longer  was 
in  the  department.  Officers  of  the  general  staff  suddenly  were 
missing  from  their  desks.  No  word  of  this  was  reported. 
Then  came  word  from  England  that  Pershing  and  his  officers 
were  there.    All  was  carried  through  without  publicity. 

Other  matters  relating  to  the  expedition  were  carried  out 
without  a  word  of  publicity.  The  regiments  that  were  to  go 
with  General  Pershing  were  all  selected  before  he  left  and 
moving  toward  the  seacoast  from  the  border.  Other  regiments 
also  were  moving  north,  east  and  west  to  the  points  where 
they  were  to  be  expanded,  and  the  movements  of  the  troops 
who  were  to  be  first  in  France  were  obscured  in  all  this  hur- 
rying of  troop  trains  over  the  land. 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  367 

Great  shipments  of  war  supplies  began  to  assemble  at 
the  embarkation  ports.  Liners  suddenly  were  taken  off  their 
regular  runs  with  no  announcement.  A  great  armada  was 
made  ready,  supplied,  equipped  as  transports,  loaded  with 
men  and  guns  and  sent  to  sea,  and  all  with  virtually  no  men- 
tion from  the  press. 

The  navy  bore  its  full  share  in  the  achievement.  From 
the  time  the  troop  ships  left  their  docks  and  headed  toward 
sea,  responsibility  for  the  lives  of  their  thousands  of  men  rested 
upon  the  officers  and  crews  of  the  fighting  ships  that  moved 
beside  them  or  swept  free  the  sea  lanes  before  them.  As  they 
pushed  on  through  the  days  and  nights  toward  the  danger 
zone,  where  German  submarines  lay  in  wait,  every  precaution 
that  trained  minds  of  the  navy  could  devise  was  taken. 

A  BRILLIANT  CLIMAX. 

The  brilliant  climax  to  the  achievement  was  made  public 
when  it  was  announced  that  not  only  had  the  last  units  of  the 
expeditionary  force  been  landed  on  July  3,  but  that  the 
American  navy  had  driven  off  two  German  submarines,  prob- 
ably sinking  one  of  them,  when  the  transport  ships  and  con- 
voys had  been  attacked. 

The  last  units  of  the  American  expeditionary  force,  com- 
prising vessels  loaded  with  supplies  and  horses,  reached 
France  amid  the  screeching  of  whistles  and  moaning  of  sirens. 
Their  arrival,  one  week  after  the  first  troops  landed,  was 
greeted  almost  as  warmly  as  the  arrival  of  the  troops  them- 
selves. 

Many  of  the  American  soldiers  crowded  down  to  the 
wharf  to  greet  the  last  ships  of  the  expedition  and  the  Ameri- 
can vessels  in  the  harbor,  which  had  made  up  previous  con- 
tingents of  the  force,  joined  in  the  welcome.  The  late  arrival 
of  the  supply  ships  was  due  not  only  to  later  departure  from 
America,  but  also  to  the  fact  that  the  vessels  were  slower  than 
those  which  had  come  before.    The  delay  caused  little  anxiety, 


368  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

although  it  worked  temporary  inconvenience  to  the  troops, 
who  had  been  waiting  for  materials  with  which  to  work. 

Probably  the  happiest  man  in  port  was  Rear  Admiral 
Gleaves,  commander  of  the  convoy.  From  the  bridge  of  his 
flagship  he  watched  the  successful  conclusion  of  his  plans  with 
characteristic  modesty  and  insisted  upon  bestowing  the  lion's 
share  of  credit  for  the  crossing  on  the  navigating  officers  of 
his  command. 

ADVANCE  PLANS  BRIEFLY  SKETCHED. 

Sketching  briefly  the  advance  plans  whereby  all  units  of 
the  contingent  had  to  keep  a  daily  rendezvous  with  accom- 
panying warships,  he  said,  that,  thanks  to  his  navigating  offi- 
cers and  despite  overcast  skies,  which  made  astronomical 
observations  impossible,  each  rendezvous  had  been  minutely 
and  accurately  kept  by  each  unit.  The  orders  he  issued  at  the 
outset,  which  comprised  scores  of  details,  were  observed,  the 
Admiral  declared,  with  such  exactness  that  the  contingent 
units  and  convoying  warships  invariably  met  each  other  with- 
in half  an  hour  of  the  appointed  time. 

A  big  contributing  factor  in  the  crossing,  according  to 
officers  of  both  branches  of  the  service,  was  the  hearty  co- 
operation between  the  army  and  navy.  From  the  time  of  the 
departure  until  the  landing  there  was  not  the  slightest  sugges- 
tion of  friction,  and  co-ordination  played  its  part  distinctively 
in  the  success  of  the  expedition. 

The  startling  fact  of  the  entire  journey  across  the  sea  was 
that  the  Navy  had  won  its  first  victory  in  driving  off  attack- 
ing submarines.  The  news  of  the  fight  was  given  out  b}^  the 
Navy  Department  and  the  Committee  on  Public  Information, 
with  the  announcement  of  the  final  landing  of  the  troops  and 
the  safe  arrival  of  the  supply  ships. 

The  announcement,  sponsored  by  Secretary  Daniels,  of 
the  Navy,  shows  beyond  the  shadow  of  doubt  that  the  Berlin 
Admiralty  had  been  "tipped  off"  that  the  American  expedi- 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  369 

tionary  force  was  on  its  way,  and  had  carefully  planned  to 
send  the  transports  to  the  bottom  of  the  Atlantic. 

Realizing  that  an  attack  might  be  expected  in  the  war 
zone,  and  that  every  precaution  would  be  taken  to  ward  it  off, 
the  Germans  moved  far  out  from  land,  in  the  hope  of  catch- 
ing the  American  gunners  napping.  They  were  fooled. 
Uncle  Sam's  jackies  were  at  the  guns  when  the  fleet  of  sub- 
marines stuck  their  periscopes  above  the  waves  and  trained 
their  torpedo  tubes  on  the  lines  of  transports. 

WAVES  COVERED  WITH  SHELLS. 

The  torpedo  boats  and  other  craft  opened  up  and  cov- 
ered the  waves  with  shells.  The  Germans  soon  lost  at  least 
one  submarine  and,  having  had  enough  of  the  fight,  they  dis- 
appeared. As  the  little  destroyers  dashed  straight  at  the  sub- 
marines and  shot  under  water  explosives  in  their  wake  as  they 
submerged,  the  transports  dashed  through  the  night  at  top 
speed  without  having  been  scratched. 

The  extreme  degree  to  which  the  Germans  had  prepared 
to  destroy  the  American  force  is  shown  by  the  second  part  of 
the  official  announcement,  which  tells  how  another  section  of 
the  transport  fleet  was  waylaid  under  cover  of  darkness,  but 
how  the  American  gunners  were  too  quick  for  the  Germans. 

The  text  of  Secretary  Daniels'  announcement  was: 

"It  is  with  the  joy  of  a  great  relief  that  I  announce  to 
the  people  of  the  United  States  the  safe  arrival  in  France  of 
every  fighting  man  and  every  fighting  ship.  Nov/  that  the 
last  vessel  has  reached  port,  it  is  safe  to  disclose  the  dangers 
that  were  encountered  and  to  tell  the  complete  story  of  peril 
and  courage. 

"The  transports  bearing  our  troops  were  twice  attacked 
by  German  submarines  on  the  way  across.  On  both  occasions 
the  U-boats  were  beaten  off  with  every  appearance  of  loss. 
One  was  certainly  sunk,  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the 
accurate  fire  of  our  gunners  sent  others  to  the  bottom. 

H  E— 24 


370  UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD. 

"For  purposes  of  convenience,  the  expedition  was  divided 
into  contingents,  each  contingent  including  troopships  and  a 
naval  escort  designed  to  keep  off  such  German  raiders  as 
might  be  met. 

"An  ocean  rendezvous  had  also  been  arranged  with  the 
American  destroyers  now  operating  in  European  waters  in 
order  that  the  passage  of  the  danger  zone  might  be  attended 
by  every  possible  protection. 

"The  first  attack  took  place  at  10.30  on  the  night  of  June 
22.  What  gives  it  peculiar  and  disturbing  significance  is  that 
our  ships  were  set  upon  at«a  point  well  this  side  of  the  ren- 
dezvous, and  in  that  part  of  the  Atlantic  presumably  free 
from  submarines.  The  attack  was  made  in  force,  although 
the  night  made  impossible  any  exact  count  of  the  U-boats 
gathered  for  what  they  deemed  a  slaughter. 

HIGH  SEAS  CONVOY. 

"The  high  seas  convoy,  circling  with  their  searchlights, 
answered  with  heavy  gunfire,  and  its  accuracy  stands  proved 
by  the  fact  that  the  torpedo  discharge  became  increasingly 
scattered  and  inaccurate.  It  is  not  known  how  many  tor- 
pedoes were  launched,  but  five  were  counted  as  they  sped  by 
bow  and  stern. 

"A  second*  attack  was  launched  a  few  days  later  against 
another  contingent.  The  point  of  assault  was  beyond  the  ren- 
dezvous and  our  destroyers  were  sailing  as  a  screen  between 
the  transports  and  all  harm.  The  results  of  the  battle  were  in 
favor  of  American  gunnery. 

"Not  alone  did  the  destroyers  hold  the  U-boats  at  a  safe 
distance,  but  their  speed  also  resulted  in  the  sinking  of  one 
submarine  at  least.  Grenades  were  used  in  firing,  a  depth 
charge  explosive  timed  to  go  off  at  a  certain  distance  under 
water.  In  one  instance,  oil  and  wreckage  covered  the  surface 
of  the  sea  after  a  shot  from  a  destroyer  at  a  periscope,  and  the 
reports  make  claim  of  sinking. 


UNCLE  SAM  TAKES  HOLD.  371 

"Protected  by  our  high  seas  convoy,  by  our  destroyers 
and  by  French  war  vessels,  the  contingent  proceeded  and 
joined  the  others  in  a  French  port. 

"The  whole  nation  will  rejoice  that  so  great  a  peril  is 
passed  for  the  vanguard  of  the  men  who  will  fight  our  battles 
in  France.  No  more  thrilling  Fourth  of  July  celebration 
could  have  been  arranged  than  this  glad  news  that  lifts  the 
shadow  of  dread  from  the  heart  of  America." 

Upon  receipt  of  the  announcement,  Secretary  Baker 
wrote  the  following  letter  to  Secretary  Daniels,  conveying  the 
army's  thanks  to  the  navy : 

"Word  has  just  come  to  the  War  Department  that  the 
last  ships  conveying  General  Pershing's  expeditionary  force 
to  France  arrived  safe  today.  As  you  know,  the  navy  assumed 
the  responsibility  for  the  safety  of  these  ships  on  the  sea  and 
through  the  danger  zone.  The  ships  themselves  and  their 
convoys  were  in  the  hands  of  the  navy,  and  now  that  they  have 
arrived,  and  carried,  without  the  loss  of  a  man,  our  soldiers 
who  are  the  first  to  represent  America  in  the  battle  for  democ- 
racy, I  beg  leave  to  tender  to  you,  to  the  Admiral  and  to  the 
navy,  the  hearty  thanks  of  the  War  Department  and  of  the 
army.  This  splendid  achievement  is  an  auspicious  beginning 
and  it  has  been  characterized  throughout  by  the  most  cordial 
and  effective  co-operation  between  the  two  military  services." 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

A  GERMAN  CRISIS. 

The  Downfall  of  Bethmann-Hollweg — The  Crown  Prince  in  the  Lime  Light 
— Hollweg's  Unique  Career! — Dr.  Georg  Michaelis  Appointed  Chancellor 
— The  Kaiser  and  How  He  Gets  His  Immense  Power. 

THE  active  participation  of  the  United  States  in  the  war, 
as  distinctly  marked  by  the  sending  of  troops  to  France, 

aside  from  giving  needed  inspiration  to  the  Allied  forces, 
may  be  said  to  have  had  a  decided  effect  in  Germany.  While 
the  German  subjects  are  loyal,  there  has  developed  in  the 
country,  as  in  every  other  country,  a  large  element  of  Social- 
ists and  progressives. 

Something  of  a  climax  was  reached  in  the  affairs  of  the 
Hohenzollern  dynasty  just  when  the  United  States  troops 
were  preparing  to  take  their  places  on  the  battle  line  in  France 
and  when  the  first  of  the  conscripted  forces  of  the  country 
were  being  summoned  to  the  colors. 

With  a  suddenness  that  startled  the  entire  world,  Dr, 
von  Bethmann-Hollweg,  the  German  Imperial  Chancellor, 
resigned  on  July  14,  thus  ending  his  career  as  the  spokesman 
of  the  Kaiser,  which  he  had  maintained  for  a  surprisingly  long 
period.  At  the  same  time  Dr.  Alfred  Zimmermann,  Foreign 
Minister,  who  was  responsible  for  the  correspondence  which 
revealed  the  fact  that  Germany  was  trying  to  induce  Mexico 
and  Japan  to  form  an  alliance  against  the  United  States,  also 
quit  his  post. 

The  resignation  of  the  Chancellor  came  quite  unexpect- 
edly, for  von  Hollweg,  in  the  prolonged  party  discussion  and 
heated  debates  of  the  main  committee  of  the  Reichstag  which 
had  been  in  progress,  seemed  to  have  triumphed  over  his 
opponents. 

His  opponents  had  been  clamoring  for  his  head,  but  he 

372 


A  GERMAN  CRISIS.  373 

made  concessions,  and  by  the  declaration  that  Germany  was 
fighting  defensively  for  her  territorial  possessions  evolved  a 
formula  which  for  a  time  seemed  satisfactory  to  both  those 
who  clamored  for  peace  by  agreement  and  those  who  demand- 
ed repudiation  of  the  formula,  "no  annexation  and  no  indem- 
nities." In  this  position  Dr.  von  Hollweg  was  backed  by  the 
Emperor. 

The  advent  of  the  Crown  Prince  upon  the  scene — sum- 
moned by  his  imperial  father  to  share  the  deliberations  affect- 
ing the  future  of  the  dynasty — seems  to  have  changed  entire- 
ly the  position  with  regard  to  the  Imperial  Chancellor.  The 
Crown  Prince  at  once  took  a  leading  part  in  the  discussions 
with  the  party  leaders,  and  his  ancient  hostility  toward  Dr. 
von  Bethmann-Hollweg,  coupled  with  his  notorious  dislike  for 
political  reform,  undoubtedly  precipitated  the  Chancellor's 
resignation. 

APPOINTMENT  OF  DR.  GEORG  MICHAELIS* 
The  resignation  of  Dr.  von  Hollweg  was  followed  by  the 
appointment  of  Dr.  Georg  Michaelis,  Prussian  Under  Secre- 
tary of  Finance  and  Pood  Commissioner. 

The  fall  of  Theobald  von  Bethmann-Hollweg  removed 
the  last  of  the  statesmen  who  were  in  charge  of  the  great 
Powers  of  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  brought 
to  an  end  a  career  which  in  successful  playing  of  both  ends 
against  the  middle  was  almost  without  parallel  in  recent 
history. 

Chancellor  von  Bethmann-Hollweg,  an  aristocrat  and 
personal  friend  of  the  Emperor,  stood  out  strongly  against 
democratic  agitation  before  the  war,  and  at  times  was  sharply 
outspoken  in  his  defiance  of  socialism  and  his  rejection  of  any 
move  toward  making  the  Chancellor  and  his  subordinates,  the 
other  Ministers,  responsible  to  the  Reichstag.  Yet  in  the  early 
stages  of  the  war  he  became  known  as  a  moderate,  and  it  has 
been  generally  accepted  that  his  influence  was  usually  em- 


374  A  GERMAN  CRISIS. 

ployed  against  the  breaking  of  relations  with  America  and 
ruthless  submarine  warfare. 

PRESERVES  A  JUDICIOUS  BALANCE. 

When  the  opposition  of  the  parties  favoring  the  most  des- 
perate measures  became  too  strong  for  him,  he  conceded  a  little 
ground,  taking  up  a  middle  position  in  which  he  balanced  him- 
self for  a  long  time  against  both  the  Conservative  Junkers  and 
the  National  Liberal  trust  magnates  on  the  one  side  and  the 
radical  Socialists  on  the  other.  Neither  side  could  claim  him; 
neither  could  interpret  his  ambiguous  utterances  as  support  of 
its  policies,  and  between  the  antagonisms  of  the  two  he  main- 
tained his  position  until  at  last  he  was  overthrown  by  the  attack 
of  Erzberger,  leader  of  the  more  liberal  wing  of  the  Catholic 
party,  the  traditional  holders  of  the  middle  ground. 

Bethmann-Hollweg's  agility  was  demonstrated  by  the 
fact  that  he  survived  Asquith  and  Grey,  Viviani,  Sazonoff, 
Berchtold,  Salandra,  Jagow,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  statesmen 
who  were  in  power  in  Europe  in  August,  1914. 

In  personality  the  Chancellor  was  studious,  scholarly  and 
pleasant,  lacking  the  brilliance  of  his  predecessor,  Von  Bue- 
low,  but  generally  regarded  as  one  who  was  if  anything  too 
mild  rather  than  too  severe. 

Dr.  Georg  Michaelis,  the  successor  to  Hollweg,  was  the 
first  commoner  to  be  appointed  to  that  high  office,  without  even 
a  "von"  before  his  name. 

The  son  of  a  Prussian  official,  he  was  born  on  September 
8,  1857,  in  Haynan,  Silesia.  He  received  a  university  educa- 
tion, making  the  law  his  profession.  In  1879  he  became  a  court 
referee  in  Berlin,  and  in  1884  was  attached  to  the  District  At- 
torney's office  in  that  city.  Several  years  later  he  went  as  pro- 
fessor of  law  and  political  economy  to  the  University  of  Tokio. 

Returning  to  Germany  in  1889,  he  was  chosen  District 
Attorney  for  Berlin.  His  services  won  much  praise  and  he 
was  afterward  sent  by  the  government  as  an  official  in  the  pro- 


A  GERMAN  CRISIS.  375 

visional  government  at  Trevas,  Germany.  In  1897  he  was 
transferred  to  Westphalia,  where  he  was  Chief  Councilor  for 
the  government  there. 

In  1900  he  was  made  Provisional  President  of  Liebnitz 
and  in  1902  First  Privy  Councilor  in  Breslau.  His  work 
there  won  him  an  appointment  as  Under  Secretary  of  State  in 
the  Department  of  Finance,  which  post  he  held  in  connection 
with  his  work  as  Food  Commissioner. 

Doctor  Michaelis  was  selected  for  the  post  of  Prussian 
Food  Commissioner  in  February,  1917,  after  all  efforts  of 
Adolph  von  Batocki's  organization — the  food  regulation  board 
— had  failed  to  lay  hands  on  large  supplies  of  grain,  potatoes 
and  other  produce  which  the  Prussian  landlords  were  holding 
for  the  fattening  of  cattle  and  swine  instead  of  making  them 
available  for  general  consumption. 

GOVERNMENT  ORDERS  DISREGARDED. 

The  orders  of  Herr  Batocki  and  the  Central  Government 
for  the  surrender  of  these  supplies  were  disregarded  or  evaded 
at  least,  if  not,  as  charged  in  Germany,  with  the  actual  assis- 
tance and  support  of  the  reactionary  Prussian  [Minister  of 
Agriculture,  Baron  von  Schorlemer. 

Doctor  Michaelis  was  eventually  selected  as  Food  Con- 
troller as  the  result  of  an  agreement  between  von  Bethmann- 
Hollweg  and  the  military  authorities  as  a  fearless,  determined 
official,  who  would  execute  his  mission  without  fear  or  favor 
and  produce  results  if  such  were  possible.  The  selection  was 
justified. 

The  conditions  in  Germany  which  marked  the  ascendancy 
of  the  Crown  Prince  in  the  deliberations  of  the  Imperial  Gov- 
ernment and  brought  about  the  upheaval  in  the  Ministry  are 
the  logical  result  of  the  system  under  which  the  country  is 
ruled. 

There  is,  in  the  mind  of  the  public  generally,  a  theory  that 
Germany  with  its  Bundesrath  and  Reichstag  has  a  govern- 


376  A  GERMAN  CRISIS. 

ment  akin  to  that  of  England  and  even  the  United  States,  but 
the  impression  is  an  erroneous  one.  It  is  true  that  Germany 
has  a  dual  system  of  government  and  independent  state  sov- 
ereignties. There  is,  however,  nothing  democratic  about  the 
system. 

To  begin  with,  the  Kaiser  is  a  constitutional  monarch  in 
his  capacity  as  German  Emperor,  but  as  King  of  Prussia  he  is 
a  self-appointed  and  arrogant  ruler — all  that  he  advertises 
himself  to  be  in  the  way  of  a  God-chosen  ruler. 

STATUS  OF  GERMAN  SOVEREIGNTY. 

To  understand  the  difference  in  relationship  between  the 
King  of  Prussia  and  the  German  Emperor  it  is  necessary  to 
realize  that  the  German  constitution  describes  the  Emperor 
thus:  "The  presidency  of  the  Union  belongs  to  the  King  of 
Prussia,  who  bears  the  title  of  German  Emperor."  On  the 
other  hand  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  happens  to  be  the  Kaiser, 
has  his  right  to  rule  by  birth.  When  the  first  king  was  crowned, 
about  1701,  he  placed  the  crown  upon  his  own  head,  and  that 
right  has  descended  to  King  William.  But  as  German  Em- 
peror the  duties  of  the  Kaiser  are  as  clearly  defined  as  those 
of  the  ruler  of  a  modern  democracy. 

The  difference  between  the  Kingdom  and  the  Empire  is 
that  the  German  Empire  is  a  creation  of  sovereign  states,  ruled 
over  by  German  Grand  Dukes,  Princes,  and  whatnot,  who 
trace  their  lineage  back  to  the  days  when  might  was  right,  and 
who  won  their  power  to  rule  by  defeating  their  fellow  men. 
At  one  time  there  were  several  hundred  of  these  ruling  princes. 
When  Napoleon  got  through  in  Germany  there  were  about 
twenty-two  left.  The  German  Empire  today  consists  of  these 
twenty-two  states,  and  three  free  cities,  comprising  in  all  a 
group  of  twenty-five  communities.  It  is  a  bond  or  association. 
It  consists,  in  fact,  of  the  twenty-five  communities,  of  which 
it  is  composed,  and  represented  by  twenty-five  kings,  dukes, 
princes,  etc.,  and  not  by  the  65,000,000  population  of  the  com- 


A  GERMAN  CRISIS.  377 

munities  themselves.  The  sovereignty  rests  with  the  princes 
of  the  several  states,  who  have  bestowed  a  fixed  power  upon 
the  Kaiser.    As  Emperor  his  office  dates  back  to  1871. 

The  legislative  machinery  which  has  been  devised  for  the 
use  of  these  German  sovereigns  consists  of  the  Bundesrath  and 
the  Reichstag.  Sometimes  the  Bundesrath  is  likened  to  our 
Senate,  or  to  the  hereditary  English  House  of  Lords,  while 
the  Reichstag  is  compared  to  the  House  of  Representatives  or 
the  House  of  Commons.    But  comparisons  are  odious. 

THE  BUNDESRATH. 

The  Bundesrath  is  an  assembly  in  which  the  German 
kings,  grand  dukes,  dukes,  princes,  etc.,  come  together  (by 
proxy)  to  direct  the  affairs  of  the  Empire.  Each  of  these  sov- 
ereigns sends  a  specified  number  of  delegates,  in  accordance 
with  the  provisions  of  the  constitution.  Thus  the  Kaiser,  as 
the  King  of  Prussia,  sends  seventeen  delegates,  while  the  King 
of  Bavaria  sends  six.  The 'total  number  of  delegates  is  fifty- 
eight,  so  right  in  the  beginning  the  Kaiser  has  a  pretty  good 
representation. 

The  delegations  in  the  Bundesrath  vote  en  masse — that  is 
the  "unit  rule"  prevails.  The  seventeen  delegates  from  Prus- 
sia must  vote  as  instructed  by  the  Kaiser,  and  if  there  chanced 
to  be  but  one  member  present  he  still  would  cast  seventeen 
votes  for  the  delegation.  The  members  of  the  Bundesrath  are 
referred  to  quite  frequently  as  ambassadors.  There  is  no  need 
for  discussion  in  the  body  since  the  delegations  vote,  in  any 
event,  as  a  unit. 

The  power  of  the  German  Bundesrath  is,  however,  aston- 
ishing. Usually  the  lower  house  is  supposed  to  be  the  one  in 
which  originates  legislation,  such  as  finance,  affecting  the  peo- 
ple. But  in  Germany  it  is  the  Bundesrath  which  has  the  power 
to  tax,  and  the  lower  chamber,  the  Reichstag,  merely  has  the 
vetoing  power. 


378  A  GERMAN  CRISIS. 

This  makes  the  taxing  power  in  Germany  primarily  the 
privilege  of  the  crown. 

The  financial  program  is  prepared  by  the  Chancellor,  who 
is  the  direct  representative  of  the  Kaiser,  and  responsible  only 
to  him.  In  other  governments  members  of  the  ministry  are 
appointed  by  the  legislative  bodies,  but  the  Chancellor  is  per- 
sonally named  by  the  Kaiser,  and  is  not  even  a  member  of  the 
Reichstag.  He  has  the  right,  however,  to  address  this  body,  as 
the  privilege  of  a  member  of  the  Bundesrath  of  which,  as  the 
personal  representative  of  the  Kaiser,  he  is  the  presiding 
officer. 

Since  the  Bundesrath,  as  already  shown,  practically  con- 
trols the  German  Empire,  and  the  King  of  Prussia,  with  his 
seventeen  votes  in  the  Bundesrath  holds  sway  in  that  body,  it  is 
easy  to  see  how  the  Kaiser  is  the  dominating  figure  in  the  Ger- 
man Empire. 

THE  KAISER'S  DUAL  PREROGATIVE. 

A  unique  provision  of  the  German  constitution  is  that 
fourteen  votes  in  the  Bundesrath  can  defeat  any  proposed 
amendment,  and  since  the  Kaiser  controls  seventeen  votes,  as 
King  of  Prussia,  besides  several  others,  he  has  a  voting 
strength  which  can  block  any  attempt  to  change  the  regime. 
Also,  as  King  of  Prussia,  he  can  instruct  his  Chancellor  to 
prepare  laws  to  be  introduced  in  the  Bundesrath. 

It  is  the  power  which  the  Kaiser  possesses,  as  the  King  of 
Prussia,  which  gives  him  his  control  as  the  German  Emperor. 
Prussia  is  the  largest  of  the  German  states,  and  when  the 
Kaiser,  as  King  of  Prussia,  says  that  he  is  master  in  Prussia, 
he  speaks  the  truth. 

There  is  a  ministry  in  Prussia,  and  the  head  of  this  body 
is  usually  the  same  person  who  occupies  the  position  of  Im- 
perial Chancellor,  and  the  Kaiser  appoints  this  Minister  as  well 
as  his  associates,  whom  he  can  remove  without  reference  to  the 
Ministrjr  as  a  body.    There  are  two  chambers  in  Prussian  Min- 


A  GERMAN  CRISIS.  379 

istry  commonly  known  as  the  House  of  Peers,  and  the  House 
of  Representatives. 

Just  to  give  the  King  of  Prussia  a  little  more  control,  he 
has  the  right  to  appoint  all  the  members  of  the  House  of  Peers, 
and  also  to  designate  the  number.  The  House  of  Represen- 
tatives, on  the  face  of  it,  is  a  popular  body,  because  the  members 
are  supposed  to  be  elected  by  universal  suffrage.  The  tax- 
payers vote  for  representation  in  this  chamber,  but  they  do  not 
vote  directly  nor  on  equal  terms. 

Members  of  the  House  of  Representatives  are  chosen  by 
an  electoral  college,  and  several  hundred  of  these  colleges  are 
selected  at  each  election.  Though  taxpayers  vote  for  the  elec- 
tors, all  the  votes  do  not  have  the  same  relative  value.  The 
taxpayers  whose  combined  taxes  represent  one-third  of  the 
whole  amount  of  taxes  in  an  electoral  district  choose  one-third 
of  the  members  from  that  district  to  the  House.  Those  who 
pay  the  next  one-third  of  the  taxes  choose  another  third  of  the 
electors,  and  the  remaining  body  of  voters  choose  the  last  third* 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

President  Wilson  Puts  Embargo  on  Food  Shipments — Scandinavian  Countries 
Furnishing  Supplies  to  Germany  Inspires  Order — The  Difficult  Position 
of  Norway,  Denmark,  Holland  and  Switzerland. 

WHEN  America  first  declared  its  intentions  there  were  in 
the  United  States  thousands  who  held  to  the  theory  that 
"America  in  War"  simply  meant  that  we  should  shut 
ourselves  within  our  borders,  perhaps  furnish  supplies  to  the 
Allied  forces,  lend  money  to  England,  France,  Belgium  and 
Russia,  use  our  navy  to  protect  our  merchant  shipping  and  go 
about  our  business,  leaving  the  fighting  to  the  forces  joined  in 
conflict  against  Germany. 

They  were  disabused  when  the  English  and  French  Com- 
mission and  the  representatives  of  Belgium  and  Russia  made 
it  apparent  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  America  to  actually 
raise  a  fighting  army  and  General  Pershing  was  sent  to  France. 
But  they  learned,  too,  that  mobilizing  the  forces  of  the  country 
and  waging  warfare  were  not  simple  matters.  The  truth  was 
brought  home  that  the  whole  nation  must  fight;  that  it  must 
use  its  brains,  its  money,  its  resources  of  every  sort,  its  whole 
power,  both  in  an  offensive  and  in  a  defensive  way. 

Not  only  must  its  soldiers  and  sailors  face  the  guns  of  the 
Teutons,  but  the  machinery  of  government  must  be  used  to 
bring  the  arrogant  Hohenzollerns  to  their  knees.  Some  start- 
ling things  were  discovered,  and  the  brains  of  the  diplomatic 
force  of  the  government  were  put  to  the  test.  International 
problems  arose  which  were  never  before  encountered  in  the 
history  of  nations. 

England,  with  its  blockade  against  German}r,  and  Ger- 
many with  its  submarine  warfare  against  British  and  neutral 
shipping,  developed  problems  which  had  to  be  solved  relative 

380 


UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS.  381 

to  keeping  Germany  from  getting  supplies  which  would  en- 
able her  to  withstand  the  siege,  and  also  as  to  the  sending  of 
supplies  to  England,  Belgium,  France  and  Russia,  and  par- 
ticularly to  our  own  forces  fighting  with  the  Allies  in  France. 
A   BIG   FACTOR   IN   WAR. 

Unfortunate  as  it  may  seem,  one  of  the  biggest  factors  in 
waging  successful  war  is  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting 
food  supplies.  It  is  a  frequently  repeated  truism  that  "an 
army  travels  on  its  stomach,"  and  in  the  pleas  for  conservation 
and  efficient  management  the  leaders  in  every  country  declared 
frequently  that  "the  war  would  be  won  by  the  last  loaf  of 
bread,"  or  that  it  was  not  a  question  of  ammunition,  but  of 
wheat. 

One  of  the  serious  problems  which  the  government  was 
therefore  called  to  face  within  a  very  short  period  after  the 
American  troops  were  first  landed  in  France  was  that  of  deal- 
ing with  the  food  situation,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  At  that 
time  the  German  U-boats  had  sunk  merchant  ships  having  a 
total  of  more  than  5,000,000  tonnage,  and  the  food  situation 
was  precarious  in  the  Allied  countries.  Germany,  on  the  other 
hand,  because  of  long  preparation  for  the  struggle,  coupled 
with  efficient  management  and  practices,  was  more  largely 
independent  of  other  countries. 

At  this  time  it  was  learned  that  Germany  was  securing 
large  quantities  of  foodstuffs  through  the  medium  of  some  of 
the  neutral  countries.  America  was,  therefore,  called  upon  to 
take  steps  to  prevent  the  Germans  getting  supplies  from  this 
country,  through  the  intermediary  of  Holland  and  the  Scandi- 
navian countries.  As  a  result  the  government  placed  an  em- 
bargo on  a  long  list  of  articles  including  fuel,  oils,  grains, 
meats  and  fodder.  The  embargo,  which  was  made  effective  by 
a  proclamation  of  President  Wilson,  forbade  the  carrying  of 
such  supplies  as  were  mentioned  from  the  United  States  or  its 
territorial  possessions  to  neutral  countries. 


382  UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

The  purpose  of  the  embargo  was  not  to  prevent  the  neu- 
tral countries  from  securing  foodstuffs  from  America  for  their 
own  consumption,  but  to  prevent  their  reselling  such  supplies 
at  a  profit  to  Germany.  The  position  of  the  government  was 
made  plain  in  the  statement  of  President  Wilson,  who  said: 

DOMESTIC  AND  FOREIGN  NEEDS. 

"It  is  obviously  the  duty  of  the  United  States  in  liberating 
any  surplus  products  over  and  above  our  own  domestic  needs 
to  consider  first  the  necessities  of  all  the  nations  engaged  in 
war  against  the  central  empires.  As  to  neutral  nations,  how- 
ever, we  also  recognize  our  duty.  The  government  does  not 
wish  to  hamper  them.  On  the  contrary,  it  wishes  and  intends, 
by  all  fair  and  equitable  means,  to  co-operate  with  them  in  their 
difficult  task  of  adding  from  our  available  surpluses  to  their 
own  domestic  supply  and  of  meeting  their  pressing  necessities 
or  deficits.  In  considering  the  deficits  of  food  supplies,  the 
government  means  only  to  fulfill  its  obvious  obligation  to  as- 
sure itself  that  neutrals  are  husbanding  their  own  resources, 
and  that  our  supplies  will  not  become  available,  either  directly 
or  indirectly,  to  feed  the  enemy." 

While  the  conservation  of  our  resources  had  a  great  deal 
to  do  with  the  issuing  of  the  embargo,  the  action  was  partly 
taken  as  the  result  of  information  lodged  by  England  that 
Holland,  Sweden  and  Norway  had  been  supplying  Germany 
and  her  allies  with  food,  despite  the  latter's  hostile  action  in 
sinking  ships  owned  by  the  neutrals.  The  government  made 
an  investigation  and  discovered  that  the  shipment  to  these  neu- 
tral countries  had  become  abnormally  large.  It  was  reported, 
particularly,  that  many  Holland  business  men  had  become 
fabulously  wealthy  by  trading  in  the  supplies  which  came  from 
America,  and  which  they  resold  to  Germany. 

The  embargo  became  operative  under  a  method  of  license 
procedure,  so  that  all  shipments  could  be  watched  by  the  gov- 
ernment authorities.    The  order  compelled  all  persons  seeking 


UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTKALS.  383 

to  export  goods  to  make  application  for  a  license  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  Commerce,  or  bureaus  designated  in  various  parts  of 
the  country. 

In  support  of  the  contentions  that  the  neutral  countries 
were  supplying  Germany,  Great  Britain  furnished  the  Gov- 
ernment with  the  following  table  as  representing  the  minimum 
of  food  exports  from  Scandinavia  and  Holland  to  Germany 
in  1916:  Butter,  82,600  metric  tons;  meat,  115,800  tons;  pork 
products,  68,800  tons;  condensed  milk,  70,000  tons;  fish,  407 
tons;  cheese,  80,500  tons;  eggs,  46,400  tons;  potato  meal,  179,- 
500  tons;  coffee,  58,500  tons;  fruit,  74,000  tons;  sugar,  12,000 
tons;  vegetables,  215,000. 

These  figures  are  most  impressive,  it  is  asserted,  in  rela- 
tion to  fats,  the  scarcest  thing  in  Germany.  Fat,  it  is  claimed, 
is  the  only  food  seriously  lacking  now  in  the  diet  of  the  Ger- 
man people.  Imports  of  this  food,  the  British  declare,  furnish 
one-fourth  of  the  daily  German  fat  ration. 

NATIONS  WHO  SUFFER  FROM  EMBARGO. 

There  are  five  neutral  countries  whose  positions  were  any- 
thing but  enviable  during  the  war,  and  it  is  perhaps  worth 
interpolating  a  little  something  about  them  at  this  particular 
point.  Norway,  Sweden,  Holland,  [Denmark  and  Switzerland 
were  the  neutrals  at  the  time  the  embargo  was  placed  on 
foodstuffs. 

Switzerland,  as  all  the  world  knows,  is  one  of  the  most 
picturesque  countries  in  Europe,  and  is  a  republic  in  the  west 
central  part  of  the  continent,  bounded  on  the  north  by  Baden, 
Wurtemburg  and  Bavaria;  on  the  east  by  the  Tyrol,  on  the 
south  by  Italy  and  on  the  west  by  France.  There  is  no  na- 
tional tongue,  three  languages  being  spoken  within  the  bound- 
aries of  the  republic.  Where  it  comes  in  contact  with  the 
French  frontier,  the  French  language  is  largely  spoken;  while 
Italian  is  the  language  spoken  in  the  southern  part,  where  it 
is  bounded  by  Italy.     In  the  northern  section  the  German 


384  UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

language  is  spoken.    The  country  has  an  area  of  15,992  square 
miles. 

In  the  main,  Switzerland  is  mountainous,  the  chief  val- 
ley being  that  of  the  Rhone,  in  the  southern  part.  The  most 
level  tracts  are  in  the  northwestern  section,  where  there  are  a 
number  of  mountain-locked  valleys.  Mountain  slopes  com- 
prise about  two-fifths  of  the  area  of  the  country,  and  prac- 
tically all  of  the  rivers  are  rapid  and  unnavigable.  The  forests 
are  extensive  and  consist  of  large  trees.  Cereals,  along  with 
hemp,  flax  and  tobacco,  are  raised,  and  the  pasture  lands  are 
fertile  and  abundant.  Hence,  the  dairy  products,  as  well  as 
hides  and  tallow,  are  produced  in  profusion.  Fruits  of  the 
hardier  varieties  grow  well  and  profitably. 

A  FEDERAL  UNION. 

The  republic  consists  of  twenty-two  States  or  Cantons 
which  form  a  Federal  Union,  although  each  is  virtually  inde- 
pendent in  matters  of  politics.  The  Swiss  Constitution,  re- 
modelled in  1848,  vests  the  ruling  executive  and  legislative 
authority  in  a  Diet  of  two  houses — a  State  Council  and  a 
National  Council.  The  former  consists  of  44  members — two 
from  each  Canton — and  corresponds  in  its  functional  action 
with  the  United  States  Senate.  The  National  Council  is  the 
more  purely  representative  body,  and  is  composed  of  128  mem- 
bers elected  triennially  by  popular  suffrage.  Both  chambers 
combine  and  form  what  is  called  the  Federal  Assembly. 

The  chief  executive  power  is  exercised  by  the  so-called 
Federal  Council,  or  Bundesgericht,  which  is  elected  trienni- 
ally. Its  governing  officers  are  the  President  and  Vice  Presi- 
dent of  the  republic.  International  and  inter-cantonal  ques- 
tions are  discussed  before  and  adjudicated  by  the  Bundes- 
gericht, which  serves  as  a  high  court  of  appeal.  The  army 
consists  of  142,999  regulars  and  91,809  landwehr;  total,  231,- 
808  men  of  all  arms.     Every  adult  citizen  is  de  facto  liable 


UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS.  385 

to  military  service,  and  military  drill  and  discipline  are  taught 
in  all  the  schools.  The  Protestant  faith  forms  the  ruling  form 
of  religion  in  15  of  the  cantons,  Roman  Catholicism  prevailing 
in  the  rest.  Education  is  well  diffused  by  numerous  colleges 
and  schools  of  a  high  grade;  and  its  upper  branches  are  cared 
for  at  the  three  universities  of  Berne,  Basle  and  Zurich. 

Denmark,  whose  home  possessions  comprise  14,789  square 
miles,  is,  by  the  way,  barely  one-half  the  size  of  Scotland.  It 
consists  of  a  peninsular  portion  called  Jutland,  and  an  exten- 
sive archipelago  lying  east  of  it.  It  has  a  number  of  territorial 
possessions  in  the  Atlantic  ocean,  among  them  the  islands  of 
Iceland,  Greenland  and  the  Faroe  islands  in  the  north. 

GERMAN  AMBITION  FRUSTRATED. 

One  of  its  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  was  purchased 
by  the  United  States  almost  at  the  time  America  entered  the 
war,  and  created  a  situation  which  was  not  calculated  to  inspire 
the  friendship  of  Germany  for  the  little  country,  since  it  was 
intimated  that  Germany  would  liked  to  have  had  the  island 
for  a  base.  The  islands  cost  the  United  States  about  $25,000,- 
000.  Including  the  colonial  possessions,  the  total  area  of  the 
Danish  possessions  is  80,000  square  miles,  the  population  be- 
ing 2,726,000  persons. 

Copenhagen  is  the  capital,  the  other  chief  cities  being 
Odense,  Aarhuus,  Aalborg,  Randers  and  Horsens.  For  ad- 
ministrative purposes  Denmark  is  divided  into  18  provinces 
or  districts,  besides  the  capital,  nine  of  these  making  up  Jut- 
land and  the  other  nine  comprising  the  island  possessions.  On 
the  south  Denmark  is  bounded  by  Germany  and  the  Baltic, 
on  the  west  it  is  washed  by  the  North  Sea;  while  to  the  north 
lies  Norway,  separated  by  the  Skagerrack,  and  on  the  east 
lies  Sweden,  separated  by  the  Cattegat  and  the  Sound. 

The  line  of  seaboard  is  irregular  and  broken,  and  the  low, 
flat  nature  of  the  country  necessitates  the  construction  of  dykes, 
in  many  places,  in  order  to  prevent  the  ocean  from  making 

HE— 25 


386  UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

inroads.  There  are  few  rivers,  and  these  are  small  and  not 
of  value  commercially.  Timber  is  not  abundant,  and  minerals 
are  scarce  and  of  little  value.  The  climate  is  generally  moist 
and  cold,  fogs  are  frequent  and  the  winters  generally  severe. 
Cereals,  potatoes,  wool  and  dairy  products  are  the  principal 
products.  Cattle  raising  is  carried  on  extensively,  much  of 
the  beef  being  exported. 

The  Danes,  physically,  are  sturdy,  and  represent  the 
truest  physical  characteristics  of  Scandinavian  types.  The 
people  are  brave,  sober  and  industrious,  and  the  sailors  from 
this  country  are  among  the  leading  navigators  of  the  world. 
The  government  is  a  constitutional  monarchy,  with  the  execu- 
tive power  vested  in  a  king  and  a  ministry,  who  are  held 
responsible  to  the  Bigsdag,  which  is  the  parliament. 

LANDSTHING  AND  FOLKSTHING. 

This  parliament  consists  of  a  Senate,  or  Landsthing,  and 
a  lower  house,  or  Folksthing.  The  Evangelical  Lutheran 
Church  is  the  State  religion,  but  all  other  persuasions  are  fully 
and  freely  tolerated.  Education  is  compulsory,  and  is  largely 
disseminated.  The  army  consists  of  60,000  men,  while  the 
navy  is  quite  small,  having  a  personnel  of  about  4000  officers 
and  men. 

The  authentic  history  dates  from  1385,  the  year  of  the 
accession  of  Margaret,  the  "Seiniramis  of  the  North,"  and 
wearer  of  the  triple  Scandinavian  crowns.  The  latest  mon- 
arch, Frederick  VIII,  came  to  the  throne  in  1906. 

Holland,  the  most  picturesque  of  the  neutral  countries, 
aside  from  Switzerland  with  its  wonderful  scenery,  is  credited 
with  having  profited  very  largely  by  the  war.  It  rests  along 
the  North  Sea  and  adjoins  the  German  Empire  on  the  east 
and  borders  Belgium  on  the  South.  It  contains  about  11  prov- 
inces, with  a  total  area  of  12,582  square  miles  and  a  popula- 
tion of  about  6,000,000. 

Always  one  thinks  of  windmills,  dykes,  fat  cattle,  butter, 


UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTEALS.  387 

eggs,  ducks  and  green  farms  when  Holland  is  mentioned,  and 
it  is  in  many  respects  one  of  the  most  highly  developed  com- 
mercial countries  in  the  world.  The  country  manufactures 
many  articles  of  world-wide  distribution,  including  chocolate, 
linens,  fine  damasks,  pottery,  chemical  and  pharmaceutical 
products,  and  Amsterdam  is  a  center  of  diamond-cutting. 

It  has  a  large  mercantile  marine  and  was  at  one  time  a 
termendous  maritime  power,  doing  an  immense  trading  busi- 
ness in  many  waters.  It  still  has  rich  and  extensive  colonies, 
including  the  Dutch  possessions  in  the  East  Indies,  compris- 
ing the  Sunda  Islands,  except  a  portion  of  Borneo  and  Eastern 
Timor,  and  New  Guinea.  Java  and  Madura  are  two  of  the 
richest  of  the  group  and  have  a  population  of  more  than 
30,000,000.  There  are  also  possessions  in  the  West  Indies  and 
in  South  America. 

A  SMALL  BUT  EFFICIENT  ARMY. 

The  Dutch  army  has  approximately  40,000  officers  and 
men  and  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  efficient  armies  in  the 
world  of  its  size.  There  is  also  a  colonial  army  in  the  East 
Indies  with  1300  officers  and  35,183  men.  Its  navy  has  4000 
officers  and  men  and  has  about  200  vessels  of  all  sorts,  none 
of  them  of  the  modern  dreadnought  or  super-dreadnought  type. 

The  history  of  the  rich  little  country  is  one  of  the  most 
interesting  in  literature.  It  was  originally  part  of  the  Empire 
of  Charlemagne.  Subsequently,  it  became  divided  into  a  num- 
ber of  petty  principalities,  and  by  heritage  became  a  posses- 
sion of  the  Austrian  monarchy.  In  the  long  struggle  against 
the  Spanish  power  it  became  one  of  the  Seven  United  Prov- 
inces. The  country  made  rapid  progress,  and  during  the  17th 
century  withstood  the  power  of  Louis  the  XIV  of  France, 
but  later  was  overrun  by  the  French,  and  finally  in  1806  was 
made  a  kingdom  by  Napoleon,  in  favor  of  his  brother  Louis. 
Ujider  the  Treaty  of  Paris  Belgium  and  Holland  were  united 
to  form  the  Kingdom  of  the  Netherlands,  and  this  arrange- 


388  UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

merit  remained  until  1830,  when  Belgium  broke  away.  Hol- 
land attempted  to  reduce  the  revolting  province  by  force,  but 
the  powers  intervened  and  an  adjustment  was  made.  The 
last  King  was  William,  III,  who  died  in  1890,  leaving  his 
daughter  Wilhelmina,  then  but  10  years  old,  Queen. 

Of  the  neutral  countries  none  endured  more  than  heroic 
Norway.  With  a  long  coast  line  practically  undefended  and 
with  the  full  force  of  the  German  navy  anchored  but  a  few 
hours  away,  and  a  none  too  friendly  country  on  her  land  bor- 
der, possessing  an  army  greater  than  her  own,  Norway's  posi- 
tion was  extremely  difficult. 

Had  she  flung  herself  into  the  war  with  the  Allies  when 
the  breach  came  she  would  have  been  of  little  help  to  them, 
for  she  would  have  placed  them  in  the  position  of  being  called 
upon  to  help  defend  her  long  coast  line.  It  is  probable  also 
that  a  break  with  Germany  would  have  let  loose  the  Swedish 
army  on  the  side  of  the  Teutons. 

BETWEEN  TWO  FIRES. 

The  little  country  was  between  two  fires,  and  she  suffered 
great  strain.  In  the  first  place,  while  Norway  attempted  to 
maintain  her  export  trade  and  her  shipping,  the  Allies  in- 
spected her  import  invoices  and  subjected  her  to  much  an- 
noyance, while  Germany,  without  provocation  ruthlessly  at- 
tacked her  merchant  ships  and  sent  many  of  them  to  the  bot- 
tom of  the  ocean. 

There  were  intimations  that  Germany's  real  intent  was 
to  precipitate  a  rupture  which  would  justify  her  attack  on  the 
little  country,  which  she  would  be  able  to  subdue  with  ease 
and  seize  the  rugged  coast  and  ports  of  vantage.  But  Nor- 
way remained  neutral,  and  was  not  at  all  pleased  with  the 
embargo  placed  upon  shipments  by  the  United  States,  though 
it  developed  that  the  restrictions  would  not  prevent  the  coun- 
try from  getting  its  share  of  grain  and  other  supplies  from 
America. 


UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS.  389 

Norway  is  the  western  portion  of  the  Scandinavian  penin- 
sula, and  has  an  area  of  about  125,000  square  miles.  Its 
northern  coast  is  washed  by  the  cold  waters  of  the  Arctic 
Ocean,  and  against  the  northeast  is  Lapland,  while  Sweden 
bounds  it  on  the  east  and  the  famed  North  Sea  on  the  south 
and  the  broad  Atlantic  on  the  west. 

The  rugged  country  is  separated  from  Sweden  by  the 

Kiolen,  or  the  Great  Scandinavian  chain  of  mountains,  and 

in  the  hills  and  mountains  are  found  the  wonderful  Norway 

spruce  and  fir  trees  familiar  in  commerce.     Its  fisheries  and 

shipbuilding  industry  are  also  of  great  importance  in  the  world 

of  business. 

DEMOCRACY  OF  NORWAY, 

The  constitution  of  Norway  is  one  of  the  most  Democratic 
in  all  Europe.  Although  a  monarchy,  its  executive  and  legis- 
lative power  is  vested  in  the  parliament,  called  the  Storthing, 
and  the  King  has  merely  a  nominal  command  over  the  army 
and  navy,  with  power  to  appoint  the  governor-general  only. 
The  latter  has  a  limited  right  to  veto  acts  of  the  parliament. 
Hereditary  nobility  was  abolished  in  1821. 

Under  the  treaty  of  Vienna  in  1814,  and  following  the 
defeat  of  Napoleon,  it  was  arranged  that  Denmark  must  give 
up  Norway,  and  the  two  countries  were  united  under  the 
Swedish  Crown.  Norway  demanded  a  separate  consular  ser- 
vice in  1905,  and  the  Storthing  declared  the  union  with  Sweden 
at  an  end.  Prince  Charles  of  Denmark  then  became  King, 
reigning  as  Haakon  VII. 

The  country  has  a  population  of  2,340,000,  and  her  full 
military  force  mobilized  for  war  is  only  110,000  men. 

Sweden,  Norway's  next-door  neighbor  on  the  Scandina- 
vian peninsula,  in  contradistinction  to  the  latter,  is  a  consti- 
tutional monarchy,  with  extraordinary  powers  vested  in  the 
King,  who  is  assisted  in  the  administration  of  affairs  by  a 
council  of  ministers.  The  Diet,  or  legislature,  consists  of  two 
chambers,  or  estates,  both  elected  by  the  people. 


390  UNCLE  SAM  AND  THE  NEUTRALS. 

Like  Norway,  the  country  is  very  rugged.  Lapland  and 
Finland  are  at  the  northeast,  and  on  the  east  is  the  Gulf  of 
Bothnia  and  the  Baltic,  and  on  the  south  the  Baltic,  the  Sound 
and  the  Cattegat.  It  joins  Ntorway  on  the  west.  Its  area  is 
172,875  square  miles,  and  its  coast  line  is  more  than  1400  miles 
long. 

Sweden,  while  it  does  not  have  a  first-class  navy,  possesses 
a  score  of  armored  vessels  of  small  displacement,  besides  tor- 
pedo boats,  destroyers,  etc.,  and  has  an  army  of  40,000  at 
peace  strength.  The  country  is  particularly  rich  in  minerals, 
and  some  of  the  finest  iron  ore  in  the  world  comes  from  its 
mines.  Nickel,  lead,  cobalt,  alum  and  sulphur  are  also  pro- 
duced in  large  quantities;  while  it  gives  to  the  world,  too, 
immense  quantities  of  lumber  and  larger  quantities  of  hemp, 
flax  and  hops. 

The  reigning  monarch  is  King  Gustavus  V,  who  suc- 
ceeded his  father,  Oscar  II,  who  died  in  1907.  The  population 
of  the  country  is  about  5,000,000. 

Of  these  neutrals,  both  Holland  and  Switzerland  did  a 
great  deal  for  the  suffering  Belgians  when  Germany  pounded 
through  the  country  of  King  Albert,  sending  money  for  the 
relief  of  the  sufferers  and  offering  refugees  shelter. 


CHAPTER   XXIV. 
THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR. 

From  Bosnia  to  Flanders — Maene  the  Turning  Point  of  the  Conflict — The 
Conquests  of  Seevia  and  Eumania — The  Fall  of  Bagdad— Russia's 
Women  Soldiees — Ameeica's  Conscripts. 

THE  end  of  August,  1917,  found  twenty-one  nations  in  a 
state  of  war  and  five  in  what  might  be  termed  a  condition 
of   modified    neutrality,    with   nearly    40,000,000    sum- 
moned to  arms  and  5,000,000  killed  in  bitter  warfare. 

This  was  the  fiery  reflection  of  the  shots  which  caused  the 
death  of  the  Archduke  Francis  Ferdinand,  of  Austria,  in  the 
quiet  little  town  of  Serajevo,  the  capital  of  Bosnia,  in  June, 
1914.  And  so,  with  their  backs  to  the  wall,  Austria-Hungary, 
Germany,  Turkey  and  Bulgaria  faced  Servia,  Russia,  France, 
Belgium,  Great  Britain,  Montenegro,  Japan,  Italy,  Portugal, 
Rumania,  the  United  States,  Cuba,  Brazil,  Greece,  Siam, 
China  and  little  Liberia,  while  Guatemala,  Panama,  Haiti, 
Uruguay  and  Bolivia  stood  by  in  a  position  of  neutrality,  but 
for  the  most  part  indicating  a  willingness  to  help  the  Allies. 

And  in  those  elapsed  three  years  after  the  Bosnia  tragedy 
an  Emperor  of  Austria  had  died ;  a  Czar  had  stepped  from  his 
throne,  and  a  King  had  been  compelled  to  toss  aside  his  crown. 
Prime  Ministers  and  Ministers  of  War  in  all  of  the  principal 
countries,  who  held  the  confidence  of  their  peoples  when  the 
war  started,  were  no  more. 

Cabinets  had  been  dissolved  and  new  ones  set  up,  states- 
men brushed  aside  and  commanders  of  the  war  forces  com-  ' 
pelled  to  step  out  that  others  might  carry  on  the  battles. 

Though  it  was  Austria's  ultimatum  to  Servia  which  pre- 
cipitated the  world-wide  struggle,  it  was  Germany  that  took 
the  first  step  and  crossed  the  French  frontier  with  its  armed 

forces.   After  Servia  refused  to  accede  to  all  of  the  demands 

391 


392  THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR. 

of  Austria-Hungary  and  war  had  formally  been  declared  by 
the  latter  country,  Russia  began  a  partial  mobilization  of  her 
armed  forces,  since  she  had  given  warning  that  she  would 
extend  protection  to  Servia.  Germany  retaliated  by  calling 
together  her  warring  forces  and  declaring  war  on  the  Czar; 
France  came  to  Russia's  aid.  Then  when  Belgium  refused  to 
permit  the  German  army  to  pass  through  the  country  and 
Germany  disregarded  international  treaties  and  invaded  the 
territory,  Great  Britain  declared  war  upon  the  Kaiser,  and 
Montenegro  aligned  itself  with  the  Allies. 

GERMANY'S  DESIGNS  ON  PARIS. 

Germany's  action  and  subsequent  events  prove  that  the 
war  lords  had  planned  to  capture  Paris  by  a  swift  attack  from 
the  north,  before  France  could  gather  her  forces  to  resist  and 
before  Russia  was  prepared  to  assist.  Belgium,  however, 
proved  a  stumbling  block.  The  natives,  battling  like  demons 
for  the  protection  of  their  homes  and  honor,  held  the  Teuton 
hordes  at  Liege  for  several  weeks,  or  until  the  famous  forti- 
fications there  were  reduced,  and  then  the  terrible  machine  of 
the  Germans  swept  forward  until  the  soldiers  were  within  fif- 
teen miles  of  the  French  capital. 

It  was  here,  within  a  few  hours'  march  of  Paris,  that  the 
French  and  Allied  troops  showed  their  real  metal.  General 
JofYre  met  the  German  hordes  beside  the  River  Marne  and 
with  his  troops  began  the  battle  which  was  to  guarantee  the 
security  of  the  French  capital  and  result  in  the  routing  of  the 
army  of  Von  Kluck,  regarded  as  the  pick  of  the  Prussian 
forces.  In  the  famed  battle  of  the  Marne  there  were  fought  a 
number  of  separate  engagements,  which  have  been  termed  the 
battles  of  Meaux,  Sezanne,  Vitry  and  Argonne. 

The  German  forces  were  driven  back  step  by  step  to  the 
north  bank  of  the  Aisne,  where  the  army  was  able  to  entrench 
itself  and  the  Germans  and  the  Allied  forces  began  digging 


THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR.  393 

themselves  into  the  ground  in  a  manner  that  had  never  before 
been  practised  in  warfare. 

While  Germany  was  striking  at  France,  the  Russians  had 
invaded  Austria,  capturing  Tarnapol  and  Lemberg  and  in- 
vesting the  great  fortress  of  Prezemsyl.  Austria  was  com- 
pelled to  call  upon  Germany  for  assistance  and  four  German 
army  corps,  under  Von  Hindenburg,  were  drawn  from  East 
Prussia  and  went  to  the  rescue.  Instead  of  trying  to  stem  the 
progress  of  the  Russians,  he  made  a  counter  offensive  with 
Warsaw  as  the  objective.  Russia  was  compelled  for  a  time 
to  abandon  its  positions  and  retreat,  and  Von  Hindenburg  got 
within  seven  miles  of  Warsaw  before  the  Russians  rode  down 
upon  his  forces  with  100,000  horsemen  and  compelled  retreat. 
Von  Hindenburg's  strategy  had,  however,  been  successful,  and 
his  action  on  the  Eastern  front  at  this  time  marked  the  first 
step  toward  his  pre-eminence  as  a  military  commander. 

BRITISH  AND  GERMAN  FORCES  COMPARED. 

During  1915  the  Allied  forces  were  able  to  do  little  more 
than  hold  their  positions.  Lord  Kitchener  had  builded  up  a 
British  volunteer  army  in  which  great  hopes  were  placed,  but 
in  the  matter  of  offensive  military  tactics  they  could  not  cope 
with  the  formidable  German  forces,  nor  had  the  Allies  devel- 
oped an  offensive  which  would  win  without  terrible  sacrifice, 
and  in  the  encounters  the  very  flower  of  Great  Britain's  man- 
hood, as  well  as  thousands  of  the  best  fighting  men  of  France, 
were  lost  to  the  world  forever.  It  was  in  this  year,  when  Ger- 
many made  use  of  asphyxiating  gas  for  the  first  time,  that 
Canada  received  its  most  stinging  blow.  The  famous  Princess 
Pats,  the  finest  military  body  of  the  Dominion,  was  practically 
annihilated,  and  in  the  final  formidable  attack  of  the  year  made 
by  the  French  against  the  Germans  in  September,  the  latter 
were  driven  back  several  miles,  but  at  a  cost  of  more  than 
100,000  French  lives. 


394  THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR. 

In  this  year,  too,  the  Germans  succeeded  in  capturing 
much  territory  and  a  number  of  valuable  positions  which  had 
been  taken  by  the  Russians,  and  the  combined  forces  of  Von 
Hindenburg  and  Von  Mackensen  finally  conquered  Poland. 
Warsaw  was  evacuated  in  July,  and  in  August  Prince  Leopold 
led  the  Bavarian  into  the  Polish  capital.  On  August  19  the 
great  stronghold  of  Kovno  fell,  and  the  conquest  was  made 
complete  with  the  surrender  of  Brest-Litovsk. 

CONQUEST  OF  SERVIA. 

The  conquest  of  Servia  by  the  Teutons  also  marked  the 
year  1915.  Among  the  first  shots  of  the  war  were  those  fired 
by  the  Austrians  when  they  bombarded  Belgrade,  the  capital 
of  Servia,  and  made  an  attempt  to  invade  the  country.  The 
Servians  and  Montenegrins  almost  annihilated  Austrian  troops 
which  attempted  to  cross  the  Danube  into  Servia,  and  the  Aus- 
trian invasion  fell.  But  the  combined  Austro-German  forces 
invaded  the  country  later  as  part  of  the  Prussian  program  to 
conquer  all  the  territory  from  the  Baltic  to  the  Bosporus.  The 
Entente  Allies  made  an  effort  to  save  the  little  country  by  land- 
ing troops  at  Salonica,  but  it  was  too  late.  Just  before  winter 
set  in,  the  Austro-German  forces  and  the  Bulgarian  forces, 
invading  from  opposite  sides,  met,  and  the  conquest  of  the 
country  was  complete. 

It  was  in  1915,  too,  that  what  is  conceded  to  have  been 
one  of  the  most  disastrous  and  futile  campaigns  of  the  war  was 
attempted  by  England.  Constantinople  was  to  be  captured 
and  the  Turks  crushed,  with  a  view  of  opening  communication 
with  Russia  by  way  of  the  Black  Sea.  The  British  fleet  was 
sent  out  to  bombard  the  Dardanelles,  and  the  now  famous 
Anzacs — Australian  and  New  Zealand  troops — were  landed 
on  the  peninsula  of  Gallipoli  to  strike  at  the  Turkish  capital 
from  behind.  The  campaign  was  waged  through  the  summer, 
but  with  little  hope  of  success,  and  finally  abandoned  after  the 


THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR.  395 

British  had  lost  more  than  100,000  of  its  most  daring,  hard- 
fighting  and  loyal  Colonial  soldiers. 

After  this  came  "Verdun" — that  conflict  in  which  France 
won  immortal  glory  and  the  German's  attack  upon  the  French 
fortress  town  of  Verdun  was  successfully  repulsed.  The  battle 
raged  for  four  months,  beginning  in  February,  1916.  The 
German  troops,  with  the  German  Crown  Prince  in  command, 
captured  two  forts  close  to  Verdun,  but  little  by  little  the 
French  troops  drove  them  back,  and  finally,  in  command  of 
General  Nivelle,  with  General  Petain  looking  after  the  de- 
fense of  Verdun,  the  French,  co-operating  with  the  British, 
made  an  attack  on  the  Somme,  and  the  Germans  were  com- 
pelled to  abandon  the  Verdun  offensive.  In  the  Verdun  cam- 
paign the  Germans  lost  more  than  500,000  men,  while  the 
French  lost  not  half  the  number. 

RUSSIA'S  CONQUEST  OF   ARMENIA. 

Russia's  conquest  of  Armenia  was  one  of  the  features  of 
1916.  The  troops  under  General  Brussiloff  renewed  their  en- 
deavors in  Galicia  and  for  several  months  made  great  progress ; 
then  Rumania  entered  the  war  and  the  Russian  forces  in  Galicia 
slowed  down.  In  Caucasus,  however,  Russian  troops  gained 
Erzerum,  one  of  the  Turk  fortresses,  and  captured  the  seaport 
of  Trebizond,  practically  gaining  Armenia.  Like  the  Germans 
in  retreat  from  Flanders,  the  Turks  practiced  unspeakable 
horrors.  Their  cruelties  were  such  as  to  almost  exterminate 
the  race. 

The  tragedy  of  the  Balkans  in  1916  was  Rumania.  With 
an  army  of  more  than  half  a  million  men,  she  entered  the  war 
with  the  approval  of  the  Entente  and  entered  Transylvania. 
But  the  Germans  began  a  counter-attack  in  Dobrudja,  and  the 
Rumanians  were  compelled  to  withdraw  some  of  their  forces 
from  Transylvania.  The  German  commander  then  threw  his 
forces  across  the  remaining  Rumanians  and  drove  them  across 
the  border,  after  which  he  swung  his  own  troops  through  the 


396  THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR. 

mountain  passes  into  Rumania.  The  two  German  forces  in- 
vading Rumania  met  at  Bucharest,  and  the  Rumanian  capital 
was  occupied. 

Another  fiasco  was  that  of  the  British  expeditionary  force 
which  was  sent  from  India  by  way  of  the  Persian  Gulf  and  up 
the  Tigris  river  to  Bagdad.  General  Townsend  succeeded  in 
getting  within  15  miles  of  Bagdad,  but  he  was  defeated  by  a 
superior  Turkish  force  and  compelled  to  fall  back  to  Kut-el- 
Amara.  Here  his  inadequate  force,  lacking  medical  and  trans- 
port facilities,  was  fairly  starved  out  before  he  was  relieved. 
He  was  finally  compelled  to  surrender  the  last  week  in  April, 
1916. 

Little  more  than  a  year  after  the  collapse  of  this  expedi- 
tion, however,  the  famous  old  city  of  Bagdad  was  captured  by 
the  English  after  a  well-directed  campaign  under  General 
Maude. 

ITALY  S  HELP  TO  THE  ALLIES. 

Italy,  having  begun  active  warfare  with  the  Allies  in  1915, 
waged  war  along  the  Austrian  border,  compelling  the  Austro- 
German  forces  to  concentrate  a  larger  body  of  troops  for  duty 
on  the  Italian  frontier,  and  to  that  extent  materially  assisted 
the  Allies.  At  the  same  time  the  Italians  fought  their  way 
up  over  the  mountains  and  won  more  than  500  square  miles 
of  territory  and  took  nearly  90,000  prisoners. 

The  final  alignment  of  the  Greeks  with  the  Allies  marked 
the  progress  of  affairs  in  the  middle  of  1917,  when  Constantine 
was  forced  from  his  throne  in  favor  of  his  second  son,  and 
Venizelos  was  returned  as  Premier.  But  the  entrance  of  the 
Greeks  did  not  materially  alter  the  situation. 

The  two  most  important  events  of  1917  were  the  entrance 
of  America  into  the  conflict  and  the  revolt  in  Russia,  which 
caused  the  abdication  of  the  Czar  and  turned  the  great  country 
into  a  republic.  The  ultimate  in  Russia's  history  is  still  to  be 
written,  but  the  change  was  fraught  with  disaster.     The  people 


THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAR.  397 

let  free,  and  unaccustomed  to  self-government,  could  not  be 
controlled,  and  the  army  became  demoralized. 

The  element  which  had  been  loyal  to  the  Romanoffs  re- 
fused to  fight  for  liberty,  and  the  Germans,  taking  advantage 
of  the  situation,  drove  the  Russian  troops  back  over  the  fron- 
tiers and  gamed  all  that  the  Russians  had  once  taken  in  conflict. 
And  out  of  this  grew  one  of  the  most  picturesque  incidents  of 
the  entire  war.  Russian  women  and  girls,  filled  with  ideals 
and  with  a  deep  sense  of  the  responsibilities  which  rested  upon 
the  nation,  formed  a  corps,  and,  dressed  in  full  miiitary  cos- 
tume, went  to  the  front  and  attacked  the  German  troops.  Xo 
soldiers  of  any  nation  have  shown  more  heroism,  or  more  capa- 
bility, for  the  women  faced  the  bullets,  and,  while  they  were 
being  mowed  down  by  the  German  guns,  they  urged  their  men 
to  face  the  enemy  and  fight — fight — fight. 

BRITISH  NAVY  AN  EFFECTIVE  ASS£T, 
While  there  have  been  few  of  the  picturesque  :attles  on 
the  seas,  which  the  world  has  long  regarded  as  ?  necessary 
adjunct  to  a  successful  war,  the  work  of  the  British  Navy  has 
proved  through  the  period  of  the  conflict  to  be  one  of  the  most 
powerful  and  effective  assets  of  the  Allied  forces.  Through 
the  operation  of  the  British  fleet,  later  augmented  by  an  Ameri- 
can war  fleet,  the  German  ships  have  been  corked  up  in  their 
home  ports  and  chased  from  the  seas. 

The  first  naval  battle  of  the  war  was  an  engagement  be- 
tween portions  of  the  British  squadron  in  the  Pacific  and  a 
superior  German  force.  The  engagement  occurred  off  the 
coast  of  Chili  in  Xovember,  1915.  Two  British  vessels  were 
lost  and  a  third  badly  damaged.  However,  a  few  months  later, 
the  German  squadron,  in  command  of  Admiral  von  Spee,  was 
met  off  the  Falkland  Islands  by  a  second  British  squadron,  and 
in  the  engagement  four  of  the  German  vessels  were  smik  and 
a  fifth  damaged.     This  vessel  was  later  sunk. 

The  most  important  naval  engagement  was  the  battle  of 


398  THE  ACTIONS  OF  THE  WAE. 

Jutland  in  May,  1916,  when  Admiral  Beatty  met  a  German 
fleet  in  the  North  Sea.  The  German  boats  made  a  dash  from 
the  Kiel  canal  and  engaged  the  British  off  the  coast  of  Den- 
mark. Both  England  and  Germany  claimed  victory,  the  for- 
mer declaring  that  Germany  lost  eighteen  ships,  while  the 
German  Government  claimed  that  the  British  lost  iifteen  ves- 
sels. Berlin  admitted  a  loss  of  60,720  tons  and  3966  men, 
while  England  conceded  a  loss  of  more  than  114,000  tons  and 
5613  men.  But  the  English  fleet  which  engaged  the  German 
fighting  ships  was  but  a  small  portion  of  the  force  on  guard 
outside  of  Helgoland  and  the  Kiel  Canal,  and  the  effect  was 
to  keep  the  German  navy  from  venturing  forth  again. 

These  are  the  main  events  which  had  punctuated  the  action 
of  the  world's  fighting  machines  at  the  close  of  August,  1917, 
when  America  was  preparing  to  thwart  the  German  U-boats 
in  their  destruction  of  the  world's  shipping,  and  had  under 
actual  call  to  arms  more  than  1,000,000  men,  a  minor  part  of 
which  had  been  safely  landed  in  France. 

WORLD'S  AWFUL  MARITIME  LOSS. 

In  the  three  months  prior  to  August  the  German  under- 
seas  boats  had  sunk  464  vessels,  or  an  average  of  426,000  tons 
of  shipping  a  month,  while  America,  working  with  her  fleets 
in  conjunction  with  the  British  Navy  to  foil  the  submarine 
in  its  endeavors,  was  also  building  more  than  12,000  cargo- 
carrying  craft  and  submarine  chasers  with  which  to  flood  the 
traffic  lanes  of  the  sea. 

Likewise,  contracts  had  been  awarded  for  10,000  flying 
machines  with  which  to  drive  the  "eyes  of  the  German  army," 
as  the  air  machines  are  called,  from  the  heavens.  Finally,  as 
the  Allies  in  the  closing  days  of  August  were  driving  the  Ger- 
man hordes  back  under  avalanches  of  shells,  629,000  of  the 
youth  of  America,  called  to  fight  under  the  conscript  act,  were 
preparing  to  move  to  camps  in  a  dozen  different  sections  of  the 
country  to  train  themselves  for  invading  foreign  countries  and 


THE  ACTIONS   OF  THE   WAR.  399 

facing  the  brutal  Teutons.  Likewise,  some  20,000  picked  men 
were  training  to  officer  these  civilian  forces,  and  half  a  million 
men  of  the  National  Guards  of  the  various  States,  formally 
mustered  into  the  service  of  the  country,  wTere  moving  by  orders 
of  the  Government  to  points  whence  they  would  find  their  way 
to  the  side  of  the  loyal  French  soldiers  and  the  sturdy  English, 
Scotch,  Canadian,  Australian  and  virile  Italian  fighters. 

The  records  of  three  years  show  that  the  American  ambu- 
lance drivers ;  daring  thousands  of  our  countrymen  who  fought 
with  the  French  and  English  because  they  believed  the  war  was 
a  just  one,  and  without  compulsion;  scores  of  Red  Cross  nurses, 
and  aviators  who  hunted  the  Teutons  in  the  air,  all  Americans, 
have  had  their  names  written  high  in  the  roster  of  heroes. 
Americans  have  always  been  pioneers  and  history  makers,  and 
they  are  making  history  now. 

With  the  approach  of  cold  weather,  and  following  months 
of  intensive  training  under  the  direction  of  French  and  English 
soldiers,  the  American  expeditionary  forces  began  actual  par- 
ticipation in  the  great  world  war  as  a  unit.  Previously  their 
achievements  were  principally  in  connection  with  the  French 
aviation  corps  and  ambulance  sections. 

SINKING  OF  FIRST  AMERICAN  WAR  BOAT. 

The  first  untoward  incident  involving  America's  forces  on 
land  or  sea  was  the  sinking  of  the  transport  Antilles  on  October 
27,  1917,  by  a  German  submarine,  when  67  men — officers,  sea- 
men and  soldiers — were  lost.  The  vessel  was  returning  from  a 
French  port  after  having  landed  troops  and  supplies.  This 
was  the  first  loss  sustained  by  the  United  States,  and  the  event 
brought  home  the  seriousness  of  the  country's  participation  in 
the  war  as  no  previous  event  had  done. 

Almost  immediately  following  this  the  world  awoke  one 
morning  to  learn  that  silently  and  unheralded  the  American 
soldiers  had  marched  from  their  quarters  in  a  French  village 
to  the  "front"  and  in  a  slough  of  mud  had  entered  the  trenches, 


400  THE  ACTIONS   0-b1  THE  WAR. 

and  for  the  first  time  in  history  United  States  troops  launched 
shells  against  the  forces  of  Germany. 

The  initial  shot  was  fired  bv  artillerists  at  the  break  of  day 
on  October  24,  and  America  was  formally  made  an  active  agent 
in  the  horrors  of  warfare  on  "No  Man's  Land."  Ten  days 
later  the  brave  Americans,  occupying  a  position  in  the  trenches 
for  instruction,  early  on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  November  3, 
received  their  baptism  of  fire,  and  in  the  cause  of  Democracy  3 
soldiers  were  killed,  5  wounded  and  12  captured  by  the  Boche 
forces. 

Cut  off  from  the  main  line  of  the  Allied  forces,  the  Ameri- 
cans were  stormed  under  the  protection  of  a  heavy  barrage  fire 
by  a  German  raiding  party  and  engaged  in  a  desperate  hand- 
to-hand  encounter.  The  20  Americans,  with  several  French 
instructors,  according  to  official  report,  were  pitted  against 
210  picked  Germans.  A  rain  of  shells  from  Boche  guns  was 
laid  back  of  the  American  section  so  that  there  was  no  retreat. 
The  lieutenant  in  command  made  a  heroic  attempt  to  reach 
the  main  fighting  line,  but  was  caught  in  the  barrage  fire  and 
rendered  unconscious  from  shell-shock. 

Previously  American  scouts  had  captured  a  German  pris- 
oner— a  mail  runner;  Lieutenant  de  Vere  H.  Harden,  of  the 
Signal  Corps  had  been  wounded  by  a  bursting  German  shell, 
and  a  German  gunner  was  reported  killed  by  an  American 
sharpshooter,  as  opening  incidents  of  the  skirmish. 

And  so  at  the  beginning  of  November,  1917,  with  the  whole 
United  States  giving  support  to  the  Government  in  subscribing 
upwards  of  five  billions  of  dollars  to  the  second  Liberty  Loan, 
and  all  forces  working  to  conserve  food,  furnish  men,  ships, 
ammunition,  clothing  and  supplies  to  her  own  troops  and  to  her 
Allies,  the  world  found  America  true  to  traditions,  battling  for 
the  right  and  giving  her  best  that  liberty  might  endure  and  the 
burden  of  Prussianism  be  lifted  from  humanity. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 
AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

United  States  Soldiers  Inspired  Allied  Troops — Eussian  Government  Col- 
lapses— Italian  Army  Fails — Allied  War  Council  Formed — Foch  Com- 
mands Allied  Armies — Pershing  Offers  American  Troops — Under  Fire — 
U-Boat  Bases  Raided  by  British. 

THE  influence  exerted  by  the  actual  presence  of  the 
American  troops  on  the  western  front  was  soon  appar- 
ent. The  spirits  of  the  English,  French  and  Canadian 
troops  were  raised  and  the  presence  of  the  Americans  was 
heralded  to  the  world  as  an  evidence  of  complete  unity  on  the 
part  of  the  Allies  that  meant  ultimate  death  to  Kaiserism. 

The  advent  of  Uncle  Sam's  fighting  men  on  the  firing 
line  had,  however,  one  serious  effect,  viewed  from  the  Allied 
standpoint.  Germany  realized  that  every  day  she  delayed  in 
making  attack  meant  the  strengthening  of  the  Allied  forces 
by  the  arrival  of  additional  United  States  troops,  and  it  was 
seen  by  the  English  and  French  leaders  that  the  Kaiser  would 
make  an  early  drive  to  annihilate,  if  possible,  the  stubbornly 
resisting,  though  somewhat  tired  and  weakened,  lines  opposing 
his  brutal  soldiery.  Not  for  months,  therefore,  was  it  per- 
mitted the  world  to  know  anything  about  the  numerical 
strength  of  the  American  troops  sent  into  France. 

Simultaneously  with  the  action  of  American  troops  in 
entering  the  resisting  line  of  Allied  troops  on  the  western 
front  the  Austro-German  troops  had  swept  into  the  Italian 
plains,  capturing  100,000  prisoners  and  upward  of  1,000  guns, 
taking  several  towns  and  compelling  the  retreat  of  the  Second 
and  Third  Italian  armies.  The  Italian  forces  were  opposed 
by  four  times  their  number,  but  it  was  also  said  that  the  unity 
of  the  Italian  forces  was  broken  by  the  spreading  of  German 
propaganda. 

26  HR  401 


402  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

The  failure  of  some  of  the  troops  was  shown  in  an  official 
dispatch  from  Rome,  in  which  it  was  stated: 

"The  failure  to  resist  on  the  part  of  some  units  forming 
our  second  army,  which  in  cowardice  retired  without  fighting 
or  surrendered  to  the  enemy,  allowed  the  Austro-German 
forces  to  break  into  our  left  wing  on  the  Julian  front.  The 
valiant  efforts  of  other  troops  did  not  enable  them  to  prevent 
the  enemy  from  advancing  into  the  sacred  soil  of  our  father- 
land. We  now  are  withdrawing  our  line  according  to  the  plan 
prepared.  All  stores  and  depots  in  the  evacuated  places  were 
destroyed." 

ITALIAN  HEADQUARTERS  CAPTURED. 

These  troops  were  compelled  to  fall  back  along  a  front 
almost  125  miles  long  and  Undine,  the  Italian  headquarters, 
was  captured.  Germany  had  found  the  weakest  spot  in  the 
Italian  line  and  occupied  about  1,000  square  miles  of  territory 
before  General  Cadorna's  forces  were  able  to  establish  a  line 
of  strong  defense. 

The  retirement  of  the  Italian  troops  was  one  of  the  most 
picturesque  in  the  history  of  the  war,  and  Germany  made  her 
gains  at  terrible  cost. 

The  retirement  was  accompanied  by  shielding  operations 
of  the  rear  guard,  which  poured  a  deadly  fire  into  the  advanc- 
ing columns  and  at  the  same  time  destroyed  powder  depots, 
arsenals  and  bridges  with  the  double  purpose  of  giving  time 
for  the  withdrawal  of  the  Italian  heavy  guns  and  of  preventing 
military  stores  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  Germans  encountered  stubborn  resistance  on  the 
Bainsizza  plateau,  and  heaps  of  enemy  dead  marked  the  lines 
of  their  advance.  Around  Globo  ridge  a  bersaglieri  brigade, 
outnumbered  five  to  one,  held  back  the  enemy  while  the  main 
line  had  an  opportunity  to  get  its  retreat  in  motion.  In  one 
of  the  mountain  passes  a  small  village  commanding  the  pass 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR  403 

was  taken  and  retaken  eight  times  during  desperate  artillery, 
infantry  and  hand-to-hand  fighting. 

Eefore  the  Italians  were  able  to  establish  a  line  of  resist- 
ance they  were  compelled  to  fall  back  to  the  Piave,  and  at  some 
points  to  a  much  greater  distance.  Meantime  the  Allies  rushed 
assistance  to  the  retiring  forces,  and  while  the  collapse  of 
,Cadorna's  line  was  unfortunate,  it  had  the  effect  of  making  it 
more  obvious  that  there  should  be  more  unity  of  operation 
between  the  Allied  forces. 

Russia's  republic,  under  the  leadership  of  Premier  Keren- 
sky,  collapsing  at  the  same  moment,  intensified  the  serious- 
ness of  the  Allied  situation,  and  largely  at  the  suggestion  of 
America  an  Inter- Allied  War  Council  was  formed. 

REVOLT  IN  PETROGARD. 

Premier  Kerensky  called  upon  the  United  States  to  help 
Russia  bear  the  burdens  of  conflict  until  the  forces  could  be 
reorganized  by  the  new  government.  Almost  immediately  there 
was  revolt  in  Petrograd,  and  the  radicals  under  the  leadership 
of  Leon  Trotsky,  president  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the 
Petrograd  Council  of  Soldiers'  and  Workmen's  Delegates, 
seized  the  telegraph  wires,  the  State  bank  and  Marie  Palace, 
where  the  preliminary  parliament  had  suspended  proceedings 
in  view  of  the  situation. 

The  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates  assumed  control 
of  the  City  of  Petrograd  and  Kerensky  was  compelled  to  flee. 
The  Winter  Palace  was  bombarded.  A  General  Council  of  the 
Soldiers'  and  Workmen's  Delegates  announced  the  taking  over 
of  government  authority: 

"We  plan  to  offer  an  immediate  armistice  of  three  months, 
during  which  elected  representatives  from  all  nations  and  not 
the  diplomats  are  to  settle  the  questions  of  peace,"  said  Nikolai 
Lenine,  the  Maximalist  leader,  in  a  speech  before  the  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Congress  today. 

"We  offer  these  terms,"  M.  Lenine  added,  "but  we  are 


404  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

willing  to  consider  any  proposals  for  peace,  no  matter  from 
which  side.  We  offer  a  just  peace,  but  will  not  accept  unjust 
terms." 

Meantime  General  Cadorna  was  relieved  of  command  of 
the  Italian  armies  and  General  Diaz  put  at  the  head  of  the 
Italian  forces,  while  General  Foch,  chief  of  staff  of  the  French 
War  Ministry,  and  General  Wilson,  sub-chief  of  the  British 
Staff,  were  made  members  of  an  Inter- Allied  Military  Com- 
mittee serving  with  General  Cadorna  to  straighten  out  the 
Italian  situation.  This  was  the  first  step  looking  to  the  unify- 
ing of  the  Allied  forces  which  was  brought  about  shortly  there- 
after by  the  formation  of  the  Inter- Allied  War  Council  at 
Versailles.  It  was  chiefly  at  the  suggestion  of  President  Wilson 
that  the  War  Council  was  called,  the  President  issuing  a  stir- 
ring appeal  in  which  he  pointed  out  the  necessity  of  unity  of 
control,  if  the  resources  of  the  United  States  were  to  be  of  the 
greatest  value  to  the  Allied  interests. 

SUPREME  WAR  COUNCIL. 

The  Supreme  War  Council,  which  was  made  a  permanent 
body,  was  composed  of  the  Prime  Minister  and  a  member  of 
the  Government  of  each  of  the  Great  Powers  whose  armies 
were  fighting  at  the  front.  Each  Power  delegated  to  the  Su- 
preme Council  a  permanent  military  representative  whose  func- 
tion was  to  act  as  adviser  to  the  Council.  As  the  result  of  the 
deliberations  of  the  War  Council,  and  following  the  suggestion 
of  General  Pershing,  General  Foch  was  made  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  Allied  Armies.  General  Foch  was  Commander 
of  the  French  troops  at  Verdun  and  a  recognized  authority  on 
military  strategy. 

While  the  problem  of  solving  the  military  phases  of  the 
situation  was  being  considered  by  the  Allied  War  Council  the 
Russian  forces  under  Kerensky  and  those  under  Trotzky, 
known  as  the  Bolsheviki,  clashed  again  and  again  at  Petrograd, 
Moscow  and  other  points,  and  the  hope  of  the  Allies  as  to  any 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR.  405 

Help  from  Russia  sank.  Germany  entered  into  a  peace  compact 
with  Ukrainia,  and  the  hand  of  the  Kaiser  was  seen  in  the 
Russian  situation  when  officers  of  the  German  Army  were 
reported  in  Petrograd  in  conference  with  the  representatives 
of  the  various  Russian  factions.  Russia  suggested  a  separate 
armistice,  or  a  separate  peace,  against  which  both  the  U.  S.  and 
France  protested. 

The  failure  of  the  Russian  Government  to  assume  any 
degree  of  stability  made  it  possible  for  the  Germans  to  with* 
draw  nmry  troops  and  transfer  them  to  the  Italian  and  West* 
ern  Fronts. 

One  result  of  the  Allied  War  Council  deliberations  was  to 
show  the  necessity  of  rapid  action  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States  and  get  troops  into  France  so  that  they  might  take  over 
a  definite  sector.  While  it  was  estimated  that  several  hundred 
thousand  Americans  were  in  France,  the  necessity  for  a  larger 
force  was  made  apparent  by  the  statement  that  90  reserves  are 
required  for  every  400  fighters  on  the  line. 

DROPPED  THEIR  TOOLS  FOR  RIFLES. 

The  first  bitter  attack  in  which  American  troops  figured 
was  when  a  company  of  United  States  engineers,  caught  be- 
tween crossfires,  dropped  their  tools  for  rifles  and  joined  the 
English  troops  in  helping  to  repulse  the  Germans  near 
Cambrai. 

A  notable  event  in  the  progress  of  the  wrar  was  the  declara- 
tion of  war  upon  Austria  by  the  U.  S.  on  Dec.  8,  1917,  Con- 
gress adopting  a  resolution  of  war  with  but  one  dissenting  vote. 

Events  which  brought  the  seriousness  of  the  war  home 
to  America  began  at  this  point  to  occur  rapidly.  First  the  Tor- 
pedo Boat  Destroyer  Jacob  Jones  was  sunk  in  the  war  zone 
when  nearly  30  men  were  reported  lost.  This  was  followed 
shortly  by  a  report  to  the  War  Department  that  17  Americans 
caught  in  the  crossfire  by  the  Germans  at  Cambrai  were  missing 
or  killed.     The  report  of  the  sinking  of  the  Alcedo,  a  patrol 


406  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

boat,  with  the  loss  of  several  officers,  was  also  received,  as  was 
that  of  the  sinking  of  the  U.  S.  Destroyer  "Chauncey"  rammed 
in  a  collision,  when  two  officers  and  eighteen  men  were  lost. 

One  of  the  high  spots  of  the  war  and  one  of  the  notable 
events  in  the  history  of  the  world,  was  the  surrender  of  the  City 
of  Jerusalem  to  the  British  on  Saturday,  December  8,  1917. 
Gen.  Allenby  entered  the  famed  city  and  established  his  troops 
on  the  ancient  Jerico  Road. 

The  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the  British  forces  marked  the 
end,  with  two  brief  interludes,  of  more  than  1200  years'  posses- 
sion of  the  seat  of  the  Christian  religion  by  the  Mohammedans. 
For  073  years  the  Holy  City  had  been  in  disputed  ownership  of 
the  Turks,  the  last  Christian  ruler  of  Jerusalem  being  the  Ger- 
man Emperor,  Frederick,  whose  short-lived  domination  lasted 
from  1229  to  1244. 

THE  FALL  OF  JERUSALEM. 

Apart  from  its  connection  with  the  campaign  being  waged 
against  Turkey  by  the  British  in  Mesopotamia,  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem  marked  the  definite  collapse  of  the  long-protracted 
efforts  of  the  Turks  to  capture  the  Suez  Canal  and  invade 
Egypt.  Almost  the  first  nunc  made  by  Turkey  after  her 
entrance  into  the  war  was  a  campaign  against  Egypt  across  the 
great  desert  of  the  Sinai  Peninsula.  In  November,  1914,  a 
Turkish  army,  variously  estimated  at  from  75,000  to  250,000 
men,  marched  on  the  Suez  Canal  and  succeeded  in  reaching 
within  striking  distance  of  the  great  artificial  waterway  at  sev- 
eral points.  For  several  months  bitter  fighting  took  place,  the 
canal  being  defended  by  an  Anglo-Egyptian  army  aided  by 
Australians  and  New  Zealanders  and  French  and  British 
forces. 

For  the  greater  part  of  1915  conflicting  reports  of  the  sit- 
uation were  received  from  the  belligerents,  but  in  December 
of  that  year  definite  information  showed  that  the  Turks  had 
been  driven  back  as  far  as  El  Arish,  about  eigbtv-five  miles  east 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME   FACTOR.  407 

of  the  canal.  A  lull  occurred  then  which  lasted  for  six  months, 
and  in  June,  1916,  the  Turks  again  advanced  as  far  at  Katieh, 
about  fifteen  miles  east  of  the  canal.  Here  they  were  decisively 
defeated,  losing  more  than  3000  prisoners  and  a  great  quantity 
of  equipment. 

Another  period  followed  in  which  the  situation  was  greatly 
confused  through  the  vagueness  and  contradictory  character  of 
the  official  statements,  but  in  December,  1916,  the  "British 
stormed  El  Arish  and  a  few  days  later  severely  defeated  the 
Turks  at  Maghdabah,  about  sixty  miles  to  the  south  on  the 
same  front.  Two  weeks  later  the  invaders  had  been  driven  out 
of  Egypt  and  the  British  forces  crossed  the  border  into  Pales- 
tine.   On  March  7  they  captured  El  Khulil,  southeast  of  Gaza. 

By  November  22  the  British  had  pushed  within  five  miles 
of  Jerusalem,  on  the  northwest,  and  on  December  7  General 
Allenby  announced  that  he  had  taken  Hebron.  Jerusalem  thus 
was  virtually  cut  off  on  all  sides  but  the  east. 

HISTORICAL  INTEREST  TO  CHRISTIANS. 

In  sentimental  and  romantic  aspect  the  capture  of  Jeru- 
salem far  exceeds  even  the  fall  of  fable-crowned  Bagdad.  The 
modern  Cit}^  of  Jerusalem  contains  about  60,000  inhabitants, 
and  is  the  home  of  pestilence,  filth  and  fevers,  but  in  historic 
interest  it  natually  surpasses,  to  the  Christian  world,  all  other 
places  in  the  world.  Since  the  days  when  David  wrested  it 
from  the  hands  of  the  Jebusites  to  make  it  the  capital  of  the 
Jewish  race  Jerusalem  has  been  the  prize  and  prey  of  half  the 
races  of  the  world.  It  has  passed  successively  into  the  hands 
of  the  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  Greeks,  Romans,  Persians, 
Arabs,  Turks,  the  Crusaders,  finally  to  fall  before  the  descend- 
ants of  that  Richard  the  Lion-hearted  who  strove  in  vain  for 
its  possession  more  than  700  years  ago. 

Early  in  January,  1918,  evidence  was  forthcoming  that 
Germany  was  preparing  to  make  a  final  drive  on  the  West- 
ern Front  to  break  through  and  capture  some  English  and 


408  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR, 

French  channel  ports  before  America  could  be  of  any  great 
assistance  to  the  Allied  forces.  As  a  result  Great  Britain  deter- 
mined to  call  500,000  more  men  to  hold  the  Huns,  and  Premier 
Lloyd  George  issued  a  stirring  appeal  to  Labor  affected  by 
the  Man-Power  Bill,  which  provided  for  the  increase  taken 
largely  from  the  labor  forces. 

The  German  intent  to  launch  an  offensive  was  indicated 
by  the  withdrawal  of  German  lines  north  of  Italy  when  im- 
portant defensive  positions  were  abandoned,  and  dummy  sol- 
diers were  left  in  trench  to  conceal  movement  to  the  rear. 
Warnings  of  a  gseat  submarine  offensive  on  American  boat- 
lines  to  France,  to  be  joined  with  a  big  drive  on  land,  were  re- 
ceived by  Secretary  of  War  Baker,  and  on  February  2,  the 
American  troops  occupying  a  sector  of  the  Lorraine  front  in 
France  faced  the  first  big  bombardment  in  what  was  prelim- 
inary to  the  most  bitter  drive  Germany  had  attempted  in  four 
years  of  warfare. 

SINKING  OF  THE  TUSCANIA. 

True  to  their  promise  the  German  submarines  started 
their  portion  of  the  offensive  and  sunk  the  U.  S.  troopship 
"Tuscania"  a  few  days  later  off  the  coast  of  Ireland.  The 
liner  carried  2,179  U.  S.  troops  of  various  divisions  besides  a 
crew  of  200.  The  total  number  of  persons  lost  was  113.  The 
troops  included  engineers,  members  of  the  aero-squadron,  and 
regulars. 

The  Tuscania  was  the  first  troopship  to  be  sunk  en  route 
to  France,  though  the  Antilles  was  sunk  in  October,  1917. 
This  boat,  however,  it  must  be  noted,  was  returning  from 
France.  At  this  time  70  lives  were  lost.  The  comparatively 
small  loss  of  life  on  the  "Tuscania"  was  accepted  as  evidence 
of  the  efficient  training  and  bravery  of  American  troops  under 
all  conditions. 

The  Tuscania  was  torpedoed  when  entering  what  until 
that  time  were  considered  comparatively  safe  waters.     The 


AMEK1CAJN   FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR.  409 

ships  were  within  sight  of  land,  which  was  just  distinguish- 
able in  the  dusk  of  evening  when  the  torpedo  hit  the  Tuscania 
amidships.    This  was  at  about  7  o'clock. 

When  the  crash  came  the  khaki-clad  young  heroes  of  the 
American  army  lined  up  as  though  on  parade,  and  sang  the 
"Star  Spangled  Banner"  at  the  top  of  their  voices  as  the 
Tuscania  sank  by  inches  under  them.  Across  from  them 
their  British  cousins  of  the  crew  came  back  with  the  echo- 
ing "God  Save  the  King,"  which  too  cool-headed  exponents  of 
what  occurred  in  a  crisis  of  a  sea  disaster  say  accounts  for 
the  fact  the  Germans  took  only  a  toll  of  113  lives  out  of  the 
2,397  souls  on  board  the  Cunarder  when  she  met  her  fate. 

AMERICAN  COURAGE  PRAISED. 

If  the  singing  man  is  a  fighting  man,  he  also  is  hopeful, 
and  in  the  combination  of  fight  and  hope  there  came  the  baf- 
fling of  the  German  attempt  to  reduce  the  American  war  forces 
by  almost  a  full  regiment.  Taking  stock  after  the  disaster, 
the  officers  of  both  the  army  and  navy  praised  the  courage  of 
the  Americans  as  the  chief  reason  for  the  saving  of  more  than 
90  per  cent  of  the  men  on  board. 

No  submarine  was  seen  until  the  torpedo  struck  the  Tus- 
cania fairly  amidships.  A  moment  later  another  torpedo 
passed  astern  of  the  vessel.  There  was  a  terrific  explosion,  and 
it  is  believed  most  of  the  casualties  were  caused  by  this  and  bv 
subsequent  difficulties  in  lowering  the  boats. 

The  vessel  immediately  took  a  heavy  list  and  the  men 
were  called  to  their  lifeboat  stations,  but  the  list  prevented  the 
boats  from  being  jDroperly  lowered,  some  of  the  upper-deck 
boats  falling  to  the  lower  deck.  Many  of  the  men  jumped 
into  the  water,  and  the  difficulty  in  lowering  the  boats  was  re- 
sponsible for  many  casualties. 

The  survivors  of  the  Tuscania  landed  at  points  in.  Ireland 
were  received  with  great  honor  in  the  various  communities,  and 


410  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

great  tribute  was  paid  to  the  surviving  soldiers  by  the  Mayor 
of  Dublin. 

The  American  troops  on  the  Tuscania  were  part  of  the 
.  forces  being  hurried  to  France  to  hold  the  Germans  in  check, 
and  at  the  time  American  troops  were  holding  a  sector  with 
the  French  in  Lorraine,  northwest  of  Toul,  while  American 
artillery  were  supporting  the  French  in  Champagne.  The 
date  set  for  the  big  German  drive  was  announced  as  January 
28,  and  the  fact  that  Germany  made  an  open  proclamation  of 
the  fact  that  they  proposed  to  wage  offensive  warfare  was 
somewhat  puzzling  to  the  minds  of  those  studying  the  situa- 
tion. Making  her  position  more  impregnable,  Germany  halted 
her  armies  in  Russia  upon  the  acceptance  of  peace  terms  by 
the  Russian  delegation  at  Brest-Litovsk,  which  were  con- 
cluded on  March  1, 1918,  and  daily  the  activities  of  the  German 
forces  on  the  Western  Front  grew  in  intensity.  On  March 
6,  in  anticipation  of  the  drive,  it  was  for  the  first  time  publicly 
stated  that  81,000  troops  of  American  soldiers  were  holding 
an  eight  mile  line  on  the  Lorraine  front,  with  three  full  divi- 
sions in  the  trenches.  The  gathering  together  of  this  force 
and  other  American  troops  in  France  drew  Secretary  of  War 
Baker  to  the  scene  of  activities.  He  was  the  first  American 
Cabinet  officer  to  cross  the  ocean  after  America  entered 
the  war. 

SEIZURE  OF  ALL  DUTCH  VESSELS. 

Holland  having  proved  herself  unwilling  to  come  to  a 
satisfactory  agreement  at  this  time  on  the  British- American 
demand  regarding  the  use  of  ships,  President  Wilson  ordered 
the  seizure  of  all  Dutch  vessels  within  the  territorial  juris- 
diction of  the  United  States ;  the  Allies  ordered  a  similar  seiz- 
ure abroad.  The  President's  proclamation  authorized  the  navy 
to  take  over  the  vessels  to  be  equipped  and  operated  by  the 
Navy  Department  and  the  Shipping  Board.  A  tdtal  of  77 
ships  were  added  to  the  American  Merchant  Marine. 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR.  411 

Holland's  failure  to  act  was  on  the  propositions  that  the 
United  States  and  the  Allies  should  facilitate  the  importation 
into  Holland  of  foodstuffs,  and  other  commodities  required  to 
maintain  her  economic  life,  and  that  Holland  should  restore 
her  Merchant  Marine  to  a  normal  condition  of  activity. 

On  March  21  the  greatest  German  offensive  of  the  war 
actually  began  on  a  front  50  miles  long,  running  west  and 
southwest  of  Cambrai.  The  preliminary  German  bombard- 
ment covered  a  front  from  the  River  Serre  below  St.  Quentin, 
and  the  River  Scarpe  east  of  Arras. 

FIERCEST  BATTLE  IN  WORLD'S  HISTORY. 

Field  Marshal  Haig's  report  from  British  headquarters 
in  France  described  the  German  offensive  as  comprising  an 
intense  bombardment  by  the  artillery  and  a  powerful  infantry 
attack  on  a  front  of  more  than  fifty  miles.  Some  of  the  British 
positions  were  penetrated,  but  the  German  losses  were  excep- 
tionally heavy. 

It  was  reported  at  the  end  of  the  first  day  that  the  fiercest 
battle  of  the  world's  history  was  in  progress,  and  that  80,000 
Germans  were  lost  in  battle ;  while  Berlin  reported  the  capture 
of  16,000  Allied  prisoners  and  200  guns. 

The  Associated  Press  correspondent  reported  that  at  least 
forty  divisions  of  German  soldiers  were  identified  as  actively 
participating  in  the  attack.  No  such  concentration  of  artillery 
had  been  seen  since  the  war  began.  The  enemy  had  1,000 
guns  in  one  small  sector — one  for  every  twelve  yards.  The 
Germans  in  many  sections  attacked  in  three  waves  of  infantry, 
followed  up  by  shock  troops.  As  a  result  they  suffered  very 
heavy  casualties. 

The  German  massed  artillery  was  badly  hammered  by  the 
British  guns. 

In  the  first  stage  of  their  offensive  the  Germans  failed 
badly  in  the  execution  of  their  program,  as  was  attested  by 


412  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

captured  documents  showing  what  they  planned  to  do  in  the 
early  hours  of  their  offensive. 

By  March  24  the  attacks  of  the  Germans  had  been  re- 
doubled, and  it  was  estimated  that  more  than  1,000,000  Huns 
had  been  thrown  into  the  struggle  against  the  British  forces 
on  which  the  attack  was  concentrated. 

The  most  notable  feature  of  the  attack  from  the  spectacu- 
lar viewpoint  was  the  bombardment  of  Paris  by  monster  Ger- 
man cannon,  located  in  the  forest  of  St.  Gobain,  west  of  Laon, 
and  approximately  76  miles  away  from  Paris. 

BIG  GUN  ONE  HUNDRED  FEET  LONG. 

Though  no  official  description  of  the  big  gun  was  ever 
given,  it  was  stated  by  military  authorities  that  it  was  approxi- 
mately 100  feet  in  length,  and  that  several  were  in  use,  and 
more  being  built  by  the  Germans.  At  first  the  statement  that 
a  gun  could  shoot  such  a  distance  was  doubted,  but  when  75 
persons  were  killed  in  Paris  and  one  of  the  shells  hit  a  church 
doubt  no  longer  existed.  It  also  developed  that  the  gun  was 
originally  an  American  invention,  and  that  similar  weapons 
were  being  built  by  the  United  States. 

The  use  of  the  big  gun  was  in  the  nature  of  a  * 'side-issue" 
to  bring  terror  to  the  French,  and  in  line  with  the  policy  of 
Rightfulness  instituted  by  the  German  militarists.  Its  use 
was  continued  daily.  Meantime  the  German  hordes  swept  on 
marching  in  close  formation  into  the  very  mouths  of  the  rapid- 
fire  guns  and  against  the  strongly  fixed  British  lines. 

For  ten  days  the  hostilities  continued,  without  cessation, 
with  fighting  along  a  whole  front  such  as  had  never  been  known 
before. 

The  Germans  continued  to  hurl  great  forces  of  infantry 
into  the  conflict,  depending  largely  on  weight  of  numbers  to 
overcome  the  increasing  opposition  offered  by  the  heroically 
resisting  British. 

The  battle  on  the  historic  ground  about  Longueval  was 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR.  413 

perhaps  the  most  spectacular  of  any  along  the  front.  It  was 
a  battle  of  machine  gunners  and  infantry.  The  Germans  were 
pursuing  their  tactics  of  working  forward  in  massed  formation, 
and  the  British  rapid-firers'  squads  and  riflemen  reaped  a  horrid 
harvest  from  their  positions  on  the  high  ground.  Notwith- 
standing their  terrible  losses,  the  Germans  kept  coming  on,  fill- 
ing in  the  places  of  those  who  had  fallen  and  pressing  their  at- 
tack. The  British  artillery  in  the  meantime  poured  in  a  perfect 
rain  of  shells  on  the  enemy,  carrying  havoc  into  their  ranks. 
In  this  section  the  Germans  operated  without  the  full  support 
of  their  guns,  because  of  their  rapid  advance. 

ENEMY  LOSES  HEAVILY. 

A  fierce  engagement  was  also  waged  about  Le  Verguier, 
which  the  Germans  captured,  but  not  until  the  British  infan- 
try holding  the  place  had  fought  to  the  last  man  and  inflicted 
extremely  heavy  losses  on  the  enemy.  The  British  again  fell 
back,  this  time  to  a  line  through  Hervilly,  just  east  of  Roisel 
and  Vermand. 

The  work  of  the  British  airmen  during  the  battle  was  one 
of  the  brightest  pages.  Bitter  battles  in  the  air  were  fought 
by  scores  of  aviators  and  the  service  proved  fully  its  ability  to 
smother  the  German  airmen  at  a  crucial  time. 

Within  a  few  days  it  was  stated  that  at  least  130  German 
airplanes  were  brought  down.  This  compilation  of  losses  has 
reference  to  only  one  section  of  the  battle  front,  comprising 
perhaps  two-thirds  of  the  line  affected. 

An  official  statement  regarding  British  aerial  operations 
said  their  airplanes  were  employed  in  bombing  the  enemy's 
troops  and  transport  massed  in  the  areas  behind  the  battle- 
front,  and  in  attacking  them  with  machine-gun  fire  from  low 
heights.  Twenty-two  tons  of  bombs  were  dropped  in  this 
work,  and  more  than  100,000  rounds  were  fired  from  the  ma- 
chine guns. 

By  March  28  the  German  losses  were  estimated  at  400,000. 


414  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

The  forces  of  the  Germans  were  almost  overwhelming,  the 
Kaiser  sacrificing  the  man-power  of  his  nation  in  sl  last  desper- 
ate attack. 

In  consequence  no  greater  stories  of  heroism  have  ever 
been  told  than  are  related  of  the  English,  French  and  American 
troops.  The  Germans  were  set  for  a  drive  against  the  English 
and  French  channel  points  with  Amiens  as  an  objective,  with 
the  idea  of  breaking  through  the  British  lines  where  they  join 
the  French. 

AMERICAN  FORCES  OFFERED  TO  FRANCE. 

The  earnestness  of  the  Americans  in  the  situation  was 
proclaimed  to  the  world  by  the  English  and  French,  and  Gen- 
eral Pershing  placed  his  name  and  that  of  his  country  and  men 
high  on  the  wall  of  fame  by  unselfishly  offering  to  France  at 
the  most  critical  period  the  use  of  his  entire  force,  to  be  disposed 
of  and  assigned  wherever  General  Foch  and  his  staff  decided  to 
use  them.  Within  a  few  days  thereafter  the  American  troops 
which  had  been  in  training  were  marched  in  to  relieve  the 
stressed  English  and  French. 

Everywhere  the  raging  battle  was  marked  by  spectacular 
features  not  the  least  of  which  were  provided  by  a  corps  of 
thirty  tanks,  which  waded  into  the  German  hordes  near  Ephey 
and  other  points,  recovering  positions  which  had  been  lost  by 
the  British. 

Canadian  armored  motorcars  also  played  an  important 
part  in  checking  the  Huns,  the  cars  armed  with  rapid-foe  guns 
being  rushed  up  to  support  weakening  troops. 

The  progress  of  the  Germans  was  halted  on  April  3,  and 
in  the  following  days  the  British  regained  several  lost  positions 
and  the  French  made  gains.  But  after  a  pause,  during  which 
several  hundred  thousand  new  troops  were  brought  in,  the 
Huns  renewed  the  offensive,  delivering  an  attack  against  the 
French  near  Montdidier  on  a  front  about  15  miles  long.     An 


AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR.  415 

attack  along  a  front  of  similar  length  was  made  against  the 
British  on  the  Sonime. 

The  first  battalion  of  American  troops  answering  to  the 
call  of  the  French  for  support  reached  the  British  front-line  in 
France,  on  April  10,  on  the  very  anniversary  of  the  entrance 
of  the  United  States  into  the  war,  and  within  a  few  days  the 
Americans  began  to  bear  the  brunt  of  battle,  holding  the  Ger- 
mans like  veterans. 

The  first  big  attack  of  the  Germans  launched  directly 
against  an  American  line  occurred  on  April  30,  in  the  vicinity 
of  Villers-Bretonneaux,  below  the  Somme,  where  the  Huns 
were  repulsed  with  heavy  losses.  The  German  preliminary 
bombardment  lasted  two  hours  and  then  the  infantry  rushed 
forward,  only  to  be  driven  back,  leaving  large  numbers  of  dead 
on  the  ground  in  front  of  the  American  lines. 

AMERICANS    BOMBARDED- 

The  German  bombardment  opened  at  5  o'clock  in  the  af- 
ternoon and  was  directed  especially  against  the  Americans,  who 
were  supported  on  the  north  and  south  by  the  French.  The 
fire  was  intense  and  at  the  end  of  two  hours  the  German  com- 
mander sent  forward  three  battalions  of  infantry.  There  was 
hand-to-hand  fighting  all  along  the  line,  as  a  result  of  which 
the  enemy  was  thrust  back,  his  dead  and  wounded  lying  on  the 
ground  in  all  directions.  Five  prisoners  remained  in  Ameri- 
can hands. 

"Tell  them  back  home  that  we  are  just  beginning,"  said 
an  American  lad  who  was  in  the  thick  of  the  fight  and  severely 
wounded  with  shrapnel.  "It  was  fine  to  see  our  men  go  at  the 
Huns.  All  of  us,  who  thought  baseball  was  the  great  American 
game,  have  changed  our  minds.  There  is  only  one  game  to  keep 
the  American  flag  flying — that  is,  kill  the  Huns.  I  got  sev- 
eral before  they  got  me." 

Details  of  the  engagement  show  the  Americans  stuck  to 
their  guns  while  the  Germans  were  placing  liquid  fire,  gas  and 


416  AMERICAN  FORCES  BECOME  FACTOR. 

almost  every  other  conceivable  device  of  frightfulness  on  them. 
One  of  them,  who  lay  wounded  in  an  American  hospital,  had 
kept  his  machine  gun  going  after  the  chief  gunners  had  been 
killed  two  feet  away  and  he  himself  had  been  wounded,  thus 
protecting  a  turn  in  the  road  known  as  Dead  Man's  curve,  over 
which  some  of  the  American  couriers  passed  in  the  face  of  a  con- 
centrated enemy  fire. 

As  indicating  the  violence  of  the  offensive,  French  ambu- 
lance men  who  went  through  the  famous  battle  of  Verdun 
declared  today  that,  comparatively  speaking,  the  German  artil- 
lery fire  against  the  Americans  was  heavier  than  in  any  single 
engagement  on  the  Verdun  front  at  any  time. 

The  German  barrage  began  just  before  sunrise.  In  an 
attempt  to  put  the  American  batteries  out  of  action  the  Ger- 
mans used  an  unusually  large  number  of  gas  shells,  but  the 
American  artillery  replied  vigorously,  hurling  hundreds  of 
shells  across  the  Teuton  lines.  Though  successful  in  resisting 
the  German  attack,  the  Americans  lost  183  men  captured  by 
the  Huns,  according  to  the  British  report. 

Nothing  in  the  history  of  naval  warfare  is  more  pictur- 
esque than  the  story  of  the  raid  made  by  English  ships  on  the 
German  submarine  bases  at  Ostend  and  Zeebrugge,  on  the 
Belgian  coast,  on  April  22.  Obsolete  cruisers  filled  with  con- 
crete were  run  aground  and  blown  up  in  the  harbors.  An  old 
submarine  filled  with  explosives  was  used  to  blow  up  the  piling 
beside  the  Mole  at  Zeebrugge. 

One  German  destroyer  was  torpedoed,  and  the  British 
lost  a  destroyer,  two  coastal  motorboats  and  two  launches. 

A  fortnight  later  the  old  cruiser  Vindictive  was  taken  into 
the  submarine  base  at  Ostend  and  sent  to  the  bottom,  blocking 
the  channel,  making  the  attack  thoroughly  effective. 


CHAPTER  XXVI 
AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE 

Brilliant  American  Fighting  Stops  Hun  Advance — French  and  British  Inspired 
— Famous  Marines  Lead  in  Picturesque  Attack — Halt  Germans  at 
Chateau-Thierry — Used  Open  Style  Fighting — Thousands  of  Germans 
Slain — United  States  Troops  in  Siberia — New  Conscription  Bill  Passed — 
Allied  Successes  on  All  Fronts, 

ALL  history  contains  no  greater  story  of  bravery  and 
heroism  than  that  which  echoed  around  the  world  con- 
cerning the  exploits  of  the  American  soldiers  in  France 
as  the  war  entered  its  fifth  year. 

Casting  aside  all  precedent,  ignoring  the  practices  which 
had  been  developed  by  the  English,  French  and  German  com- 
mands during  four  years  of  stubborn  fighting,  a  little  force  of 
Americans — barely  a  handful,  led  by  the  picturesque  Marines 
-—brought  the  Huns  to  a  standstill  in  their  drive  upon  Paris 
and  turned  the  tide  of  war. 

Once  again  history  repeated  itself,  for  the  Germans  were 
turned  back  at  the  beautiful  river  Marne,  where  the  brave 
Americans  and  heroic  French  smashed  their  lines.  The  spec- 
tacular event  in  which  the  Americans  participated  was  a  mere 
incident  of  the  great  conflict  raging  across  France,  but  the 
story  must  ever  be  one  of  the  outstanding  features  of  the  war 
because  of  the  effect  it  produced  upon  the  whole  situation. 

In  the  struggle  against  the  Huns  the  Belgian  army  had 
been  reduced  to  its  lowest  ebb;  the  manpower  of  France  and 
England  had  been  sapped  by  constant  call  for  reserves,  and 
the  Allied  forces,  while  resisting  and  righting  heroically,  were 
without  reserves  to  draw  upon  to  effect  a  decisive  blow  when 
the  opportunity  presented. 

The  German  hordes  had  swept  forward  with  hammer- 
like blows  toward  Paris  in  what  wras  a  continuation  of  the  giant 
offensive  started  in  March.  The  second  movement  was 
H  R--27  417 


418  AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE 

launched  under  the  personal  command  of  the  German  Crown 
Prince  on  May  27,  and  was  directed  against  four  divisions  of 
the  British  troops  and  the  Sixth  French  Army.  Concentra- 
tion was  on  a  front  stretching  from  Soissons  to  Rheims,  a  dis- 
tance of  about  30  miles. 

The  Huns  were  driving  on  the  entire  front,  but  the  Crown 
Prince  with  crack  troops  was  to  have  the  honor  for  which  he 
had  long  been  striving — that  of  crossing  the  famous  Marne 
and  taking  Paris.  His  troops  had  reached  the  river  between 
Dormans  and  Chateau-Thierry  at  the  very  spot  where  the 
Third  German  Army  had  swept  across  the  stream  on  August 
25,  1914.    Paris  was  less  than  50  miles  away. 

Here  and  there  at  other  points  the  Germans  had  been  held 
by  the  French  and  English,  but  as  part  of  the  strategy  of  the 
French  command  the  enemy  had  been  permitted  to  advance  at 
this  point  through  lines  which  would  cost  him  a  terrible  toll  of 
lives.  The  French  meantime  were  concentrating  on  the 
enemy's  flank  with  the  hope  of  breaking  through  and  pocketing 
part  of  the  Crown  Prince's  advancing  forces. 

Whatever  the  intent,  the  Germans  were  resisting  the  ef- 
forts to  stop  them.  The  question  was,  where  would  the  ad- 
vance end?    The  answer  was  furnished  by  America. 

The  enemy  had  attempted  to  broaden  his  Marne  salient 
and  had  stretched  as  far  south  as  Chateau-Thierry.  It  is  sup- 
posed his  purpose  was  to  compel  General  Foch  to  meet  shock 
with  shock  by  throwing  in  his  reserve  forces,  since  the  German 
advance  had  then  almost  reached  shelling  distance  of  Paris. 

But  the  German  command  had  not  taken  the  Americans 
into  their  calculations,  for  here  the  Prussians  met  Uncle  Sam's 
fighting  men  and  their  French  supports  and  were  smashed  and 
thrown  back. 

Fighting  in  their  own  way,  in  the  open,  against  superior 
forces,  the  Marines  and  troops  of  the  National  American  Army 
fought  their  way  to  victory,  routing  the  enemy  and  wresting 


AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE  419 

from  them  positions  absolutely  necessary  to  their  further 
advance. 

Immense  forces  of  Germans  had  been  thrown  into  the 
fray  when  the  American  division,  to  which  the  Marines  were 
attached,  was  ordered  into  the  breach.  The  bulk  of  the  forces, 
called  to  help  halt  the  Huns,  were  hours  away  from  the 
fighting  front  and  were  being  brought  up  for  the  purpose  of 
holding  a  secondary  position  where  they  would  take  up  the 
fighting  when  the  French  fell  back. 

They  had  captured  Cantigny  after  elaborate  preparations 
under  the  direction  of  the  French,  but  here  there  were  no 
preparations.  The  American  commanders  wanted  to  attack 
the  advancing  enemy.  The  Allied  leaders  doubted  the  ability 
of  the  Americans  to  stop  the  Boche  in  open  combat. 

The  American  commanders  pleaded  to  make  war  in  their 
own  way.  Doubting,  yet  hopeful,  the  Allied  commanders  gave 
consent.  The  Americans  w^ere  moved  into  position.  There 
was  no  time  for  rest  and  they  came  forward  under  forced  draft, 
so  to  speak.  Infantry,  machine  gun  companies  and  artillery 
swung  into  position  and  faced  the  enemy  which  aimed  a  blow 
at  the  line  where  it  was  supported  by  the  French  on  the  left. 

The  Boche  hordes  swarmed  across  fields.  The  American 
gunners  raked  them  with  hell's  fire.  The  reputation  of  the 
Americans  as  sharpshooters  and  marksmen  was  sustained. 
Under  the  most  stressful  circumstances  and  while  the  French 
observers  stood  amazed,  the  Americans  took  careful  aim  and 
shot  as  though  at  rifle  practice.  Every  possible  shot  was  made 
to  tell. 

The  Germans  wavered,  then  halted  under  the  withering 
fire  of  machine  guns  and  rifle.  On  again  they  came,  only  to 
again  be  repulsed.  The  ground  was  strewn  with  their  dead  and 
wounded.  Then  they  began  to  break  and  to  crawl  back  to 
safer  positions. 

The  enemy  had  been  stopped  but  not  driven.     They  had 


420  AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE 

fallen  back  to  strong  positions,  the  names  of  which  must  go 
down  in  history  as  scenes  of  terrific  fighting — Bouresches  and 
Bois  de  Belleau — the  latter  a  wooded,  rocky  parcel  of  land  on 
which  German  machine  guns  were  hidden — hundreds  of  them 
< — while  more  than  a  thousand  of  the  enemy's  best  men  were 
concealed  in  the  thicket  and  underbrush  and  in  the  rocky 
fissures. 

The  Americans  drove  into  the  wood  and  charged  the 
stronghold.  Sacrifice!  Yes,  hundreds  of  brave  young  Ameri- 
cans died  fighting,  but  not  in  vain.  American  artillery  swept 
the  woods ;  little  companies  of  men  charged  the  enemy  machine- 
gun  nests,  silencing  the  guns  and  killing  the  operators  or  tak- 
ing them  prisoners.  There  was  no  going  forward  in  mass 
formation  under  barrage  or  protecting  curtain  of  fire,  but  out 
in  the  open  the  Marines  and  infantrymen  rushed  on  facing 
terrific  fire. 

Bois  de  Belleau  was  cleared  of  the  Boche.  Bouresches  fell 
to  the  Americans.  The  capture  of  the  town  was  a  repetition 
of  the  taking  of  the  first  position.  Machine  guns  protected 
the  town  everywhere.  In  cellar  windows,  doorways  and  on 
roofs  the  Germans  had  set  up  their  weapons.  But  it  was  the 
old  story — no  hail  of  shot  could  stop  the  Americans.  Almost 
without  sleep,  unable  to  bring  up  supplies,  the  Americans  had 
fought  four  days  with  only  canned  foodstuffs  to  sustain  them. 

Stories  of  the  fights  are  reminiscent  of  those  in  which 
American  troops  engaged  the  Indians  on  the  plains  in  the 
frontier  days.  Indeed  American  Indians — children  of  the 
famous  old  Sioux  and  Chippewa  tribes  of  Red  Men — acted  as 
scouts  for  Uncle  Sam  in  many  of  his  troops'  activities  in 
France,  and  the  methods  of  the  old  Indian  fighters  proved  too 
much  for  the  Germans. 

It  is  estimated  that  7000  were  killed  or  wounded  b}r  the 
Americans  in  this  action,  and  thai:  their  prisoners  numbered 
more  than  1000.     How  privates  took  command  of  squads  and 


AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE  421 

continued  to  outbattle  the  enemy  when  officers  were  killed ;  how 
lone  Americans  or  small  groups  of  them  captured  squads  of 
Huns  or  annihilated  them,  are  common  stories  of  heroism  writ- 
ten into  the  official  war  records  of  the  American  Expeditionary 
Forces  in  France,  and  sealed  by  medals  of  honor  presented  to 
young  Americans  or  confirmed  by  official  words  of  commenda- 
tion. 

Let  the  words  of  General  Pershing  in  an  official  order  to 
his  troops  on  August  27,  stand  as  part  of  the  record: 

"It  fills  me  with  pride  to  record  in  General  Orders  a 
tribute  to  the  service  achievements  of  the  First  and  Third 
Corps,  comprising  the  First,  Second,  Third,  Fourth,  Twenty- 
sixth,  Twenty-eighth,  Thirty-second  and  Forty-second  Divis- 
ions of  the  American  Expeditionary  Forces. 

"You  came  to  the  battlefield  at  a  crucial  hour  for  the 
Allied  cause.    For  almost  four  years  the  most  formidable  army 

•/  mi 

the  world  has  yet  seen  had  pressed  its  invasion  of  France  and 
stood  threatening  its  capital.  At  no  time  has  that  army  been 
more  powerful  and  menacing  than  when,  on  July  15,  it  struck 
again  to  destroy  in  one  great  battle  the  brave  men  opposed  to 
it  and  to  enforce  its  brutal  will  upon  the  world  and  civilization. 
"Three  days  later,  in  conjunction  with  our  Allies,  you  coun- 
ter-attacked. The  Allied  armies  gained  a  brilliant  victory  that 
marks  the  turning  point  of  the  war.  You  did  more  than  to 
give  the  Allies  the  support  to  which  as  a  nation  our  faith  was 
pledged. 

"You  proved  that  our  altruism,  our  pacific  spirit  and  our 
sense  of  justice  have  not  blunted  our  virility  or  our  courage. 

:'You  have  shown  that  American  initiative  and  energy  are 
as  fit  for  the  tasks  of  war  as  for  the  pursuits  of  peace.  You 
have  justly  won  unstinted  praise  from  our  Allies  and  the 
eternal  gratitude  of  our  countrymen. 

'*We  have  paid  for  successes  with  the  lives  of  many  of  our 
brave  comrades.     We  shall  cherish  their  memory  always  and 


422  AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE 

claim  for  our  history  and  literature  their  bravery,  achievement 
and  sacrifice. 

"This  order  will  be  read  to  all  organizations  at  the  first 
assembly  formations  following  its  receipt." 

Aside  from  being  largely  responsible  for  stopping  the 
Huns  once  again  at  the  Marne,  the  exploits  of  the  Americans 
filled  the  French  and  English  with  confidence,  aroused  their 
spirits  and  gave  them  renewed  hope.  Incidentally  their  efforts 
and  methods  made  apparent  the  value  of  surprise  attacks  and 
quick  blows  in  dealing  with  the  stolid  Huns. 

The  Allied  commanders,  quick  to  take  advantage  of  the 
situation,  gave  the  enemy  no  chance  to  consolidate  their  posi- 
tions. The  unified  forces  of  Allies  attacked  with  renewed 
energy  all  along  the  line,  and  the  Huns  were  forced  back  with 
a  sweep  that  astonished  the  world. 

By  September  1,  the  Germans  had  lost  practically  all  that 
they  had  gained  in  their  drive  from  March  21,  and  in  many 
places  they  had  been  driven  back  across  the  famous  Hinden- 
burg  line,  the  furthest  point  of  retreat  of  the  Germans  in  1914, 
when  they  were  forced  back  by  General  Joff re  from  the  Marne, 
and  dug  themselves  into  pit  and  trench.  Dozens  of  towns  were 
taken  and  more  than  120,000  prisoners  were  bagged. 

Almost  as  spectacular  in  its  effect  on  the  minds  of  the 
French  and  English,  as  was  the  demonstration  of  American 
fighting,  was  the  work  accomplished  in  France  in  providing 
for  the  transportation  and  care  of  the  incoming  troops.  Here 
great  docks,  storage  plants,  training  camps,  aviation  schools, 
motor  assembling  plants,  base  hospitals  and  reclamation  es- 
tablishments and  railroads,  built  in  less  than  a  year  and  still 
growing,  represented  an  investment  of  $35,000,000  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States  Government  in  August,  1918. 

Early  in  May  the  number  of  Americans  in  France  was 
about  500,000.  That  this  number  should  have  been  sent  across 
the  ocean  within  the  space  of  one  year  after  America  entered 


AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE  423 

the  war  was  regarded  as  a  distinct  achievement,  but  by  Sep- 
tember it  was  officially  announced  that  the  number  had  in- 
creased to  1,500,000. 

Some  of  these  were  sent  to  the  Italian  front  to  help  in 
the  drive  against  the  Austrians,  and  about  15,000  troops  from 
the  Philippines  were  sent  by  the  United  States  into  Siberia  to 
give  moral  support  to  the  Czecho- Slovaks. 

The  decision  to  send  troops  to  Siberia  was  by  agreement 
with  the  Japanese,  and  followed  a  statement  issued  by  the 
United  States  on  August  4,  in  which  it  was  stated  that  "mili- 
tary action  was  admissable  in  Russia  only  to  render  such  pro- 
tection and  help  as  possible  to  the  Czecho- Slovaks  against 
armed  Austrian  and  German  prisoners  who  were  attacking 
them,  and  to  steady  any  efforts  at  self-government  or  self- 
defense  in  which  the  Russians  themselves  may  be  willing  to 
accept  assistance."  It  was  stated  that  the  troops  were  for 
guard  duty,  and  under  the  agreement  with  Japan,  the  only 
other  country  in  a  position  to  act  in  Siberia,  each  nation  sent 
a  small  force  to  Vladivostok. 

The  British,  French  and  United  States  Governments  gave 
recognition  to  the  Czecho- Slovaks  as  an  Allied  nation — a 
geographical,  political  and  military  entity — with  three  armies, 
one  in  Siberia,  one  in  Italy  and  one  in  France,  where  they  had 
been  fighting  with  the  Allies  to  crush  the  Huns.  The  territory 
which  the  Czecho- Slovaks  claim  as  their  own  to  govern  inde- 
pendently comprises  Bohemia,  Moravia,  Silesia  and  Slavonika, 
which  lie  between  and  are  part  of  Austria-Hungary  and 
Germany. 

With  the  facilities  for  handling  the  troops  abroad  thor- 
oughly organized  and  the  obvious  necessity  for  furnishing 
greater  manpower  to  bring  about  an  early  defeat  of  Germany, 
the  United  States  decided  to  increase  the  scope  of  its  conscrip- 
tion and  to  raise  an  army  of  3,000,000  for  immediate  service 
and  adopted  a  new  manpower  bill  which  was  passed  by  Con- 


424*  AMERICANS  TURN  WAR'S  TIDE 

gress  the  last  week  in  August  and  signed  by  President  Wilson 
on  August  30. 

The  measure  provided  for  the  registration  and  drafting 
of  all  male  citizens  between  the  ages  of  18  and  45  years,  allow- 
ing for  deferred  classification  of  those  engaged  in  essential 
work  or  having  obligations  which  made  it  impossible  for  them 
to  render  active  military  service. 

Not  only  the  Allied  successes  on  the  western  front,  but 
also  those  on  the  Italian  front  and  in  the  Balkans,  where  the 
French,  Italians  and  Greeks  in  Albania,  with  a  million  troops, 
advanced  against  the  Germans,  Austrians  and  Turks,  made 
apparent  the  necessity  for  further  concentration  of  manpower. 

While  losing  ground  on  the  western  front  and  rapidly 
being  forced  to  the  wall,  Germany  gave  another  spectacular 
twist  to  her  military  program  by  carrying  the  war  to  America's 
doors.  With  her  submarines  she  sank  nearly  two  score  of  ships, 
schooners,  barges,  tugs,  and  even  a  lightship,  within  a  few 
miles  of  New  York,  Boston,  Norfolk,  Charleston  and  the  Del- 
aware Capes. 

But  while  the  U-boats  were  harassing,  no  effective  as- 
saults were  made  against  the  ships  which  carried  American 
troops  abroad.  In  this  connection  it  should  never  be  forgotten 
in  the  glamour  of  war  that  while  America  performed  wonders 
in  getting  her  soldiers  overseas,  England  provided  most  of  the 
ships,  and  that  it  was  England's  Navy  which  kept  the  German 
Navy  in  check  while  America's  war  vessels  and  destroyers  con- 
voyed the  troopships  and  protected  them  from  the  submarines. 


*  Sixty-four  pages  are  here  added  to  the   folios  to   include   full-page  illustra- 
tions not  before   numbered,   making  a   total   of   4S8   pages. 


• 


'•'■.':;i.'  ■ 


