tf tltnmi  uf 


{Irestltltil  b\J       Ella  Smith  Elbert 

Jlxt  Jltnmmam 

N9  Zptharine  E.  Conan 


■  •  mm 


-    .  • 


AN  ADDRESS 


DELIVERED  BY  THE 


REV.  L.  ¥.  BERRY,  D.  D.. 


UPON  HIS  INSTALLATION  AS  PRESIDENT  OF  THE 


INDIANA  ASBURY  UNIVERSITY. 


JULY   16,  1850. 


PUBLISHED  BY  THE  TRUSTEES, 


INDIANAPOLIS: 

PRINTED  BY  JOHN  D.  DEFREES 
1850. 


PRESIDENT  BERET'S  ADDRESS. 


The  world  presents  no  position  to  moral  agents  that  does 
not  involve  responsibility.  Such  are  our  relations  to  our 
Maker  and  to  each  other,  that,  whether  we  are  active  or 
inactive,  using  our  talents,  or  hiding  them  as  too  precious 
for  use,  or  as  though  the  use  involved  too  great  hazard, 
we  cannot  escape  from  the  responsibilities  of  free  and 
rational  agents.  But  there  are  some  positions  where 
circumstances  are  perpetually  recurring  to  keep  the  sense 
of  responsibility  alive  and  active  within  the  mind.  Per- 
haps there  are  none  more  fully  calculated  to  secure  this 
end  than  that  of  the  instructor  of  youth.  The  capacities 
of  mind  are  continually  expanding  in  his  view;  its  sus- 
ceptibility of  being  impressed,  favorably  or  otherwise,  is 
sometimes  even  painfully  apparent;  the  permanency  of 
these  impressions  when  once  made;  their  influence  in 
moulding  character,  in  shaping  future  destiny;  the  con- 
sequences to  the  individual,  to  society,  to  immortal  exist- 
ence, of  failure  on  one  hand  and  success  on  the  other,  all 
conspire  to  heighten  the  consciousness  of  responsibility,  and 
to  render  the  class  room,  to  the  man  who  has  the  requisite 
moral  as  well  as  intellectual  qualifications,  a  scene  of  in- 
tense excitement  and  interest. 

It  was  not  without  some  proper  appreciation  of  these 
weighty  duties,  that  your  speaker  received  the  important 
trust  which  the  honorable  joint  board  were  pleased  to  com- 


4  PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


mit  to  him.  The  experience  of  one  year  has  not  diminished, 
but  greatly  increased,  his  estimate  of  the  delicacy  and  im- 
portance of  the  duties  involved  in  that  trust,  while  the  elo- 
quent charge,  from  our  distinguished  fellow  citizen,  has  deep- 
ened the  impression,  rendering  those  duties  more  obvious 
and  therefore  more  imperative.  "  I  will  try,"  was  the  la- 
conic answer  of  an  officer  when  directed  to  perform  a  peril- 
ous work.  Now,  while  this  is  all  the  most  distinguished 
man  can  promise  in  relation  to  his  future  action,  it  is  the 
privilege  of  all,  even  the  least,  to  promise  as  much.  And, 
though  your  speaker  may  tremble  in  view  of  the  responsi- 
bilities of  his  post,  yet,  would  he  be  destitute  of  proper  sen- 
timents and  feelings,  if  he  did  not,  under  the  full  inspiration 
of  this  promise,  enter  upon  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his 
office,  firmly  relying  upon  the  source  of  all  prosperity,  upon 
that  power  and  wisdom  that  can  alone  effectuate  the  wishes 
and  counsels  of  man. 

But  the  occasion,  this  large  and  intelligent  assembly,  and 
the  impressive  charge,  all  remind  me,  it  is  Man — the  intel- 
lectual and  moral  improvement  of  man — that  has  led  to  the 
rearing  of  this  institution,  and  has  excited  so  high  and  abid- 
ing an  interest  in  its  prosperity.  And  to  the  consideration 
of  this  being,  Man,  both  as  an  individual  and  in  society,  and 
especially  to  his  capacities  for  improvement,  would  we  direct 
the  attention  of  the  audience. 

This  world  is  the  theater  of  human  action.  Wherever  we 
turn  our  attention,  all  is  stir  and  bustle ;  the  individual  and 
the  masses  are  in  motion.  There  is  the  pomp  of  prepara- 
tion, the  apparatus  of  human  industry,  the  endlessly  varied, 
and  innumerable  devices  of  human  skill,  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  equally  varied  and  innumerable  purposes;  and  we 
often  identify  the  interest  which  the  living  agent  inspires 
with  the  theater  itself.  But  it  is  man  which  invests  our 
earth  with  so  much  that  is  interesting.  The  earth  itself  is 
but  the  field  where  he  calls  into  sight  and  action  the  pur- 
poses of  his  great  and  ardent  mind ;  where  he  embodies  his 
vast  designs ;  where  he  developes  all  the  multifarious  devices 
of  his  skill  and  wisdom.    There  must  be  a  percipient  and 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS.  5 


sensitive  being  before  it  can  be  discovered  there  are  any 
forms  of  beauty  and  sublimity  on  our  earth,  and  it  only  be- 
comes an  object  of  real  interest,  when  considered  in  relation 
to  such  a  being.  To  create  this  interest  there  must  be  mind 
so  constituted,  that  by  the  aid  of  association,  it  can  call  up, 
from  the  depths  of  memory,  hi  most  delightful  and  interest- 
ing relations,  objects  that  are  past,  and  give  them  the  forms 
and  lineaments,  the  permanency,  life,  and  activity  of  real 
existence ;  that  can  discover  "  the  fixed  laws  of  matter  with 
so  much  accuracy  as  to  express,  in  mathematical  formulas 
not  only  the  state  of  large  bodies,  but  also  of  a  drop  of  water, 
or  of  a  ray  of  light,  estimating  minutely  extension  and  quantity, 
force,  velocity,  and  resistance ;"  that  can  endue  objects  desti- 
tute of  life  and  sensation,  with  the  energy,  the  animation, 
and  functions  of  real  being,  until,  in  the  glow  and  freshness 
of  its  vivid  conceptions,  the  mountains  shall  frown  in  solitary 
grandeur,  the  skies  smile  upon  the  earth,  the  valleys,  covered 
with  rich  harvests,  laugh,  as  if  rejoicing  to  supply  the  wants 
of  man,"  the  hills  skip  like  lambs"  and  the  "floods  utter  their 
voice  and  lift  up  their  hands  on  high.'''' 

If  man  was  constituted  differently,  if  his  nature  was  pure 
intellect,  unmoved  by  desire  or  emotion,  there  might  still  be 
bright  creations ;  but  there  would  be  none  to  admire  their 
brightness.  Beauty  might  exist,  but  it  would  not  be  felt.  The 
intellect  might  grasp  great  conceptions  such  as  right  and 
wrong,  and  preceive  the  immutability  of  moral  distinctions  ; 
but  there  would  be  none  to  appreciate  those  conceptions,  or 
feel  the  fitness  of  those  distinctions.  If  man  but  gives  his 
attention,  all  nature  is  vocal  with  music,  and  lovety  in  its 
array  of  beauty ;  if  he  withdraws  that  attention,  the  earth 
becomes  as  a  desolate  waste,  or  full  of  deformity  and  discord- 
ance. It  is  said  the  nightingale  sings  in  the  day  as  well  as 
in  the  night ;  but  mind,  in  which  sensation  resides,  occupied 
with  the  absorbing  interests  of  other  pursuits,  can  give  no 
attention  ;  and  thus  the  sweet  song  that  has  so  often  cheered 
man  in  the  silence,  and  mental  relaxation  of  the  evening, 
falls,  unheeded,  as  upon  the  leaden  ear  of  death. 

But  God  has  placed  man's  moral,  over  against  his  mental 


6 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


powers.  He  has  given  him  sensibilities  as  well  as  intellect. 
And  under  their  nicely  adjusted  and  legitimate  action,  man 
becomes  that  restless,  inquisitive  creature,  who  is  ever  in 
pursuit  of  some  object;  ever  seeking  new  ends;  calling  on 
nature  to  yield  up  her  secrets ;  to  make  known  her  laws,  and 
going  forth  with  an  invincible  determination  to  subdue  phy- 
sical elements,  and  mould  material  nature  to  the  good  pleasure 
of  his  will.  And  whether  we  find  him  on  the  land,  or  on  the 
sea,  engaged  in  high  or  low  pursuits,  traveling  the  circuit  of 
the  heavens,  or  employed  with  his  muck-rake  upon  the  earth, 
he  exhibits  a  minuteness  and  expansion,  a  fixedness  and  ver- 
satility, in  one  word,  a  universal  adaptation  of  intellectual 
powers,  which  excites  a  livelier  and  broader  interest  in  what- 
ever pertains  to  him,  and  makes  us  search  with  more  eager- 
ness to  ascertain  his  destination. 

Now  he  exhausts  his  intellectual  resources  in  controverting 
some  such  question  as  that  which  agitated  the  scholastic 
world,  and  enlisted  the  greatest  minds  of  the  age  :  "When 
a  hog  is  carried  to  market  with  a  rope  tied  about  its  neck, 
which  is  held  at  the  other  end  by  a  man,  whether  is  the  hog 
carried  to  market  by  the  rope,  or  the  man  ?"  Now  he  turns  away 
from  this  trifling  and  degradation  of  his  intellect,  and  disco- 
vers, from  the  falling  of  an  apple,  the  law  Qf  gravitation,  and 
by  analogy  makes  it  evident,  this  law  applies  to  all  the  heav- 
enly bodies.  Now  he  puts  forth  all  his  skill  in  shaping  the  point 
of  his  pen ;  anon,  he  labors  with  Franklin  to  discover  the 
laws  of  Electricity,  or  with  Hadley  to  apply  light  by  means 
of  the  Quadrant,  to  the  measurement  of  angles.  All  his 
powers  are  now  concentrated  on  the  gratification  of  his  ap- 
petites. Food  and  water  are  the  world  to  him.  Then  you 
may  behold  him  with  curious  instruments,  eagerly  engaged  in 
performing  a  chemical  analysis,  and  determining,  by  accurate 
tests,  and  the  nicest  discrimination,  if  there  be  any  adultera- 
tion in  the  compound.  Seek  him  to  day,  and  you  will  find 
him  with  Paracelsus  in  a  dusty  foundry  amidst  furnaces 
and  pots,  engaged  in  the  laborious  though  Utopian  enterprise 
of  discovering  the  primitive  element,  the  universal  men- 
struum ;  to-morrow  he  is  employed  with  Newton  in  measur- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS 


7 


ing  the  solid  contents  of  the  sun,  or  calculating  the  relative 
distances  of  the  planets.  But  whether  he  be  discussing 
quodlibets  with  the  scholastic  metaphysicians,  or  the  laws  of 
planetary  motion  with  La  Place ;  whether  he  be  sagely  and 
intently  employed  in  nibbing  his  pen,  or  with  Hadley  in  fix- 
ing the  light,  and  subjecting  it  to  his  operation;  whether  his 
attention  be  directed  to  the  necessary,  but  somewhat  un- 
classical  employment  of  gratifying  his  appetites,  or  with  Sir 
Humphrey  Davy  to  fix  the  alkaline  bases  and  the  laws  of  their 
combination  ;  whether  he  be  found  with  Paracelsus  exploring 
the  secrets  of  Alchymy,  and  still  pursuing  the  ever- flying  fugi- 
tive of  his  hopes,  or  with  Newton  in  exploring  the  heavens,  and 
unfolding  the  astounding  results  of  his  investigation — he  is  the 
same  being,  the  same  intellect,  the  same  sentient  nature,  the 
same  volitive  control.  Whether  his  attention  be  fixed  on  vast 
or  on  minute  objects,  his  observations  be  made  through  a 
telescope  or  a  microscope,  he  stoops  to  pick  an  apple,  or  rises 
to  govern  a  world,  he  is  the  same  unchanged  creature.  All 
his  powers  fix  upon  an  object,  be  it  great  or  small.  All  his 
feelings  for  the  moment  cluster  around  it.  He  no  less  thinks, 
desires,  and  wills  when  he  brushes  a  fly  from  his  face,  than 
when  he  performs  some  delicate  surgical  operation,  or  re- 
solves some  intricate  problem  of  mathematics.  It  is  man 
that  makes  the  world.  It  is  human  thoughts  and  human 
sentiments,  it  is  the  rise  and  fall  of  individual  and  social  mo- 
rality and  intelligence  that  cause  the  nations  to  advance,  stand 
still,  retrograde.  It  is  the  thinking,  feeling,  willing  of  this 
paradoxical  creature,  of  this  groveling  and  godlike  man, 
which  are  producing  such  strange  revolutions  on  our  earth, 
that  invest  it  with  so  much  to  interest,  excite,  and  astonish,  and 
which  make  it  the  theater  where  truth  and  error,  good  and 
evil,  joy  and  suffering  mingle  in  perpetual  conflict. 

There  is  undoubtedly  danger  that  man's  judgment  will  be 
perverted  by  vast  material  magnitudes,  and  that  he  will  lose 
a  proper  estimate  of  himself  amidst  their  external  glories 
and  magnificence.  But  we  should  remember  they  are  un- 
conscious of  their  own  existence     They  wheel  onward  in 


8  PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


their  dazzling  orbits,  passive  under  the  forces  that  control 
them,  without  thought  or  feeling,  or  a  self-determining  power. 
The  physical  universe  is  a  mere  automaton,  while  mind  is 
governed  by  laws  under  its  own  control.  If  there  be  a  sys- 
tem of  relations  binding  these  inert  masses,  there  is  one  as 
complete,  as  harmonious,  and  infinitely  more  wonderful, 
within  individual  man,  and  extending  from  the  individual  to 
each  and  all  of  the  human  family.  And  what  is  more,  this 
system  is  comprehended  by  his  intellect,  and  directed  by  his 
volition.  The  understanding  is  employed  in  investigating 
truth,  and  with  a  measure  of  that  intelligence  which  created 
the  universe,  adapting  means  to  ends  ;  his  appetites,  propen- 
sities and  affections  in  impelling  him  to  action,  and  furnish- 
ing the  sources  from  which  his  sensitive  nature  derives  its 
happiness ;  conscience  harmonizes  with  these  impulsive 
principles,  when  they  preserve  their  proper  bounds,  and  when 
they  over-step  them,  it  strongly  impels  to  another  course  of 
action,  and  restrains  the  desires  by  its  solemn  admoni- 
tions, the  uneasiness  it  creates,  and  the  remorse  with 
which  it  fills  the  soul  after  an  action  has  been  performed  : 
and  the  voluntary  power,  the  will,  presides  over  and  regulates 
the  whole. 

Let  man  study  the  science  of  his  own  nature;  let  him  sur- 
vey the  workings  of  this  system;  let  him  contemplate  the 
wonderful  spiritual  machinery  which  his  Maker  has  put  to 
work  within  him,  and  to  which  he  has  given  such  recu- 
perative energy  as  to  render  it  ever  moving,  producing  har- 
monious, ennobling,  purifying  results,  through  all  the  suc- 
cessive and  heightening  periods  of  his  existence:  and  then, 
if  his  admiration  of  material  objects  does  not  abate,  at  least 
his  conception  of  the  order,  strength  and  adjustment  of  his 
own  powers  will  be  greatly  exalted  and  enlarged.  He  will 
find  man  more  wonderful  than  any  other  work  of  God ;  and 
he  will  learn  to  regard  whatever  is  connected  with  his  pro- 
gressive improvement,  as  more  deserving  of  attention  than 
the  most  exalted  spheres  in  the  universe.  And  science 
itself,  in  all  its  departments,  embracing  these  worlds  of  light 
and  glory,  will  come  to  be  considered  valuable  only  as  it 


PRESlDEiXT  BERRY S  ADDRESS: 


contributes  to  the  intelligence,  morality,  and  consequently  to 
the  happiness  of  this  being. 

It  is  certainly  an  inquiry  of  no  inconsiderable  importance 
and  interest,  whether  this  being  shall  advance  or  retrograde  \ 
his  civilization,  his  moral  and  intellectual  condition  improve, 
or  the  advancement  already  made  be  lost,  and  society  be 
resolved  into  the  simple  individualism  of  savage  life.  On 
the  question  of  Human  Progress,  we  hesitate  not  to  avow 
our  belief  in  the  comparative  perfectability  of  human  na- 
ture.   And  it  will  be  no  difficult  matter  to  show,  there  are 
agents  now  at  work,  there  are  prolific  means  now  employed, 
that  must  issue  in  a  radical  improvement  of  man's  social 
condition.    But  in  discussing  this  subject,  it  is  not  our  inten- 
tion to  consider  the  question  of  the  different  races  of  men, 
however  it  may  seem  to  be  blended  with  our  subject,  or  how- 
ever entertaining  it  might  prove  to  be.    A  modern  writer  has 
asserted,  that  "Men  were  originally  created  of  different 
races,  and  that  however  they  may  mingle  there  is  a  constant 
tendency  for  the  mixed  race  to  die  off,  and  the  races  to  re- 
vert to  their  original  types."    Now  in  the  absence  of  all 
satisfactory  evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  bold  statement,  we 
are  contented  with  the  simple  declaration  of  an  infallible 
record — "God  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  to 
dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth."    We  shall  then,  without 
waiting  to  adduce  proofs,  assume  the  original  identity  of  the 
human  family. 

Neither  shall  we  pause  to  consider  some  minor  points, 
bearing  on  our  physical  progress  such  as  Food,  Fuel,  Raiment 
and  Shelter.  These  too  are  interesting  topics,  standing  in 
close  connection  with  our  subject.  It  is  a  field  in  which 
science  will  make  vast  improvements  contributing  more  or 
less  directly  to  the  physical  well  being  of  man.  The  sub- 
ject of  physical  progress  may  be  briefly  considered  in  har- 
mony with  our  design,  for  it  lays  at  the  foundation  of  all 
social  progress ;  but  the  points  to  which  we  have  referred, 
though  they  constitute  branches  of  the  general  subject, 
would  lead  us  to  discuss  topics  foreign  to  our  present  pur- 
pose. 


10 


lJRESJDEj\T  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


We  would  examine  the  present  aspect  of  the  world;  in- 
quire what  are  the  attitudes  of  the  nations  ;  what  will  be  the 
result  of  this  or  that  improvement  or  scientific  dicovery  ; 
what  of  a  more  general  dissemination  of  science;  of  a  more 
energetic  and  extensive  application  of  moral  means  and 
agencies ;  and  if  all  these  combined  will  be  likely  to  raise 
the  human  race  from  its  present  degradation  to  such  a  state 
of  social  improvement  as  to  enable  all  men  to  realize  the 
greatest  amount  of  happiness  of  which  the  present  state  is 
susceptible.  At  the  very  threshold  of  this  subject,  we  are 
met  with  the  inquiries,  "Is  the  condition  of  man  really  im- 
proved by  society?"  "Are  not  his  interests  and  happiness 
more  fully  secured  without  it  ?"  I  need  scarcely  say  that  in 
the  estimation  of  some  writers  of  merit,  the  social  state 
teems  with  evils  to  the  race  ;  the  evil  far  exceeds  the  good. 
But  it  is  very  difficult  to  point  out  the  reliable  grounds  for 
such  a  position.  If  it  be  admitted,  it  must  follow,  that  the 
individual  independence  and  lawlessness  of  the  savage  state 
are  more  rational  and  elevating,  than  any  or  all  the  advan- 
tages of  society.  By  society  we  mean  a  state  of  physical 
well  being,  associated  with  high  moral  and  intellectual  free- 
dom and  culture.  If  then  it  be  said,  the  barbarous  state, 
with  its  uncultivated  powers,  its  deadened  sensibilities,  and 
blighting  influences,  is  superior  to  such  a  social  state,  there 
is  an  end  to  all  argument.  The  assumption,  if  we  compare 
the  means  of  happiness  possessed  by  barbarous  and  civil- 
ized men,  is  a  manifest  absurdity.  It  were  easy  to  show, 
by  any  recognized  standard  of  judgment,  that  the  suscepti- 
bilities of  man's  physical,  mental  and  moral  nature  for  im- 
provement can  only  be  fully  developed  in  connection  with 
society;  indeed,  that  the  refinements  and  just  adaptations  of 
society,  necessarily  suppose  human  nature  carried  forward 
to  the  farthest  point  of  earthly  progress. 

Civilization  is  so  clearly  a  blessing  to  man,  we  cannot 
avoid  the  inference,  that  there  must  be  some  strong  personal 
reason  other  than  conviction,  some 'derangement  of  moral 
powers  to  lead  one  to  suppose  the  undisguised  selfishness, 
torpidity,  and  ferocity  of  savage  life  are  superior  to  the  spirit 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


11 


stirring  philanthropy,  the  humanity,  the  mental  activity  and 
refinement  of  social  existence.  There  is  but  one  single  fact 
peculiar  to  savage  life  which  harmonizes  with  reason,  and 
commends  itself  to  a  man  of  correct  moral  feelings.  I  al- 
lude to  his  feeling  of  independence,  to  his  sentiment  of  un- 
restricted and  unqualified  personality.  But  to  what  does 
the  savage  state  owe  this?  It  will  not  surely  be  said,  it  is 
the  product  of  barbarism.  It  is  an  offspring  of  spontaneity, 
an  original  suggestion  of  the  soul,  born  with  every  man,  and 
exists  as  much  in  the  social  as  in  the  savage  state.  The 
very  ground  work  of  society  implies  it.  For  it  is  the  very 
individual  lawlessness,  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  sole 
property  of  the  savage,  that  is  conceded  when  man  enters 
society. 

But  not  only  are  our  powers  more  fully  developed  in  con- 
nection with  society,  but  it  is  essential  to  human  happiness. 
Man  was  formed  for  it.  Nothing  can  compensate  him  for 
its  loss.  The  garden  of  Eden  with  all  its  bloom  and  beauty, 
would  be  to  him  as  desolate  as  the  African  desert,  if  he  was 
without  companions.  Multo  miserius  sent  exilium  esse,  said 
the  aged  Coriolanius.  He,  that  with  an  unblanched  cheek 
and  a  steady  nerve,  could  encounter  all  other  forms  of  dan- 
ger, was  overwhelmed  with  the  terrors  of  exile.  It  is  indeed 
strange,  that  common  sense  which  some  one  has  denomi- 
nated the  "genius  of  humanity,"  should  teach  us  to  live  in  so- 
ciety, if  it  furnishes  so  many  drawbacks  upon  human  hap- 
piness. Men,  as  if  governed  by  a  common  impulse,  associ- 
ate themselves.  If  the  solitariness  and  peculiar  independ- 
ence of  the  savage  are  congenial  with  the  interests  of 
humanity,  why  is  it  that  solitary  confinement  is  regarded  as 
so  severe  a  punishment?  The  evil  is  not  in  the  confine- 
ment, for  if  so,  it  would  destroy  men  generally  when  allowr 
ed  social  intercourse.  But  it  is  the  solitariness  which  stupi- 
fies  their  intellects,  benumbs  all  their  powers,  renders  exist- 
ence intolerable,  and  terminates  it  in  gloom  and  despair. 

The  Western  Roman  Empire  fell,  in  the  fifth  century,  under 
the  successive  attacks  of  barbarians.  We  know  what  was 
the  state  of  the  Roman  Empire.    What  was  that  of  these  sav- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


age  hordes  who  thus  became  masters  of  the  fairest  portion  of 
the  world?  The  bands  of  society  were  rent  on  every  side. 
Cultivation  entirely  ceased.  And  in  the  state  of  mental  inan- 
ity which  followed  ;  in  the  universal  selfishness  which  excludes 
every  refined  feeling  and  entombs  the  soul  within  the  body  ;  in 
their  ignorance  and  brutality  ;  in  the  disorders,  anarchy,  tribual 
dominion,  and  wars  which  succeeded  through  several  success- 
ive centuries,  we  have  the  perfected  contrast  of  barbarism 
with  civilization.  And  so  it  must  ever  be.  The  arguments 
with  which  the  social  state  is  opposed  may  claim  importance 
and  profundity ;  but  upon  examination  we  shall  find  their  im- 
portance, like  that  of  the  human  exquisite,  to  consist  in  airs 
and  flourish  of  trumpets,  and  their  profundity  mere  surface. 
It  is  an  old  saying,  "  Waters  may  seem  deep  because  they 
are  muddy,"  and  philosophy  will  teach  us,  a  small  object 
may  rise  into  magnitude  if  seen  in  a  fog. 

But  is  there  any  sufficient  ground  on  which  to  base  our 
hopes  for  the  future  progress  of  the  race  ?  Very  different 
answers  would  doubtless  be  returned  by  different  persons  to 
this  question.  One  sees,  in  the  movements  of  society,  no  di- 
rection, no  intelligent  end.  Crimes,  absurdities,  and  bar- 
barisms follow  each  other  in  endless  succession.  The  bound- 
less ocean,  swept  by  storms  and  tempests,  is  its  appropriate 
similitude.  A  favorable  aspect  is  only  presented  to  mock 
human  hopes,  while  the  whole  scene  is  crowded  with  disas- 
trous occurrences.  The  wheel  of  the  fickle  goddess,  Fortune, 
is  ever  turning.  The  rule  of  Chance  is  universal.  And 
over  the  whole  earth,  Fate,  with  inexorable  rage,  crushes  the 
successive  generations  of  man,  and  hurls  them  with  re- 
morseless fury  into  the  gulf  of  oblivion.  Before  such  a  be- 
ing all  is  darkness  and  dismay ;  while  around  him  in  the 
moving  scenes  of  a  providential  government,  he  can  see  no 
indications  of  an  intelligent  administration. 

There  are  others  who  regard  every  event  as  subject  to  un- 
changing laws,  administered  by  an  intelligent  being.  They 
see  the  turmoil,  the  commotion,  the  confusion  referred  to  : 
they,  too,  look  out  upon  a  turbulent  ocean  swept  by  storms  ; 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


18 


but  high  above  the  storm  they  see  the  guiding  hand  of  Provi- 
dence, overruling  all  events,  and  giving  them  such  a  general 
direction,  as  to  make  them  contribute  on  the  whole  to  the 
final  elevation  and  happiness  of  man.  The  administration 
is  in  the  hands  of  a  benevolent  being ;  and  contemplating 
the  universality  and  fixedness  of  his  laws,  they  look  out  in 
anticipation  of  a  bright  future  ;  an  age  of  perfected  social 
interests ;  an  age  crowned  with  the  glory  of  peace  and  all 
its  concomitant  blessings ;  industry  promoted  ;  commerce 
multiplying  the  means  of  human  happiness ;  man  drawn 
into  intimate  relations  with  his  fellow  man  ;  conscience  free ; 
talent  rewarded ;  virtue  honored ;  education  diffused ;  the 
arts  and  sciences  matured  and  conferring  many  blessings  : 
and  religion,  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  crowning  and  immor- 
talizing the  whole.  This  improvement  of  the  race  even  now 
begins  to  shine  in  prospect,  like  the  first  rays  of  light  stream- 
ing on  the  vision  of  the  mariner  after  a  night  of  storms. 
The  storm  is  over,  the  billows  are  gently  subsiding  into  a 
state  of  rest,  the  wind  has  retired  to  his  caverns,  or  sent 
howling  over  other  seas,  and  light,  succeeded  by  a  sense  of 
safety,  rendered  more  intensely  pleasurable  by  the  previous 
presence  of  danger,  has  burst  upon  his  view.  Upon  such 
a  tempestuous  sea  has  human  society  been  tossed.  The 
time  has  come  when  the  storm  must  abate — calm  and  rest 
must  succeed  to  universal  confusion.  And  the  nations  of 
the  earth,  if  they  do  not  yet  behold  the  sun,  may  exultingly 
cry,  "  the  morning  breaketh." 

After  what  has  been  said,  we  need  scarcely  repeat,  our 
views  correspond  with  those  last  given.  And  if  we  had  no 
other  ground  on  which  to  rely,  we  should  repose  securely  in 
the  one  just  referred  to — the  universfjlity  of  law. 

"  Of  law,"  says  the  celebrated  Hooker,  "  no  less  can  be 
said,  than  that  her  seat  is  the  bosom  of  God,  her  voice  the 
harmony  of  the  world  ;  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  do  her 
homage,  the  very  least  as  feeling  her  care,  the  greatest  as- 
not  exempted  from  her  power;  both  angels  and  men,  and 
creatures  of  what  condition  soever,  though  each  in  different 


1 1 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


spheres  and  manners,  yet  all  with  uniform  consent  admiring 
her  as  the  mother  of  their  peace  and  joy."  One  hardly 
knows  which  most  to  admire  in  this  passage,  its  sublimity, 
its  comprehensiveness,  its  facility  and  grace  of  expression, 
or  its  truthfulness.  It  is  truth  of  the  highest  order  and 
deepest  interest ;  truth  as  nearly  related  to  man's  social  and 
spiritual  being  as  fragrance  to  the  burning  incense;  truth 
flaming  with  revelations  of  hope,  and  peace,  and  joy  all 
along  the  line  of  earthly  existence,  irradiating  the  closing 
scenes  of  that  existence  with  the  sunlight  of  immortality, 
and  furnishing  an  assurance  of  its  renewal  in  the  bright 
abodes  of  the  blest  on  high.  Were  it  true,  there  is  no  rule, 
no  order  in  the  world  around ;  were  there  no  intelligent  be- 
ing looking  through  all  the  gloom  and  turmoil  of  our  earth 
to  distant  ends  concurrent  with  human  happiness  ;  were  any 
event  not  subject  to  the  divine  dominion,  what  a  flood  of  sor- 
row would  the  discovery  of  such  a  fact  let  in  upon  the  hu- 
man mind.  It  would  be  as  though  the  bow  of  promise  were 
stricken  from  the  heavens,  as  though  the  sun  should  with- 
draw his  beams,  or  the  blasts  and  storms  of  winter  were 
suddenly  to  howl  around  us  in  mid-summer.  A  being  igno- 
rant of  the  nature  of  storms  might  fancy  a  demon  rode  upon 
their  dark  wings  ;  that  the  shivering  bolt  was  hurled  from  his 
hand  ;  the  tempests  let  loose  from  the  reservoirs  of  his  ma- 
lice :  and  that  pestilence,  and  famine,  disease  and  death  were 
his  chosen  ministers.  Denying  the  universality  of  law,  this 
state  of  extreme  dread  and  terror  becomes  the  common  lot  of 
man.  Repose  of  spirit  is  a  stranger  on  earth  ;  and  "  stran- 
gling better  than  life."  Nay  worse  than  this.  Better  that  our 
earth  be  governed  by  an  intelligent  though  malevolent  be- 
ing, than  by  a  wild,  untraceable,  mysterious  chance.  In  one 
case,  having  intelligence,  we  might  be  sure  he  worked  by 
some  rule  ;  and  the  discovery  of  that  rule  might  furnish 
some  grounds  for  hope.  We  might  anticipate  the  blow,  and 
either  prepare  to  receive  it,  or  by  some  means  succeed  in 
shunning  it.  But  we  can  make  no  calculations  in  relation 
to  the  acts  of  a  blind,  unintelligent  agent,  who  puts  forth 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  xYDDRESS. 


15 


power  necessarily.  He  acts  at  random,  and  human  sagacity 
and  foresight  are  unavailable. 

But  this  is  not  the  only  result.  Denying  the  universality 
of  law  we  dethrone  the  Deity.  We  cannot  conceive  of  God 
without  conceiving  of  fixed  laws  and  universal  government. 
Take  any  event  from  under  his  control,  and  abandon  it  to 
the  government  of  chance,  and  he  is  without  those  attributes 
essential  to  absolute  perfection.  You  thus  raise  up  a  rival  of 
the  infinite  ;  a  being  with  power  adequate  to  contest  the 
question  of  supremacy  with  heaven.  There  is  commotion  in 
the  earth ;  the  weak  are  overcome  by  the  strong ;  right  and 
might  are  found  on  different  sides  ;  the  despot  tramples  on  the 
liberty  of  nations ;  the  patriot  army  is  overthrown  in  battle  ; 
society  retrogrades  ;  virtue  is  degraded  ;  truth  and  equity  fall 
in  the  streets.  It  is  the  wild  domain  of  chance.  Darkness, 
and  error,  and  misery  are  the  necessary  results.  Let  the  con- 
viction of  the  universality  of  law  once  fix  itself  in  the  mind  and 
we  view  the  same  scene  without  dismay.  We  confidently 
wait  to  see  the  scene  still  farther  unfold  ;  to  behold  the  proof 
of  the  fact,  a  thousand  times  illustrated  in  history,  that  our 
world  has  a  moral  government.  We  wait  to  view  the  just 
and  certain  retribution  as  terrible  as  unanticipated  ;  to  be- 
hold the  overthrow  of  the  despot ;  the  nations,  corrected  by 
well-appointed  discipline,  arising  from  slavery  ;  society  ad- 
vancing, exhibiting  activity,  and  energy,  and  love  of  virtue  in 
all  its  movements,  and  furnishing  an  unmistakable  vindica- 
tion of  the  ways  of  God  to  man. 

It  is  the  peculiar  privilege  of  him  who  accredits  the  doc- 
trine of  a  Divine  Providence,  to  go  beyond  the  mere  histo- 
rian, who  simply  records  facts,  oftentimes  without  compre- 
hending their  relations.  He  may  enter  the  "  secret  place  of 
thunder;"  he  may  seat  himself  in  the  divine  chariot  as  it  rolls 
over  the  earth,  and  see,  in  the  comprehensive  plans  of  God's 
moral  government,  the  development  of  vast  designs,  of  far 
reaching  purposes,  of  a  benevolence  looking  steadily  for 
ward  to  the  elevation  of  our  race  and  taking  in  its  immense 
compass,  its  vast  and  unmeasured  unity,  every  agent  and 
5 


16 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS 


every  event  that  may  be  made  to  bear  upon  the  interests  of 
mankind.  Thus,  not  only  law,  fixed  and  uniform,  "  becomes 
the  mother  of  our  peace  and  joy,"  but  issuing  from  "the  bo- 
som of  God,  her  voice  is  the  harmony  of  the  world."  It  is 
here  we  base  our  argument  for  the  improvement  of  man- 
kind. The  will,  the  power,  and  the  benevolence  of  the 
Creator  accord  with  it.  It  is  hence  repeatedly  foretold  in 
the  Scriptures,  and  the  loftiest  strains  and  boldest  imagery 
of  the  holy  seers  of  ancient  times,  are  employed  in  its  cele- 
bration as  the  jubilee  of  our  earth.  The  question,  then,  of 
the  prospective  exaltation  of  man,  is  settled  by  the  unerring 
prescience  of  God. 

But  we  may  inquire,  what  are  the  means  and  agencies 
which  will  bring  about  the  result?  It  cannot  surely  be  as- 
sumed we  are  entirely  ignorant  in  relation  to  this  matter. 
The  past  and  present  are  known  to  us;  and  man  is  able  to 
derive  from  all  the  example  of  the  past,  where  examples  are 
numerous  and  well  attested,  and  from  all  the  experience  and 
observation  of  the  present,  such  grounds  of  analogical  rea- 
sonings as  will  guide*  him  to  safe  conclusions  in  relation  to 
the  future.  This  fact  becomes  more  evident  when  we  inves- 
tigate the  laws  of  mind,  and  discover  there  the  same  uni- 
formity to  which  we  have  previously  referred.  Assuming, 
for  the  moment,  this  uniformity,  the  argument  may  be  thus 
stated:  If,  at  any  period  in  the  history  of  the  world,  any  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  human  family,  under  favorable,  but 
especially  under  unfavorable  circumstances,  has  evinced  high 
susceptibilities  for  improvement;  and  has  made  large  advance- 
ments, as  the  laws  of  mind  are  uniform,  under  similar  con- 
ditions, we  may  confidently  look  for  corresponding  results. 
Again :  If  we  find  that  a  certain  employment — say  commerce 
—has  had  a  striking  effect  to  elevate  mankind,  and  that  not 
in  a  few  instances  merely  but  universally,  we  may  safely 
infer  that,  so  far  as  it  is  pursued  in  future,  it  will  continue 
to  produce  this  result.  And,  if  still  further,  we  can  show  an 
increasing  tendency  to  enter  upon  commercial  pursuits;  that 
the  sphere  of  commerce  is  widening  and  its  facilities  increas- 


PRESIDENT  KERRY'S  ADDRKSK.  1? 


ing;  that  from  the  relations  of  man,  and  from  their  mutual 
wants,  which  can  only  be  met  by  a  system  of  exchanges,  it 
must  continue  to  expand ;  and  that,  in  proportion  as  men 
have  become  intelligent,  they  have  established  commercial 
connections,  and  given  free  scope  to  trade,  we  shall  have 
greatly  strengthened  the  argument,  and  have  proved  that 
while  man  will  certainly  enter  upon  this  employment,  it  will 
certainly  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  society.  Now,  if 
this  mental  uniformity  be  conceded,  the  argument  becomes 
irresistible.  The  history  of  the  past  and  present  is  at  once 
replete  with  interest;  the  benevolent  heart  is  roused  to  greater 
activity,  and  benevolent  associations  are  clothed  with  new 
efficiency. 

But  we  are  under  no  necessity  of  assuming  the  uniformity 
of  mental  law,  or  of  asking  any  concessions  on  this  subject. 
It  is  so  obvious  and  so  unvarying,  that  men  in  reasoning  from 
it  seem  almost  endowed  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  ".We 
can  foretell,"  says  Dr.  Abercrombie,  (Moral  Feelings,  Part 
II.,)  "the  respective  effects  that  a  tale  of  distress  will  have 
upon  a  cold  hearted  miser  and  a  man  of  active  benevolence, 
with  the  same  confidence  with  which  we  can  predict  the  dif- 
ferent actions  of  an  acid  upon  an  alkali  and  upon  a  metal." 

How  is  it  that  the  proper  officers  in  all  civilized  govern- 
ments estimate  beforehand,  the  amount  of  capital  which  will 
be  annually  invested  in  commerce  ?  This  principle  lays  at 
the  foundation  of  all  their  calculations.  How  does  the  ora- 
tor and  the  writer  of  fiction  succeed  so  invariably  in  sway- 
ing human  passions  ?  It  is  by  adapting  their  appeals  and 
imaginary  creations  to  them,  which  they  could  not  do  but 
for  their  uniformity.  How  is  it  that  in  a  pending  election, 
an  adept  in  the  science  of  human  nature,  noth withstanding 
human  fickleness  and  instability,  can  foretell  its  termination 
with  strong  confidence  and  almost  unvarying  accuracy? 
Man  changes,  but  it  is  according  to  unchangeable  rules.  His 
circumstances  vary,  not  his  rules.  His  rules  are  fixed  like 
the  sun  in  its  relation  to  the  earth,  while  his  circumstances, 
like  the  earth,  are  alone  subject  to  revolutions.    And  so 


h8 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


confident  is  man  of  the  stability  of  these  inward  laws,  that 
he  stakes  his  very  existence  upon  them,  and  relies  with  safe- 
ty, even  where  his  life  hangs  upon  their  permanency. 

Many  of  the  most  approved  sciences,  have  no  other  founda- 
tion than  this  mental  uniformity.  Such  are  History,  the 
Laws  of  Nations,  Political  Economy,  Rhetoric,  and  Moral 
Philosophy,  not  to  mention  several  others.  Deny  this  stabili- 
ty of  mental  laws  and  the  admitted  facts  of  these  sciences 
will  be  true  or  false,  according  to  the  ever  varying  and  con- 
fused action  of  the  principles  of  human  nature.  But  if  the 
laws  of  mind  are  so  fixed  and  uniform  as  to  constitute  a 
proper  basis  for  scientific  deduction,  then  are  they  a  reliable 
ground  for  argument  in  relation  to  man's  future  progress. 
If  then  the  facts  we  have  adduced  are  undeniable,  we  have, 
in  the  uniformity  of  mental  laws,  an  accurate  rule  to  guide 
us  in  the  arguments  we  would  draw  from  the  records  of  the 
past,  and  from  present  experience  and  observation.  Let 
us  examine  some  of  the  facts  that  may  be  derived  from  these 
sources. 

It  is  an  undeniable  truth,  that  the  whole  world  are  anticipat- 
ing a  halcyon  period,  when  social  reforms  shall  be  perfected, 
the  bonds  of  the  slave  be  broken,  a  universal  equality  of 
rights  recognized,  and  when,  the  intellectual  and  moral  con- 
dition of  man,  corresponding  with  the  elevated  circumstances 
of  his  physical  being,  he  shall  realize  the  full  compass 
of  happiness  for  which  he  was  made.  This  anticipation  is, 
to  my  mind,  in  many  points  of  view,  both  interesting  and 
startling.  Immediately  prior  to  the  appearance  of  the  Sav- 
iour of  the  world,  the  expectation  of  the  coming  of  a  being 
of  great  power  and  remarkable  characteristics,  was  nearly 
universal.  This  expectation,  so  fully  realized  in  the  advent 
of  him  who  was  The  Wonderful,  doubtless  owed  its  origin  ei- 
ther to  tradition,  or  to  the  prophets  of  the  Jewish  dispensation. 
But  the  rapid  improvement  of  society,  the  vast  elevation  of 
the  race,  the  universal  spread  of  light,  knowledge,  and  peace, 
are  equally  subjects  of  prophetic  enunciation,  as  clear  and 
distinct  as  was  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.    A  bright  fu- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


19 


ture  is  the  subject  of  universal  anticipation.  Are  there  any 
indications  that  the  event  will  in  this,  as  in  the  other  case, 
succeed  the  expectation  ?  Have  any  heralds  preceded  it  to 
announce  its  coming  ?  I  answer,  the  tendency  of  society  is 
upward,  and  the  elements  of  progress  are  being  rapidly  de- 
veloped. The  high  is  universally  taking  the  place  of  the 
low,  beauty  is  succeeding  deformity,  the  immobility  of  the 
savage  state  is  giving  place  to  the  bustle,  the  stir,  the  lofty 
and  tireless  effort  of  intellectual  existence,  and  a  besotted 
sensualism  is  yielding  before  the  pure  and  lovely  influences 
and  control  of  Bible  morality.  "There  be  men,"  says  a 
modern  writer,  "who  think  the  meat  is  more  than  the  life,  the 
raiment  than  the  body;  who  regard  the  earth  as  a  stable, 
and  the  fruit  as  fodder;  who  love  the  corn  they  grind  and 
the  fruit  they  crush,  more  than  the  garden  of  the  angels  on 
the  slopes  of  Eden."  We  do  not  deny  the  existence  of  this 
gross  and  debasing  sensualism.  But  we  must  not  forget 
they  are  men,  and  men  too  as  susceptible  of  intellectual  cul- 
ture, as  those  who  most  admire  the  scenes  of  nature,  who 
have  the  most  exquisite  taste,  who  find  the  keenest  relish 
and  largest  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  wisdom  and  be- 
nevolence manifested  in  "the  garden  of  the  angels  on  the 
slopes  of  Eden."  They  may  now  seem  to  be  mere  sensual 
beings — to  have  bodies  without  souls.  But  under  the  elevat- 
ing influences  of  political  and  religious  liberty,  of  science 
and  morality,  these  soulless  beings,  like  the  chrysalis,  shall 
spring  into  new  life  and  activity,  and  the  torpid,  sightless, 
thoughtless  creature,  who  seemed  only  fit  to  drudge  with 
brutes,  shall  suddenly  become  a  man  of  full  stature,  vieing 
with  angels  in  the  exhibitions  of  intellect,  and  in  the  cease- 
less impulsions  of  a  soul-stirring  philanthropy.  No  believer 
in  his  Bible  will  deny  that  man  is  capacitated  for  such  im- 
provement; nay,  that  this  is  the  destiny  marked  out  for  him. 
And  now  let  him  but  view  this  destiny;  let  him  gain  but  one 
glimpse  of  the  bright  career  before  him,  and  his  listlessness 
instantly  departs,  and  the  desire  for  improvement  becomes 
active  and  influential. 


\ 


20 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


//  may  be  readily  granted,  scenes  Jtave  transpired  in  the  politi- 
cal world  well  calculated  to  produce  discouragement  in  the  mind  of 
him  who  views  events  merely  in  themselves  without  any  connection 
with  a  moral  governor.  Clouds  and  darkness  seem  to  cover 
the  whole  political  horizon.  France  strikes  for  liberty ;  her 
monarch  is  dethroned;  her  ministers,  the  tools  of  despotism, 
fly ;  there  is  an  upheaving  of  the  nation  ;  the  masses  are 
moved  as  with  one  spirit ;  a  mighty  and  universal  impulse 
bears  the  nation  onward  ;  a  republican  government  is  estab- 
lished. But  our  first  flush  of  joy  has  not  passed  away,  when 
we  behold  with  feelings  of  mingled  pity  and  horror,  the  Pre- 
sident of  the  Republic  throwing  himself  into  the  arms  of  the 
royalist  party,  and  the  existence  of  a  monster  corruption 
sufficient  to  dissolve  any  social  fabric. 

The  Pope  is  expelled  from  Rome,  and  flies  in  disguise. 
Even  at  Rome  the  spirit  of  liberty  is  not  extinct.  The  nation 
gives  signs  of  life,  and  arises  with  a  manifest  determination 
to  overthrow  the  oppressive  tyranny  which  had  ground  it  to 
the  dust.  But  while  it  is  in  the  full  tide  of  successful  experi- 
ment, France,  in  the  sight  of  heaven,  marches  forth  her  re- 
publican armies,  overthrows  the  feeble  bands  of  the  Romans, 
and  prepares  the  way  for  the  return  of  the  Pope. 

Hungary  throws  off  the  yoke  of  Austria,  and  is  successful 
in  withstanding  its  forces,  until  diplomacy  brings  Russia  to 
the  aid  of  Austria,  and  the  efforts  of  a  noble  race  for  inde- 
pendence  and  social  reform  are  crushed.  All  Europe  seemed 
to  be  moved  by  the  same  spirit ;  monarchs  have  been  made 
to  concede,  and  oppressive  governments  have  become,  to 
some  extent,  liberal.  Even  Turkey  furnished  a  temporary 
asylum  for  the  proscribed  and  fugitive  Hungarians.  But  in 
some  instances  these  monarchs  have,  and  in  others  will  find 
out  the  means  of  evading  these  concessions,  of  drawing  back 
all  they  have  reluctantly  yielded,  and  of  binding  the  cords  more 
closely  around  their  oppressed  subjects. 

But  what,  then  ?  Does  it  follow  that  the  spirit  of  liberty 
which  extorted  these  concessions  is  extinct?  Have  we 
grounds  in  history  to  believe,  these  nations  have  stagnated, 

/ 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


»] 


and  that  these  attempts  at  social  amelioration  and  political 
reform  will  never  be  renewed  ?  The  spirit  of  liberty  is  all 
abroad  strengthening  the  hearts,  and  instructing  the  minds 
and  nerving  the  arms  of  men.  Those  very  principles  which 
brought  on  the  conflicts  that  have  ended  so  disastrously,  are 
still  like  unseen  leaven  diffusing  their  influence.  Under  their 
operation  social  reform  will  silently  advance,  though  its  pre- 
sent manifestation  be  prevented  by  despotism.  The  nations 
are  preparing  for  subsequent  efforts ;  and  those  efforts  must 
issue  ultimately  in  the  overthrow  of  tyranny,  in  the  eman- 
cipation of  mind,  in  vast  and  incalculable  social  im- 
provements. The  governments  of  Europe  at  this  moment 
stand  on  a  volcano.  Deep,  down  in  its  burning  center,  op- 
pressors may  hear  if  they  will  the  premonition  of  coming  de- 
struction ;  and  they  may  see  it,  also,  in  the  ardent  vapors 
and  fitful  flames  that  stream  up  through  the  involving  smoke 
and  obscurity. 

We  may  find  much  darker  periods  in  the  world's  history, 
and  trace  with  pleasure  that  silent  accumulation  of  power, 
that  real  but  unobserved  progress,  that  unostentatious,  but 
rapid  collection  of  energies  for  the  hour  of  conflict  and  trial. 
Look,  for  instance,  at  the  irruption  of  the  Northern  Nations. 
The  Roman  Empire  at  that  time  embraced  nearly  all  the 
civilization  of  the  world.  The  immense  swarms  that  swept 
down  upon  it,  devoured  every  green  thing,  and  converted  the 
most  delightful  part  of  the  world  into  a  desert  waste.  A 
universal  chaos  succeeded.  All  distinctions  of  property, 
every  impress  made  by  society,  was  effaced.  It  required 
ten  centuries  to  give  to  the  rigid,  unyielding  elements 
of  northern  barbarism  a  social  form.  But  the  work  was 
finally  effected.  That  element  triumphed,  and  those  nations 
that  came  so  near  destroying  all  social  institutions,  now 
furnish  specimens  of  the  highest  elevation. 

During  the  dark  ages  feudalism  held  the  sway.  Essen- 
tially opposed  to  every  branch  of  human  progress,  it  sat  like 
an  incubus  upon  the  energies  of  all  Western  Europe.  In  its 
very  constitution,  with  its  petty  sovereignties,  its  absolute  des- 


22 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


potism,  its  repulsive  regulations,  its  degrading  vassalage,  and 
its  predatory  wars,  it  involved  the  dismemberment  of  society. 
But  so  essential  is  society  to  man's  interest,  that  from  the 
midst  of  this  dark  and  savage  system,  which  seemed  to  be 
to  it  as  the  valley  and  shadow  of  death,  it  arose  and  began 
co  perform  the  functions  of  a  real  existence.  A  species  of 
federative  government,  in  the  form  of  a  baronial  assembly, 
was  established.  To  this  Suzerain,  the  minor  chief,  in  order 
to  escape  the  rapacity  and  depredations  of  other  plunderers, 
yielded  the  right  to  protect  himself  and  to  avenge  his  own 
wrongs,  just  as  the  individual  yields  the  same  right  in  order 
to  acquire  the  protection  of  society.  Whoever  has  analyzed  the 
constitution  of  society,  cannot  fail  to  recognize  in  this  its  real 
existence.  The  advantages  of  association,  as  thus  disclosed, 
suggested  the  idea  of  a  return  to  the  form  of  government  which 
had  been  overthrown.  This  was  monarchy.  The  kings 
were  too  weak  to  sustain  themselves ;  they,  therefore,  united 
with  the  free  cities,  the  inveterate  enemies  of  these  feudal 
chiefs,  and  thus  consolidated  their  governments.  It  cannot  be 
denied  that  monarchy  has  frequently  retarded  the  dissolution, 
and  accelerated  the  formation  of  society.  It  was,  perhaps, 
the  only  form  of  government  capable  of  abiding  in  those 
stormy  and  perilous  times.  It  became,  therefore,  the  rallying 
point  of  nations.  And  with  all  its  crimes  and  infamy,  with 
the  exhibition,  even  in  its  palmiest  days  and  happiest  moods, 
of  a  power  radically  antagonistic  to  the  rights  of  man,  we 
must  give  it  the  credit  of  doing,  perhaps,  better  than  any  other 
system  could  have  done,  under  the  circumstances. 

But  the  point  to  which  we  especially  desire  to  call  atten^ 
tion,  is  the  fact,  that  amidst  the  long,  dark  night  of  feudal  swayy 
the  human  mind  did  not  lose  its  capability  of  progress.  It  led 
forth  society,  in  swaddling  bands  it  is  true,  but  still  society, 
from  the  barbarism  which  had  trod  it  in  the  dust,  and  aimed 
to  terminate  its  existence.  The  trammels  fell  from  mind, 
and  liberated  mind  burst  the  fetters  from  science.  The  tend- 
encies of  feudalism  were  all  anti-social ;  but  society  was 
formed  notwithstanding,  and  individual  character  had  a  cor- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


23 


responding  advancement.  We  have  the  proof  of  this  in  chi- 
valry, in  the  thirst  for  whatever  was  noble  and  generous,  in 
the  stand  which  woman  was  permitted  to  take,  and  in  the 
literary  productions  which  issued  from  the  castles  of  the  ba- 
rons. Thus  man  has  improved  in  the  midst  of  far  more  unfa- 
vorable periods  than  the  present. 

The  Providence  of  God  seems  to  open  a  vista  through  the 
gloom  that  gathers  round  the  darkest  period,  to  cheer  man 
and  encourage  hope.    The  recent  convulsions,  which  have 
apparently  terminated  so  inauspiciously,  involving,  in  Hun- 
gary in  particular,  deeper  degradation  and  more  hopeless 
bondage,  will  finally  issue,  if  our  previous  reasonings  are 
well  founded,  in  the  freedom  of  the  struggling  nations.  Who 
does  not  know  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  you  may  not 
compress  the  atmosphere  without  extreme  hazard  ;  the  pos- 
sibility of  continuing  the  pressure  diminishing  with  every 
weight  that  is  added,  and  the  danger  accumulating  in  a  fear- 
ful ratio.    So  with  man.    You  may  tighten  his  bands,  but 
you  thereby  render  them  more  galling,  chafe  his  spirit, 
make  him  desperate,  and  prepare  him  at  any  hazard  to  rend 
them  asunder.    We  may  not  infer  progress  is  arrested  be- 
cause it  is  not  seen.    Tyranny  may  have  had  a  temporary 
triumph  only  to  insure  a  more  marked  and  certain  over- 
throw.    Its  triumphs   will  prove  to  be  an  illustration  of 
the  old  aphorism,  Quern  Deus  vult  perdere,  prius  elemental. 
Charles  the  V.,  emperor  of  Germany,  had  at  one  time  nearly 
overthrown  the  protestant  cause  ;  the  protestant  princes  were 
captured,  and  the  work  was  near  being  finished,  when 
Maurice  of  Saxony  arrested  his  progress,  turned  back  his 
victorious  armies,  and  even  the  emperor  himself  with  diffi- 
culty escaped  being  captured.    Reforms  of  the  most  valua- 
ble kind,  those  which  deeply  affect  the  morals  of  a  nation, 
and  lay  a  broad  and  permanent  basis  for  subsequent  im- 
provements, may  be  progressing  rapidly,  though  silently  and 
unobtrusively  as  the  light  of  dawn  steals  upon  our  world. 
Vice  is  thus  quietly  depressed  ;  the  love  of  freedom  and  so- 
cial progress  becomes  more  enlightened,  more  active,  more 
6 


24 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


enduring  ;  and  all  virtues  acquire  a  more  vigorous  existence 
even  by  the  very  storms  of  the  atmosphere  where  they  thrive. 
When  the  time  comes  to  put  them  forth,  the  proprietors  of 
these  virtues  will  find  themselves  in  possession  of  a  moral 
power,  almost  as  surprising  to  themselves  as  to  despotism 
itself.  We  can  only  estimate  the  value  which  enlightened 
men  place  upon  their  social  rights  and  religious  liberties,  by 
their  efforts  and  sacrifices  to  maintain  them.  Here  you  may 
carry  man  forward  to  any  hazard  of  "  life,  property,  and 
sacred  honor."  Deprive  him  of  those  rights  after  they  have 
been  once  enjoyed,  and  he  is  reduced  to  a  despair  which  fits 
him  for  any  encounter.  The  love  of  freedom,  and  the  de- 
spair which  results  from  privation,  lurk  at  this  moment  in  the 
hearts  of  thousands  of  individuals  in  Europe,  and  are  work- 
ing with  no  less  activity  and  power,  because  both  the  agents 
and  effects  are  invisible.  Governments  struggle  in  vain  to 
suppress  this  love  of  freedom,  and  to  substitute  servility  and 
blind  submission.  The  history  of  the  world  furnishes  indubi- 
table evidence,  that  man  might  as  well  hope  to  put  out  the 
sweltering  fires  of  a  volcano,  by  pouring  water  into  its  crater, 
as  to  extinguish  this  spirit.  It  is  a  flame  lighted  with  a  coal 
from  heaven's  own  altar,  and  burns  inextinguishable  within 
the  human  breast.  It  is  a  spirit  not  only  harmonious  with 
human  interests,  but  in  direct  league  with  heaven,  and  will 
be  supported  by  all  the  perfection  of  infinite  attributes. 

The  period  of  the  Reformation  will  furnish  facts  of  the  utmost 
importance  in  forming  a  correct  judgment  in  relation  to  future 
progress.  To  estimate  these  facts  correctly  we  should  con- 
sider what  was  peculiar  to  the  times  and  in  the  circumstances. 
The  day  star  dawned  long  before  this  moral  sun  arose 
with  so  much  splendor.  The  free  cities  first  gave  evidence 
that  social  life  was  not  extinct.  Though  they  had  been  in- 
corporated with  the  feudal  system  and  sunk  down  in  its  de- 
gradation, they  were  the  first  to  arise  therefrom.  Their  en- 
franchisement dates  at  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century. 
Some  of  them  by  degrees  dared  to  exercise  municipal  rights, 
and  to  assume  the  sovereign  power ;   timidly,  at  first,  as 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


2b 


though  it  were  a  crime  to  think  of  freedom ;  but  with  more 
boldness  as  their  minds  became  familiarized  to  the  idea. 
From  so  small  beginnings  society  moved  on  to  a  bolder  as- 
sertion of  its  rights,  to  more  fearless  aggressions,  to  a  more 
daring  assault  upon  feudal  institutions,  until,  in  their  weak- 
ness and  decrepitude,  it  acquired  the  firmness  and  fearless- 
ness of  permanent  organization. 

Other  events  contributed  to  hasten  the  manumission  of 
mind.  The  followers  of  John  Huss  supported  themselves 
and  maintained  their  religious  liberty  against  the  whole 
power  of  the  House  of  Austria,  then  so  much  in  the  ascend- 
ant as  to  threaten  to  acquire  the  empire  of  the  world. 
The  hardy  Swiss  mountaineers,  with  all  of  Spartan  valor, 
had  defeated  the  Austrian  forces,  thrown  up  an  insurmount- 
able barrier  against  the  tide  of  oppression,  and  taught  man- 
kind another  lesson  of  great  practical  value.  Despite  every 
effort  of  Anti-Christ,  the  cords  of  superstition  were  gradually 
slackening.  The  enormous  wickedness  of  the  Roman  hier- 
archy itself  contributed  to  bring  about  this  denouement, 
to  open  men's  eyes,  and  to  make  them  view  the  absurdity 
and  blasphemy  of  its  claims.  It  had  endeavored  to  render 
science  entirely  inaccessible  to  the  people.  Knowledge,  to 
the  reigning  superstition,  was  more  terrible  than  an  army 
with  banners.  The  study  of  the  languages,  especially 
Greek  and  Hebrew,  was  prohibited,  as  pernicions  to  the 
faith  ;  and  the  perusal  of  the  scriptures  was  a  still  higher 
offence.  And  when  whole  swarms  of  drivelling  and  polluted 
ascetics  were  insufficient  to  extinguish  the  love  of  liberty, 
and  efface  the  image  of  God  from  the  soul  of  man, 
the  accursed  auto-de-fe  was  celebrated,  and  the  inquisition 
opened  its  engines  of  torture  upon  society. 

But  mind  had  received  too  strong  an  impulse  from  recent 
events  to  be  thus  fettered.  In  defiance  of  Pope,  and  Car- 
dinal, and  engines  of  torture,  men  began  to  study  the  lan- 
guages, and  to  translate  the  scriptures.  Various  branches 
of  science  were  taught,  not  stealthily,  but  openly,  while 
princes  lent  their  aid  to  progress,  by  countenancing  both  in- 


36 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS 


novation  and  innovators.  Worse  than  the  plagues  of  Egypt 
multiplied  around  the  gay  and  gallant  Medicis,  who  had 
just  assumed  the  tiara.  Discovery  succeeded  discovery. 
One  remarkable  event  followed  another.  Vasco  de  Gama 
found  out  a  passage  to  the  Indies  around  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope ;  Columbus  discovered  America.  Gunpowder,  the 
compass,  and  painting  in  oil  were  discovered  ;  which  last 
contributed  to  the  cultivation  of  taste,  and  excited  a  love  of 
the  fine  arts,  by  filling  Europe  with  its  master  pieces.  At 
the  same  period,  there  was  another  discovery  which  opened 
on  the  church  a  worse  than  Pandora's  box  of  evils.  This  was 
the  art  of  printing,  destined  to  wield  more  influence  over 
mind,  and  to  contribute  more  largely  to  progress  than 
all  the  other  events  of  that  prolific  era.  Great  political 
events  transpired  also  within  the  period  embraced  in  the 
Reformation.  Such  were  the  secularization  of  the  Knights 
of  the  Teutonic  order  by  which  Prussia  was  created ;  Swe- 
den raised  into  national  existence  by  Gustavus  Vasa ;  a 
powerful  republic  arose  in  Holland ;  the  struggles  of  Eliza- 
beth, Queen  of  England,  the  political  representative  of  Pro- 
testanism,  against  Philip  II  of  Spain ;  and  constitutional 
monarchy  was  established  on  a  firm  basis  in  England.  We 
cannot  spend  time  even  to  enumerate  the  great  events  of 
this  period.  If  we  turn  to  the  philosophical  world,  Lord 
Bacon  brings  about  a  revolution  there,  as  thorough,  as 
marked,  as  comprehensive  as  had  been  effected  in  relation 
to  the  political  and  moral  condition  of  man.  The  natural 
world,  as  if  to  prepare  an  appropriate  theater  for  expanding 
mind,  enlarged  her  borders,  while  the  nations  poured  forth 
colonies  to  occupy  the  new  territories.  Colonial  establish- 
ments, intellectual  improvements,  the  appearance  of  great 
men,  and  the  increase  of  freedom  were  little  superior  as 
evidences  of  advancement,  to  the  widening  sphere  and  new 
activity  of  commerce.  Let  the  lover  of  his  race  contem- 
plate the  number  and  magnitude  of  the  events  recorded  by 
every  historian  of  the  period,  which  transpired  in  so  short  a 
time,  and  then  consider  the  agents  were  men  just  issuing  from 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS 


i 

27 


the  degradation,  ignorance,  and  immobility  of  the  dark  ages, 
and  he  will  need  no  clearer  proofs  of  the  immense  capacities 
of  mind,  of  the  immeasurable  resources  of  intellectual  ex- 
istence. Every  political  excitement,  every  social  develop- 
ment, every  discovery  of  science,  every  moral  achievement, 
was  stamped  with  singular  magnitude.  Every  movement 
bore  the  same  expansive  features.  Mind,  down-trodden 
and  enslaved  for  centuries,  arose  in  its  might,  and  shook 
terribly  the  earth.  The  old  foundations  gave  way ;  the 
bulwarks  of  despotism  were  overthrown ;  suppliant  ty- 
rants and  suppliant  priests  plead  in  vain  for  an  arrest — that 
the  torrent  might  be  stayed.  It  rolled  onward  regardless  of 
their  prayers,  bearing  away  the  accumulated  rubbish  of 
ages. 

But  the  most  distinguished  event  of  this  remarkable  era 
was  the  Reformation  itself.  It  stands  forth  conspicuous 
among  them ;  and  so  far  as  social  progress  was  concerned,  the 
choice  of  means  and  the  direction  of  energy,  it  was  the  pa- 
rent of  them  all.  Other  events  were  fashioned  and  ener- 
gized by  finite  minds ;  in  this  an  infinite  intelligence  stands 
revealed.  Human  instruments  appear ;  secondary  causes 
are  seen  at  work ;  intellectual  effort  is  put  forth ;  men  unite 
in  new  organizations  :  but  the  very  agents  that  appear,  pro- 
claim the  presence,  wisdom,  and  power  of  an  infinite  agent, 
accomplishing  stupendous  designs,  and  reaching  final  results, 
far  beyond  the  measure  of  finite  intelligence.  Under  God, 
we  may  regard  the  reformation  as  a  vast  effort  of  mind  to 
achieve  its  freedom.  It  was  mind  in  progress  ;  mind,  break- 
ing away  from  unreasonable  restraints,  and  demanding  the 
rights  of  private  judgment ;  it  was  a  spurning,  an  utter  re- 
jection of  human  authority,  over  mind ;  it  was  rebellion  in  its 
most  stern  and  determined  aspects,  against  intellectual  and 
moral  despotism  :  it  was  God  in  league  with  man,  human 
weakness  rendered  efficient  by  divine  power. 

But  great  as  was  the  progress  of  man  at  the  time  the 
reformation  received  its  birth,  we  must  not  make  our  calcu- 
lations of  future  progress  by  this  standard.    That  was  a  pe- 


^8 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


riod  barely  succeeding  one  of  universal  stagnation.    If  light 
had  appeared  it  was  only  to  reveal  in  the  body  social  and 
political  malformation,  decrepitude,  and  imbecility.    If  a  prin- 
ciple of  order  had  been  introduced  into  the  chaos,  it  had  not 
yet  assimilated  the  conflicting  elements  which  were  ferment- 
ing all  around  it.    There  was  little  unity,  little  centraliza- 
tion, no  equilibrium,  no  common  platform  on  which  men 
could  stand  to  rear  up  the  social  fabric.    The  very  founda- 
tions of  society  had  to  be  laid,  and  laid  too,  not  in  peace,  but 
in  tears  and  blood.    Then,  the  nations  had  been  down  trod- 
den for  ages,  and  degraded  by  the  most  abject  vassallage  ; 
now,  for  more  than  three  centuries,  they  have  stood  erect, 
with  an  elevating  consciousness  of  individual  rights  and  of 
human  destiny.    Then,  knowledge  was  shut  up  in  cloisters 
as  the  miser  hoards  his  gold,  and  the  penalty  of  appropriat- 
ing it  was  even  greater  than  that  of  theft ;  now,  it  is  regard- 
ed as  an  immaterial  commodity,  upon  which  every  child  of 
man  may  seize  without  pains  or  penalties,  with  all  its  intrin- 
sic value,  free  as  the  light  of  heaven,  or  as  the  water  of  the 
mountain  stream.    The  influence  of  religious  principle  was 
then  almost  unfelt;  now,  it  furnishes  a  thousand  springs  to 
benevolent  action,  and  moves  society  forward  with  heaven- 
born  force  in  the  way  of  improvement.    No  clear  example 
of  a  people  governing  themselves  had  then  been  given  ;  now, 
we  have  an  illustrious  example  :  a  nation  choosing  its  own 
rulers,  making  its  own  laws,  compelling  universal  respect  by 
its  laws,  its  governmental  energy,  its  commerce,  its  litera- 
ture, orators,  statesman,  scholars,  and  its  benevolent  institu- 
tions— and  that  country,  not  a  German  principality,  contain- 
ing as  much  territory  as  one  of  our  counties,  but  half  a  con- 
tinent, an  empire  itself.    Then,  the  authoritative  mandate  of 
a  spiritual  despot  was  believe;  but  investigate  and  yield  only  to 
conviction  is  the  watchword  of  liberated  mind,  as  it  is  also 
the  recognized  behest  of  Jehovah.    The  bloody  Inquisition 
then  stifled  knowledge  in  its  birth,  and  hurried  its  votaries 
into  eternity ;  now,  the  chains  are  broken  from  mind,  the  op- 
pressive weight  is  lifted  from  conscience  ;  man  dares  to  in- 


• 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


29 


vestigate  any  subject  within  the  proper  range  of  human 
thought,  and  exultingly  goes  forth  in  the  wide  field  of  mental 
freedom,  to  develop  the  powers  with  which  heaven  has  dis- 
tinguished him,  and  to  enjoy,  in  facts  discovered,  in  secrets 
ravished  from  nature,  a  realization  of  his  creator's  beneficence 
in  making  him  to  "Know  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  to  be  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  the  air."  The  progress  of 
the  reformation  was  great ;  but  this  was  only  the  preface  to 
the  volume.  It  shows  what  man  was  when  emerging  from 
slavery  ;  the  extent  of  progress,  cf  which  he  is  susceptible 
is  to  be  determined  by  future  experiments.  The  period  is 
at  hand  when  those  experiments  will  be  made  upon  the 
grandest  scale  ;  the  means  are  available  to  realize  a  suc- 
cessful issue  :  and  we  dwell,  I  doubt  not,  among  the  people 
chosen  to  attain  the  highest  point  of  social  perfectability, 
that  can  be  reached  in  this  world.  After  three  centuries 
man  is  fairly  launched  on  the  ocean  of  progress.  The 
boundless  future  and  illimitable  fields  *are  before  him.  The 
seasons  will  still  change ;  one  generation  after  another  will 
pass  away  ;  but  human  susceptibilities  for  progress  will  con- 
tinually be  developing.  And  America,  with  her  free  govern- 
ment, her  extended  coasts,  her  vast  commercial  connections, 
her  indomitable  Anglo-Saxon  spirit,  is  to  be  the  fountain 
head  of  moral  and  intellectual  power — elected  to  this  desti- 
ny— to  be  the  great  leader  and  abetter  of  social  progress 
throughout  the  world. 

Progress  will  be  attained  by  the  diminution  of  labor.  It  begins 
in  the  use  of  labor-saving  machines.  Every  step  man  ad- 
vances from  the  savage  state  is  marked  by  the  invention  or 
improvement  of  machines  to  lighten  labor.  The  means  for 
the  accomplishment  of  this  end  are  at  present  so  rapidly 
multiplying,  that  man  seems  to  be  approaching  the  condi- 
tion of  his  early  existence,  ere  the  curse,  "  thou  shalt  eat 
thy  bread  in  the  sweat  of  thy  brow,"  was  exacted  of  him. 
And  this  must  go  on  increasing.  Man  will  press  physical 
agents  into  his  service,  and  make  them  do  his  drudgery;  not 
depriving  himself  of  the  opportunity  of  labor,  but  greatly 


30 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


lightening  it,  and  multiplying  its  products  to  an  incredible 
extent.  He  calls  to  his  aid,  Caloric,  Gravitation,  Expansi- 
bility, Compressibility,  Electricity,  Chemical  Affinities  and 
Repulsions.  Though  these  are  agents,  if  rightly  applied,  of 
sufficient  power  to  burst  a  sphere  or  shiver  a  world,  yet  man 
chains  them  to  his  car,  unites  them  with  his  machinery,  and 
wields,  by  his  individual  superintendence,  vastly  more  power 
than  any  adjustment  of  muscular  strength,  could  enable  him 
to  apply  to  a  given  object.  Indeed,  the  time  has  come  when 
extravagant  conjecture,  in  relation  to  the  results  of  human 
skill  and  intelligence,  is  almost  out  of  the  question.  You 
can  assume  nothing,  this  side  of  the  infinite,  that  is  absurd 
or  impossible,  unless  it  is  a  demonstrable  contradiction.  It 
is  not  too  much  to  infer,  that  the  being  who  can  chain  the 
lightning,  measure  the  universe,  overcome  the  winds  and  the 
tides,  and  drive  his  cars  with  such  velocity  over  the  earth — 
can  make  all  material  nature,  the  high  and  the  low,  its  most 
obvious  and  most  subtle  agents — the  volcano,  the  storm,  and 
the  very  earthquake  itself  subservient  to  his  will.  From 
existence  and  accountability,  intelligence  and  power  are 
inseparable.  These  all  exist  in  man.  Compared  with  the 
power  of  that  Being,  who  has  given  "bounds  to  the  ocean, 
that  it  cannot  pass,"  human  power  is  as  nothing  and  vanity ; 
but,  withdrawing  our  eyes  from  the  infinite,  where  they  are 
dazzled  "  with  excess  of  light,"  we  may  properly  contem- 
plate the  vast  results  of  finite  power  directed  by  intelligence. 

It  has  been  objected  that  the  introduction  of  labor-saving 
machines,  will  deprive  man  of  the  opportunity  of  labor. 

Were  this  true,  we  admit  they  would  be  an  evil  rather 
than  a  good.  Were  we  discussing  a  question  of  political 
economy,  we  could  easily  show,  by  unanswerable  argument, 
that  the  objection  is  without  foundation.  But  it  will  be  suf- 
ficient for  our  present  purpose  to  remark,  that  experience  has 
proved  it  wholly  untrue — the  greatest  changes  effected  by 
the  introduction  of  natural  agents  being  favorable  to  the 
laborer,  viz.:  lighter  work  and  higher  wages. 

The  physical  improvement  resulting  from  the  use  of  ma- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS.  31 


chinery,  lays  at  the  foundation  of  another  and  a  higher  one : 
time  for  intellectual  improvement.  Nearly  the  whole  of 
man's  time  is  spent  in  depressing  and  consuming  labors,  to 
obtain  those  objects  of  desire  essential  to  personal  and 
family  comfort.  There  is,  therefore,  no  time  left  for  mental 
cultivation.  Machinery,  with  man's  superintendence,  will 
perform  the  same  labor,  much  better,  in  a  much  shorter  time, 
and  with  much  less  exhaustion  to  those  who  are  employed 
about  it.  Leisure  is  thus  obtained  for  intellectual  pursuits. 
The  acquisition  of  mental  power  is  the  first  result.  This 
will  lead  to  an  improvement  of  the  machinery  by  which 
labor  was  at  first  diminished,  or  to  the  invention  of  new 
machinery ;  and  in  either  case  more  leisure  for  intellectual 
pursuits  is  the  result.  Leisure  and  intelligence  must  thus  re- 
ciprocally operate  on  each  other,  rapidly  and  directly  elevat- 
ing the  race  in  their  social  condition.  Industry  within  pro- 
per bounds  and  intelligence  generally  keep  company.  It  is 
to  this  association  that  we  owe  our  elevation  above  the  sa- 
vage. Uncivilized  man  has  a  narrow  circle  of  wants,  be- 
cause his  knowledge  is  limited.  Increase  his  knowledge  and 
his  wants  will  increase;  and  with  the  multiplication  of  wants 
comes  a  greater  ability  to  supply  them.  The  happiness  of 
the  barbarous  state,  based  upon  this  freedom  from  want,  is 
frequently  obtruded  before  us.  But  the  savage  wants  little 
because  he  knows  little.  Would  any  American  be  willing 
to  exchange  places  with  the  slave,  though  in  so  doing  he 
would  be  freed  from  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  citizenship? 
Would  any  man  be  willing  to  spend  his  days  in  a  dark  ra- 
vine, his  view  bounded  on  every  side  by  high  mountains, 
simply  because  he  would  thus  be  freed  from  the  wants  which 
a  more  extensive  prospect  would  involve?  True  to  his  na- 
ture, the  mountain  barriers  would  stimulate  him  to  effort, 
especially  if  their  precipitous  sides  seemed  to  frown  in  defiance. 
Climbing  to  the  very  highest  point  of  some  Alpine  summit, 
and  feeling  his  pulse  quickened  and  his  nerves  braced  by  the 
invigorating  mountain  *  atmosphere,  he  would  look  off  upon 
the  bright  prospect  of  forest,  and  field,  and  inland  lake,  and 
7 


:32 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


river  pouring  its  waters  on  to  the  ocean,  and  the  ocean  roll- 
ing its  waves  till  in  the  distance  sea  and  sky  seem  blended, 
not  fearing  the  expansion  of  his  desires  nor  the  increase  of 
his  wants.  The  identity  of  happiness  with  savage  life,  will 
find  a  good  illustration  in  the  argument  of  Fluellen,  to  prove 
the  resemblance  between  Macedonia  and  Monmouth.  The 
identity  is  about  as  clearly  made  out  in  the  one  case  as  in  the 
other.  "  There  is  a  river  in  Macedon,  and  there  is  also, 
moreover,  a  river  at  Monmouth.  It  is  called  Wye  at  Mon- 
mouth, but  it  is  out  of  my  brains  what  is  the  name  of  the 
other  river;  but  'tis  all  one,  'tis  so  like  as  my  finger  to  my 
finger,  and  there  are  salmon  in  both."  Let  the  minds  of 
men  be  cultivated,  let  the  knowledge  of  their  wants  be  in- 
creased; pressing  wants  will  arouse  even  the  sloth,  and 
make  him  perform  the  painful  operation  of  moving :  and 
they  will  stimulate  men  to  industry.  Knowledge  of  our 
wants  involves  both  intelligence  and  industry;  and  intelli- 
gence and  indolence,  ignorance  and  industry,  are  alike  anti- 
podean. 

The  great  inventions  of  modern  times  are  steam  naviga- 
tion, railroads,  and  the  telegraph.  These  must,  in  the  very 
nature  of  things,  have  a  vast  influence  on  man  for  weal  or 
wo.  They  increase  the  means  for  national  and  international 
communication  many  fold,  furnish  immense  facilities  for 
commerce,  and  bring  the  farthest  parts  of  the  world  in  hail- 
ing distance  of  each  other.  We  contemplate  with  amaze- 
ment these  huge  agents,  these  mighty  instruments  of  human 
invention,  as  they  thunder  across  our  continent,  or  plough 
the  ocean,  or  transmit  intelligence  from  point  to  point  with 
the  speed  of  the  lightning.  While  the  philosopher,  survey- 
ing the  triumphs  of  science  and  the  field  of  victory,  exultingly 
cries  out,  What  next?  What  splendid  creation  of  the  human 
intellect  will  next  appear?  the  philanthropist,  in  doubtful 
mood,  anxiously  inquires,  What  will  be  the  result?  The 
masses  are  moving  in  every  direction  and  commingling  on 
every  side.  Old  ocean  is  no  longer  a  barrier.  Distance  is 
a  word  nearly  obsolete.     Man  has  become  a  scatterling 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


without  being  a  vagabond.  How  will  all  this  issue?  We  think 
principles  have  already  been  laid  down  which  will  guide  us 
to  a  satisfactory  conclusion. 

The  first  result  we  notice  is  the  immense  commercial  facilities 
which  are  thus  presented  to  society.  Commerce  must  be  greatly 
increased  and  extended  as  the  result  of  these  inventions. 
This  is  indisputable.  Now,  is  commerce  friendly  to  human 
progress?  In  answer  to  this  question,  we  would  invite  at- 
tention to  a  few  facts. 

Commerce  pervades  every  part  of  society,  and  its  exist- 
ence is  coeval  therewith.  No  man  in  the  civilized  state 
lives  wholly  on  the  products  of  his  own  labor.  He  exchanges 
their  excess  for  the  products  of  the  labors  of  others  ;  and  thus 
commercial  connections,  necessarily  growing  out  of  the  di- 
visions of  labor  are  established,  which  run  through  all  the 
departments  of  life,  and  pervade  and  regulate  the  business 
of  the  world. 

Commerce  leads  to  the  physical  well-being  of  man.  It  is  a  fact 
noticed  by  almost  every  historian,  that  early  civilization  com- 
menced on  the  shores  of  seas  and  large  navigable  rivers. 
In  this  respect  the  Mediterranean  was  peculiarly  favored. 
It  was  the  birth  place  of  civilization,  and  for  a  long  period 
the  center  of  the  world  known  to  history.  When  society 
was  formed  elsewhere,  it  was  on  the  Nile,  the  Ganges,  and 
the  large  navigable  rivers  of  China.  Thus  civilization  and 
commerce  are  so  intimately  associated,  that  they  have  uni- 
formly taken  their  existence  at  the  same  time.  But  national 
decline,  the  retrograde  movement  of  society,  dates  also  from 
the  period  in  which  commercial  connections  from  any  cause 
were  broken  up.  It  was  the  destruction  of  the  commerce  of 
the  towns  in  the  Western  Roman  Empire,  which  caused  it 
to  sink  down  into  the  torpor,  ignorance,  and  degradation  of 
the  dark  ages.  When  the  light  of  civilization  again  shone 
upon  them,  the  same  union  still  existed.  The  towns  paid 
enormous  taxes,  yet  they  were  permitted  to  hold  property. 
Their  mechanics  and  tradesmen  travelled  from  place  to 
place  to  sell  their  goods,  and  this,  for  a  time,  constituted 


34 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


their  entire  commerce.  Their  social  condition  was  very 
little  superior  to  that  of  our  African  slaves.  But  their  com- 
merce, simple  and  unpretending  as  it  was,  silently  ele- 
vated them,  giving  them  distant  glimpses  of  social  rights 
until  finally  they  asserted  their  independence. 

Wealth,  which  is  another  mark  of  physical  well  being,  is  as 
closely  connected  with  commerce  as  civilization.  The  system  of 
primogeniture  and  entail,  by  which,  in  feudal  times,  property 
descended  to  the  oldest  son,  and  was  continued  in  the  elder 
branch  of  the  family,  was  eminently  opposed  to  social  in- 
terests, as  it  was  opposed  to  general  wealth.  The  tendency 
of  lineal  succession  was  not  only  to  beggar  a  family,  but  a 
race.  It  lay  at  the  foundation  of  a  degrading  system  of  sla- 
very, that  extinguished  every  high  aspiration,  destroyed  all 
enterprise,  and  rendered  the  masses  abject  and  spiritless. 
As  slaves  they  could  acquire  no  right  in  the  soil ;  and  they, 
therefore,  had,  beyond  the  supply  of  present  wants,  no  stimu- 
lus to  labor.  Any  improvement  of  their  condition  was  im- 
possible. And  for  this  natural,  and  powerfully  operative 
motive,  it  substituted  one  that  was  weak  and  unsteady,  viz.  : 
the  fear  of  punishment.  Now  this  motive  can  have  but  little 
influence,  except  where  there  is  consciousness  of  guilt. 
When  this  is  the  case,  man  pronounces  his  own  condem- 
nation belorehand,  goes  out  to  anticipate  the  punishment, 
and  when  it  is  inflicted,  acknowledges  its  justice.  Take 
away  his  sense  of  guilt,  and  punishment  can  have,  as  a  mo- 
tive, very  little  influence.  At  least  it  can  never  produce  the 
industry  essential  to  wealth.  Ancient  serfdom,  like  modern 
slavery,  assumed  for  the  master  all  personal  and  moral  re- 
sponsibility on  the  part  of  the  slave,  and  left  him  destitute 
of  any  stimulus  to  effort.  Nature  has  taught  every  man  that 
he  is  sole  proprietor  of  his  physical,  mental,  and  moral  na- 
tures, considered  as  means  of  happiness.  This  principle  is 
written  indelibly  on  the  soul  of  every  man.  No  system  of 
Blavery,  no  crushing  tyranny  can  efface  it.  It  is  the  hand 
writing  of  God.  When  punishment  is  inflicted,  the  slave 
feels  it  is  because  he  will  not  submit  to  an  usurped  power  in 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


35 


direct  violation  of  rights  that  are  incorporated  with  his  very 
being.  Punishment  may  make  him  a  liar,  dishonest,  or  con- 
vert him  into  an  enemy  of  his  kind — a  human  fiend — but  it 
can  never  make  him  frugal  or  industrious.  "Work  as  little ^ 
and  eat  as  much  as  possible,"  will  be  their  rule.  Deprive 
man  of  the  natural  stimulus  to  production,  and  he  becomes  a 
drivelling,  powerless  creature,  or  a  vicious  and  dangerous 
one.  It  is  only  when  man  begins  to  accumulate,  to  realize 
the  reward  of  effort,  and  above  all,  to  possess  a  clear,  well 
defined,  and  well  guarded  right  of  property,  that  he  begins  to 
advance.  Social  progress  dates  from  this  period.  Then 
man  begins  to  live  for  an  object  congenial  with  his  nature, 
and  worthy  of  his  destination  ;  peace  and  plenty,  home  and 
quiet,  are  the  rewards  of  his  industry. 

Science,  in  modern  times,  has  thrown  away  her  lordly  airs, 
her  tinsel  and  finery,  and  clothing  herself  in  homespun,  has 
become  the  companion  of  every  rustic.  Thus  we  have  the 
science  that  regulates  commercial  exchange — the  science  of 
political  economy.  Science  has  assumed  a  new,  but  most 
appropriate  sphere,  in  teaching  us  how  to  direct  our  industry 
to  the  most  profitable  ends — that  is,  how  to  become  wealthy — 
and  in  so  doing  ministers  largely  to  progress.  Wealth  is  the 
offspring  of  industry.  Increase  the  industry  of  a  people,  and 
you  increase  their  wealth ;  turn  them  away  from  seeking 
wealth  as  an  object,  and  you  involve  them  in  indolence,  and 
all  the  mischievous  consequences  inseparable  therefrom. 

Let  us  turn  to  history  and  learn  lessons  from  the  experi- 
ence and  wisdom  of  the  past.  We  shall  at  once  perceive 
that  wealth  and  refinement,  financial  prosperity  and  social 
improvement  are  inseparable.  Examine  the  history  of  the 
present  times,  and  our  own  country.  With  what  surprising 
rapidity  are  the  products  of  human  industry  being  accumu- 
lated. The  improvements  in  nautical  science  have  rendered  the 
ocean  more  entirely  subservient  to  the  will  of  man.  Science 
has  enabled  man  to  harness  on  the  steam  engine  to  help  out 
the  wind  ;  and  between  steam  and  wind  unparalleled  activity 
and  enterprise  are  introduced  into  the  commercial  world. 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


Steam  is  also  employed  as  an  auxiliary  to  water  in  pro- 
pelling our  machinery  ;  and  thus  the  products  of  human  in- 
dustry, and  consequently  wealth,  are  multiplied  many  fold: 
and  refinement  and  social  elevation  have  a  corresponding 
progress.  We  do  not  deny  that  wealth  may  purchase  luxu- 
ries, and  luxuries  will  enervate  ;  that  is  the  abuse  of  wealth 
involves  a  state  opposed  to  high  intellectual  and  moral  cul- 
ture. But  those  who  make  this  objection  entirely  lose  sight 
of  the  fact  that  poverty  involves  incessant  and  painful  strug- 
gles to  supply  the  wants  of  the  body,  and  leads  to  acts  of 
fraud,  dishonesty,  and  theft.  If  wealth  stands  opposed  to 
the  prosperity  of  a  nation,  it  must  be  to  their  physical,  intel- 
lectual, or  moral  prosperity.  It  cannot  now  be  assumed  to 
stand  opposed  to  physical  prosperity,  for  that  is  the  point 
under  consideration,  and  all  men  agree,  that  a  wealthy  people 
are  so  far  in  a  state  of  physical  well  being.  It  is  the  abuse 
of  wealth,  and  not  wealth  itself,  that  conflicts  with  morals. 
The  very  principles  that  a  pure,  exalted,  Bible  morality  in- 
culcates as  essential  to  virtuous  character,  such  as  self-de- 
nial, industry,  and  frugality,  necessarily  lead  on  to  wealth. 
It  cannot  conflict  with  intellectual  prosperity.  In  times  of 
peace,  when  men  increase  in  wealth,  and  every  department 
of  society  enjoys  the  blessing  of  competency,  the  arts  flour- 
ish, discoveries  are  made,  researches  are  prosecuted,  facts 
accumulate  and  science  advances.  Were  a  traveler  to  be 
desirous  of  describing  the  prosperity  of  a  country,  would  he 
not  do  it  by  referring  to  the  sources  of  its  prosperity — its 
agriculture,  manufactures,  and  commerce  ?  He  would  speak 
of  the  fertility  of  its  soil,  its  high  state  of  cultivation,  the 
number  and  extent  of  its  manufactories,  the  busy  hum 
of  its  workshops,  its  navigable  rivers,  its  capacious  harbors, 
the  extent  of  its  shipping,  and  its  thoroughfares  ;  and  he 
would  be  thought  insane,  who  would  attempt  to  describe  the 
deranged,  prostrated,  or  ruined  condition  of  a  country  with 
these  terms. 

It  would  be  an  easy  task  to  draw  from  history  many  in- 
contestable facts  bearing  on  the  same  point.    Why  did  not 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS.  37 


Sparta  enjoy  the  prosperity  of  Athens  ?  The  Athenians 
were  a  commercial  people,  and  consequently  wealthy,  while 
Lycurgus,  the  Spartan  lawgiver,  effectually  cut  off  the  Spar- 
tans, from  both,  by  making  iron  their  circulating  medium — 
their  money. 

The  oppressive  governments  of  Europe  prohibited  the 
Jews  from  holding  real  estate.  They,  therefore,  betook  them- 
selves to  commerce,  and  have  become  the  bankers  of  the 
world,  and  at  no  distant  period  seem  likely  by  one  means  and 
another,  to  wield  the  political  destinies  of  Europe. 

But  we  have  already  intimated,  that  while  commerce  di- 
rectly tends  to  the  wealth  of  a  nation,  wealth  contributes 
to  the  rapid  improvement  of  the  social  state.  "It  is  certain," 
says  McCulloch,  "that  comparative  barbarism  and  refine- 
ment of  nations  depend  more  on  the  comparative  amount  of 
their  wealth,  than  on  any  other  circumstance.  A  poor  people  are 
never  refined,  nor  a  rich  people  ever  barbarous.  It  is  impossi- 
ble to  name  a  single  nation  which  has  made  any  considerable 
progress  in  the  fine  arts,  without  having  been  at  the  same 
time  celebrated  for  its  wealth.  The  age  of  Pericles  and 
Phidias  was  the  flourishing  age  of  Grecian,  as  the  age  of  Pe- 
trarch and  Raphael  was  of  Italian  commerce.  The  influ- 
ence of  wealth  in  this  respect  is  almost  omnipotent.  It  raised 
Venice  from  the  bosom  of  the  deep,  and  made  the  desert 
and  sandy  islands  on  which  she  is  built,  and  the  unhealthy 
swamps  of  Holland,  the  abodes  of  science  and  art.  In  our 
own  country  (England)  its  effects  have  been  equally  striking. 
The  number  and  eminence  of  our  philosophers,  poets,  schol- 
ars, and  artists  have  ever  increased  as  the  public  wealth,  or 
the  means  of  rewarding  and  honoring  their  labors  have  in- 
creased."* 

Commerce  effects  the  social  condition  more  extensively 
than  has  yet  been  intimated.  All  progress  in  society  is  both 
preceded  and  accompanied  by  a  more  felicitous  organization  ;  by 
new  life  and  energy  infused  into  the  social  relations.    Under  this 


*McCulloch,s  Principles,  Part  I 


38 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS 


vivifying  influence,  they  put  on  new  forms  of  beauty,  order, 
authority,  and  acquire  new  power  to  influence  the  destiny  of 
man.  But  commerce,  a3  we  have  already  seen,  contributes 
directly  to  bring  about  this  result.  It  was  so  on  the  shores 
of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Nile.  It  was  so  with  the  muni- 
cipalities of  Germany,  with  Venice,  and  Holland.  It  has 
aroused  man  from  lethargy  ;  brought  him  into  closer  con- 
nection with  his  fellow  man  ;  lead  to  the  extensive  cultiva- 
tion of  the  soil,  and  to  a  better  condition  and  new  activity 
throughout  all  the  social  fabric.  The  physical  condition  of 
man  being  improved,  his  intellectual  and  moral  progress  fol- 
lows of  consequence.  There  is  so  close  a  connection  be- 
tween them,  that  the  existence  of  one  is  the  certain  pledge 
of  the  existence  of  the  other.  Of  the  truth  of  this  position 
the  wary  despot  is  fully  apprized.  To  prohibit  all  improve- 
ments is  to  prevent  or  greatly  retard  social  amelioration. 
They  therefore  labor  to  smother  progress  in  its  infancy,  to 
strangle  the  infant  Hercules  in  his  cradle.  Let  them  so  far 
improve  man's  physical  condition,  that  the  profits  of  his 
labor  will  not  be  absorbed  by  oppressive  taxation  ;  that  the 
jealous  supervision  and  censorship  of  works  of  science  shall 
cease  ;  that  it  shall  no  longer  be  treason  to  utter  the  wrords 
liberty  and  rights,  and  the  result  will  not  be  more  visible  in 
his  physical,  than  in  his  moral  and  intellectual  condition. 
Mind  emerging  from  its  degrading  vassallage  will  luxuriate 
in  its  freedom ;  its  ample  powers  will  be  developed,  and  the 
number,  brilliancy,  energy  and  grandeur  of  its  creations 
shall  mark  the  extent  of  its  progress.  The  fountain  of 
human  sensibility  will  have  been  smitten,  and  streams  of 
sympathy,  benevolence,  and  love,  will  flow  out  to  gladden 
and  refresh  the  earth.  Break  up  social  bondage  and  you 
emancipate  mind.  Physical  progress,  then,  involves  the  cul- 
tivation of  literature  and  morality.  If,  then,  commerce,  as 
we  have  largely  shown,  leads  to  the  bettering  of  man's 
physical  condition ;  if  it  gives  vital  energy  and  activity  to 
social  relations,  and  leads  to  their  extensive  developement 
and  efficient  organization  :  then  the  facilities  for  commerce. 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS.  39 


which  are  multiplying  until  the  wildest  conjecture  is  exceeded 
by  the  sober  realities  of  actual  existence,  argues  favorably 
for  the  universal  diffusion  of  knowledge,  and  the  general 
cultivation  of  morality.  Indeed,  we  shall  find  upon  exami- 
nation, that  commerce  not  more  closely  identified  with  si 
wealth  than  with  improvements  in  science  and  general 
morality. 

The  two  great  events  in  the  political  history  of  the  world, 
the  discovery  of  a  passage  to  India  by  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  and  of  America,  are  intimately  connected  with  com- 
merce. It  was  the  desire  of  the  Portugese  for  the  extension 
of  their  commerce,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  America  in 
1492,  and  of  a  passage  around  the  Cape  to  Hindostan  in 
1497.  While  the  end  for  which  these  expeditions  were 
planned,  was  realized,  a  result  more  remote,  but  not  less 
sure  and  interesting,  remained  to  be  enjoyed.  We  doubt 
not,  these  events  will  do  more  toward  the  universal  spread 
of  virtue,  the  wide  diffusion  of  knowledge  and  the  general 
freedom  of  mankind,  than  all  other  discoveries  put  together. 
America  furnished  a  resting  place  to  our  ancestors,  driven 
out  from  the  Mother  Country  by  persecution.  Leaving 
England,  they  took  possession  of  the  New  World,  from  that 
moment  to  be  distinguished  for  virtue,  science,  freedom, 
progress.  It  is  yet  the  home  of  the  oppressed,  the  resting 
place  of  the  poor  and  unfortunate  of  every  nation,  who  visit 
its  shores.  It  has  become  a  kind  of  general  sensorium  from 
which  a  vital  influence  is  distributed  throughout  society. 
Plymouth  Rock  will  from  henceforth  be  regarded  as  the  birth- 
place of  liberty.  Here,  at  least,  for  the  first  time,  liberty 
stood  erect,  all  her  movements  natural  and  unconstrained, 
and  her  eye  lighting  up  with  indescribable  pleasure,  as  she 
surveyed  her  wide  domain  of  mountain  and  valley,  of  forest 
and  river,  and  inland  sea,  and  her  heart  exulting  over  pros- 
pective achievements  and  glorious  results. 

But  increased  commercial  facilities  are  not  the  only  effects 
which  will  follow  from  steam  navigation  and  railroads 
Man  will  thereby  be  brought  into  contact  with  man  the  world  over 

8 


40 


PRESIDED  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


front  which  mil  follow  results  of  immeasurable  influence  upon 
social  progress.  There  are  certain  periods  in  the  history  of 
the  world  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  onward  move- 
ments of  society.  An  unaccountable  influence  seems  all 
at  once  to  pervade  men's  minds  :  or,  rather,  unanticipated 
effects  follow  from  causes  that  were  hitherto  either  wholly 
inoperative  or  inefficient  Suddenly  the  resources  of  society, 
of  literature,  and  morals  are  surprisingly  augmented  ;  health- 
ful principles  are  propogated  ;  society  is  regenerated,  and 
performs  its  functions  with  new  vigor;  humanity  makes 
large  acquisitions ;  its  rights  are  clearly  defined  and  un- 
derstood ;  and  tyranny,  vice,  and  ignorance  are  essentially 
weakened  and  depressed.  We  cannot  avoid  {he  conviction 
that  these  sudden  impulses,  these  rapid  changes,  bearing 
man  forward  to  higher  social  attainments,  are  indications  of 
a  final  destination  for  our  race,  so  elevated,  so  peaceful,  so 
universally  harmonious  with  human  interests,  that  even  the 
conception  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  in  our  present  dis- 
ordered condition.  And  we  can  but  hail  the  means,  through 
which  men  will  be  brought  into  intimate  relations,  and  the 
developements  of  science,  of  morality,  of  the  social  condi- 
tion, shall  be  experimentally  tested  and  exemplified  in  the 
eyes  of  all  men,  as  efficient,  if  not  chief  auxiliaries  in  the 
accomplishment  of  this  great  work.  The  time  is  not  distant 
when  men  will  feel  that  he  who  "  made  of  one  blood  all  na- 
tions of  men,"  made  them  with  an  identical  interest.  In- 
tercourse will  hasten  the  period  when  dissocializing  princi- 
ples being  rooted  out,  and  the  strife  which  has  swept  over 
our  earth  being  extinguished,  the  pulsations  of  "  the  great 
heart  of  humanity"  will  send  kindred  streams  through  all 
the  ramifications  of  universal  society.  Were  this  merely  a 
hypothesis,  unsustained  by  evidence,  it  might  be  the  subject 
of  delightful  contemplation.  But  it  is  no  Utopia.  Inspira- 
tion has  placed  its  broad  seal  upon  this  grand  and  cheering 
truth,  and  we  may  contemplate  it  not  only  as  a  desirable 
object,  but  as  one  the  fruition  of  which  will  certainly  be  re- 
alized.   It  requires  no  extraordinary  discernment  to  discover 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


41 


that  these  stupendous  inventions  are  designed  to  accomplish 
an  end  far  more  valuable  than  a  mere  purpose  of  con- 
venience, or  their  contribution  to  the  means  and  refinements 
of  physical  enjoyment.  There  is  a  manifest  and  intimate  re- 
lation between  these  agents  and  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  and 
morality.  Says  Prof.  Morse,  "  We  are  on  the  eve  of  a  new- 
era  in  the  history  of  man.  Soon  the  surface  of  the  earth 
will  be  covered  with  a  net-work  of  wire,  connecting  all 
its  cities  and  towns,  and  along  these  wires,  as  along  the 
nerves  of  the  human  body,  the  commands  of  a  central  will 
may  be  instantaneously  and  simultaneously  communicated 
to  the  remotest  extremities.  Man  will  thus  put  on  the  earth 
for  his  body,  animate  it  with  his  soul,  and  become  the  Lord 
of  Creation."  When  this  net-work  of  wire  shall  have  been 
completed,  the  discoveries,  experiments,  and  progress,  in 
one  country,  will  be  instantaneously  communieated  to  all 
others.  The  intelligence  that  can  control  the  electric  agent, 
and  construct  automatic  machinery  that  will  record  events 
happening  in  one  place,  the  next  instant  in  another  many 
hundred  miles  distant,  will  derive  from  the  same  agent  other 
and  larger  advantages  affecting  the  interests  and  welfare  of 
man.  The  contact  of  mind  will  go  far  towards  forming 
men  in  faet  into  a  universal  brotherhood,  establishing  the 
principles  of  civil  liberty,  and  of  a  pure  and  elevated 
morality.  In  these,  for  the  present  world,  are  centered  all 
man's  interests.  Here  are  found  the  elements  of  his  life,  the 
bliss  of  his  being,  the  crowning  honors  of  his  existence. 
We  cease  to  contemplate  these  objects  with  any  high 
degree  of  pleasure  if  they  do  not  lead  to  such  results. 
Mere  force,  however  great,  or  however  ingeniously  applied, 
is,  with  us,  an  object  of  very  trifling  moment.  The  renova- 
tion of  one  moral  being,  or  the  least  progress  of  the  race  is 
infinitely  more  worthy  of  our  admiration  than  the  greatest 
force  in  existence.  The  important  inquiry  in  relation  to 
every  new  discovery  is,  Will  it  contribute  to  human  progress  ? 
This  is  the  central  idea.  Others  are  more  or  less  valuable 
as  they  stand  in  more  or  less  intimate  connections  with  this. 


42 


PRESIDENT  BERRY  8  ADDRESS. 


In  this  position  we  are  neither  singular  nor  enthusiastic  ;  for 
all  men  feel  and  judge  in  a  similar  manner.  Much  as  ig- 
norance has  degraded  mankind,  and  beclouded  their  judg- 
ments, in  this  respect,  they  clearly  discern  their  true  interests. 
They  discern  between  the  beneficiaries  and  the  destroyers 
of  mankind.  Mention  in  the  same  category,  the  names  of 
the  greatest  emperors  and  generals  that  have  figured  in 
our  world,  with  the  names  of  Bacon  and  Newton,  Wesley 
and  Howard.  The  most  ignorant  and  besotted,  at  all  ac- 
quainted with  the  characters  of  the  men,  would  be  offended 
with  the  juxtaposition.  The  incongruity  of  the  comparison 
between  the  destroyers  of  mankind,  and  those  who  have 
done  so  much  in  the  scientific  and  moral  world  for  its  eleva- 
tion and  happiness,  would  be  painfully  apparent.  Indeed,  it 
is  only  as  literature  itself  is  linked  with  human  progress  and 
destiny,  that  we  deem  it  valuable.  The  world !  The  in- 
terests of  mankind  !  Whatever  is  leagued  with  these,  is 
destined  to  an  earthly  Immortality.  He  who  writes  for  the 
times  cannot  hope  for  posthumous  fame.  A  partizan  press 
makes  no  permanent  offering  at  the  shrine  of  science.  The 
stream  that  flows  from  a  temporary  or  sectional  interest 
must  soon  run  dry.  He  that  would  reach  the  ocean  must 
launch  his  bark  on  the  noble,  majestic  river,  whose  force  and 
volume  of  waters  are  too  great  to  meet  with  a  successful 
barrier ;  not  upon  the  dashing,  fretting  torrent,  which  soon 
exhausts  itself  in  spray,  or,  reaching  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain, empties  itself  into  some  stagnant  pond  without  an 
outlet.  The  works  of  Lord  Bacon,  whose  expansive  mind 
took  hold  on  this  world-wide  interest,  and  the  Georgics  of 
Virgil,  written,  as  is  supposed,  to  promote  agriculture,  an 
interest  identified  in  more  than  one  way  with  human  hap- 
piness, will  be  read  and  retain  all  their  freshness  while  the 
world  stands. 

But  these  mighty  agents  are  manifestly  connected  with 
this  upward  and  onward  movement  of  society.  The  increas- 
ing intercourse  they  will  secure,  will  break  down  the  barri- 
ers between  the  nations  ;  human  affections  will  no  longer  be 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


43 


bounded  and  checked  by  natural  lines  ;  and  man,  instead  of 
being  an  American,  an  Englishman,  will  consider  himself  a 
citizen  of  the  world.  And  as  if  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
full  effect  of  these  agents,  civilized  Europe  is  now  pouring  it- 
self out  upon  the  uncultivated  parts  of  our  earth.  French, 
and  German,  and  English  colonies  will  soon  be  found  in  every 
part  of  the  world.  Who  can  tell  what  humanizing,  enlight- 
ening, elevating  effects  will  not  be  realized  as  the  result  of 
universal  intercourse.  It  will  lift  the  debased  and  degraded 
out  of  the  dust ;  it  will  exalt  merit,  destroy  tyranny,  termin- 
ate war.  What  has  caused  wars  but  the  contrivances  of 
rulers,  and  the  irrational  antipathies  of  nations.  Intercourse, 
by  creating  a  fellowship  of  nations,  a  confederacy  of  inter- 
ests, will  remove  these  antipathies,  and  call  into  action  such 
affections  as  will  render  it  impossible  any  more  to  embroil 
the  nations  in  war.  The  roads  thrown  open  by  these  agents 
will  be  the  highways  of  our  world's  progress.  Take  one  in- 
stance. What  is  likely  to  result  from  the  contemplated  road 
across  Panama  ?  California  gold  will  secure  its  construction, 
and  it  will  become  the  passage  way  of  the  world.  A  hardy, 
commercial  race  will  ever  be  passing  and  repassing  on  this 
short  but  grand  thoroughfare.  And  what  effects  will  such 
contact  produce  upon  the  nations  adjacent  ?  It  will  raise 
their  drivelling  intellects,  and  impel  their  supine  bodies  into 
activity.  Listlessness  will  give  way  to  industry,  anarchy  to 
order,  savagism  to  refinement,  heathenism  to  religion ;  and 
moral  health  and  beauty  will  spreatl  over  the  face  of  re- 
deemed society. 

And  generally  the  effect  of  these  agencies  in  bringing  the 
most  distant  parts  of  the  world  together,  will  be  to  elevate 
and  improve  the  social  condition.  The  means  of  travel  are 
likely  to  be  so  perfected,  that  man  may  make  the  tour  of  the 
world  in  about  the  same  time  it  formerly  required  to  make  a 
voyage  to  Europe.  Leaving  his  home  in  the  west,  he  may 
pause  a  moment  in  his  flight  at  Niagara  to  hear  the  roar  of 
its  waters,  and  to  see  the  beautiful  rainbow  which  arches 
this  prodigious  display  of  the  powers  of  nature.  With  scarcely 


14 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


time  intervening  in  which  to  take  a  long  breath,  he  is  in 
New  York  ;  another  week  in  Europe.  Taking  the  cars  he  may 
visit  the  towering  Alps,  or  hie  him  away  to  Greece,  to  roam 
over  "  its  temple  crowned  hills,"  or  view  its  specimens  of 
ancient  architecture,  particularly  the  remains  of  the  Parthe- 
non, the  magnificent  temple  of  Minerva  in  the  Acropolis  of 
Athens.  Having  surveyed  its  broken  pillars,  the  beautiful  frag- 
ments which  still  remain  as  mementoes  of  its  former  gran- 
deur, he  may,  if  he  desire,  see  the  rest  of  its  remains  by  a 
short  trip  to  England,  where  he  will  find  them  safely  depo- 
sited in  the  British  Museum,  whither  the  all  grasping  Anglo- 
Saxon  has  borne  them.  Let  him  take  his  journey  again,  and 
visit  the  desert  cities  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile  ;  and  contem- 
plate the  remains  of  sculptured  grottoes,  obelisks,  columns, 
sphinxes,  colossal  statues,  and  pyramids — the  monuments  of 
the  skill  and  industry  of  by-gone  ages.  Let  the  iron  horse 
then  bear  him  over  those  desolate  regions  where  the  showers 
of  heaven  never  fall,  the  dreary  African  desert,  denominated 
by  a  Latin  poet  Arida  nutrix  leonum.  Passing  thence  he 
may  trace,  through  regions  of  exhaustless  fertility,  the  Niger 
to  its  source,  and  visit  Liberia  from  henceforth  to  be  celebrat- 
ed as  the  beginning  point  of  African  civilization.  Entering 
Asia  by  the  isthmus  of  Suez,  he  may  visit  Hindostan,  and 
China,  and  Palestine  ;  and  everyday,  and  perhaps  every  hour 
of  this  immense  tour,  send  an  account  of  his  progress  by  the 
lightning  line  to  his  family  ;  and,  probably,  in  less  than  two 
months  from  the  time  he  left  home  again  enjoy  the  happiness 
of  his  own  domestic  circle.  Who,  with  modern  improve- 
ments in  view,  will  say  this  is  visionary  ?  Even  now  ar- 
rangements are  being  made  for  an  Anglo-Indian  railway. 
And  while  commerce  is  bearing  along  these  railroads,  ex- 
tending over  vast  continents,  the  abounding  products  of  ev- 
ery clime,  a  dense  mass  of  human  beings  will  move  along 
the  same  roads.  Intellect  will  be  brought  into  contact  with 
uncultivated  powers,  art  with  barbarous  rudeness,  enlighten- 
ment with  mere  civilization,  truth  with  error,  liberty  with 
despotism,  and  a  pure  morality,  clothed  with  the  sanction  of 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


45 


divinity,  with  deceptive  forms,  as  destitute  of  any  saving  ele- 
ment, of  any  vivifying  principle  as  the  statues  of  the  ancient 
gods.  When  the  world  of  mind  is  thus  suddenly  thrown 
open  before  percipient  and  sentient  beings,  who  can  tell  the 
effect?  Who  can  calculate  the  results  of  such  a  revela- 
tion on  man,  one  of  whose  strongest  propensities  is  curiosity, 
and  who,  in  his  lowest  state  of  degradation,  can  scarcely  be 
supposed  to  be  uninfluenced  thereby  ?  Mind,  naturally  in- 
quisitive, will  be  found  busied  with  the  countless  number  and 
variety  of  interesting  facts  which  science  will  unfold.  Curi- 
osity will  feed  on  the  wonders  of  science,  and  all  its  power 
and  influence  on  the  soul  be  rendered  active  by  that  on 
which  it  feeds.  One  truth  investigated,  curiosity  is  stimulat- 
ed, and  impels  to  farther  investigation.  The  field  once  en- 
tered, ten  thousand  interesting  objects  will  attract  awakened 
mind  onward,  until  the  whole  field  is  explored.  Let  the 
thirst  for  knowledge  once  be  excited,  and  with  the  opportu- 
nity for  gratification,  man  will  not  be  content,  until  he  has 
drank  at  every  fountain.  Who  that  has  stood  upon  the  banks 
of  a  stream  and  viewed  its  graceful,  serpentine  course 
through  the  valley,  has  not  felt  a  strong  desire  almost  irre- 
sistably  impelling  him  to  trace  it  to  its  mountain  source, 
wdiere  purer  than  the  nectar  of  the  gods,  it  gushes  forth  from 
the  rock,  to  start  on  the  errand  of  health  and  love  with  which 
its  Maker  has  charged  it ;  and  who,  having  gratified  this  de- 
sire, has  not  the  next  moment  felt  himself  impelled  by  the 
same  propensity  to  follow  it  downward  to  the  place  where  it 
pours  its  expanded  volume  of  waters  into  the  mighty  ocean. 
Man  desires  to  see  the  end  from  the  beginning.  Mind  once 
awakened  continues  to  act.  The  wheels  of  that  mighty  spi- 
ritual engine  must  from  that  moment  forever  be  in  motion.  It 
is  the  mental  constitution  which  God  has  given  us.  And  it  is 
a  fact  worthy  of  observation,  that  when  curiosity  is  first  ex- 
cited, the  propensity  is  more  active  and  will  lead  to  greater 
exertion  in  seeking  gratification  than  subsequently.  It  is 
on  this  principle  that  there  are  epochs  in  the  world's  history, 
when  an  age  of  progress  is  accomplished  in  a  very  brief  pe- 


46 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


riod.  Such  an  era  was  that  of  the  reformation.  How  did 
prostrate  mind  arise  under  the  influence  of  newly  discovered 
truth.  The  contrast  is  scarcely  greater  between  childhood 
and  manhood,  than  between  the  men  of  the  reformation  and 
the  same  men  immediately  preceding  it.  It  was  as  though 
the  infant  of  days  had  instantaneously"  acquired  the  physical 
and  intellectual  vigor  of  manhood.  Luther  from  the  cell  of 
his  convent  and  from  the  study  of  his  chained  Bible  sent  an 
awakening  thrill  through  the  world  of  mind.  He  struck  a 
chord  which  vibrated  in  every  soul.  Truth  suddenly  stood 
revealed  in  all  its  lovely  proportions,  and  in  its  contrasts  with 
error;  and  regenerated  man  came  forth  to  rejoice  in  its  light, 
to  be  elevated  by  its  influence,  to  seize  and  appropriate  it  as 
God's  best  gift  to  man. 

We  speak  of  the  moral  sublimity  of  Luther's  position. 
And  surely  we  would  not  utter  one  word  to  detract  from  it. 
Few  if  any  since  the  days  of  apostolic  heroism  have  stood  in 
one  that  more  fully  deserved  such  a  designation.  But  others 
have  performed  acts  that  in  all  the  attributes  of  moral  great- 
ness were  fully  equal  to  his.  The  essential  difference  is, 
those  of  Luther  were  connected  with  a  world- wide  move- 
ment, that  gave  them  at  the  same  time  success  and  immor- 
tality. And  our  admiration  of  the  individual  is  swallowed 
up  in  our  admiration  of  the  wonderful  movements  of  the 
masses,  the  progress  of  society,  the  prodigious  energy,  the 
vast  comprehension,  the  incessant  activity,  and  exhaustless 
resources  of  intellect.  The  moral  and  intellectual  improve- 
ment of  man  so  far  exceeded  all  previous  conceptions  of  hu- 
man capacities,  that  the  patrons  of  ignorance  were  utterly 
confounded,  and  could  do  little  more  than  stand  still  and 
curse  the  light,  which,  from  every  part  of  the  moral  heavens, 
was  pouring  in  upon  the  darkness  of  the  world.  But  to  the 
influence  of  truth  thus  strangely  discovered,  the  world  of 
mind  yielded  as  readily  as  does  the  ocean  to  the  impulses  of 
the  wind . 

It  is  not  in  itself,  grand  and  imposing  as  this  history  is, 
that  we  most  delight  to  view  it.    It  has  a  prospective  bear- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


47 


ing.  It  reveals  the  future  to  us.  It  shows  man  in  a  new 
and  most  interesting  attitude,  and  invests  us  almost  with 
prescience  in  regard  to  the  destiny  of  our  race.  The  forces 
that  Luther  brought  to  bear  upon  despotism  and  ignorance 
were  not  more  than  half  developed.  Their  strength  was 
cheeked  "in  mid  volley."  Only  a  single  agent  was  at  first 
employed.  Luther  against  the  world.  And  when  subse- 
quently they  were  multiplied,  Charles  V.  Emperor  of  Ger- 
many, a  bigoted  Catholic,  was  at  hand  to  crush  with  power 
wherever  it  was  practicable  incipient  reformation,  and  to 
deter,  with  all  the  patronage  of  the  empire,  persons  from 
yielding  to  its  sway.  Consider  also  that  science  could  then 
render  comparatively  but  little  aid.  It  was  refined  until  it 
was  wholly  unsuited  to  any  particular  purpose.  The  phi- 
losophy of  facts — inductive  science  was  then  almost  un- 
known. Instead  of  this,  they  had  a  pitiful  ontology,  com- 
posed of  flimsy  sophism,  and  ridiculous  subtilties  dressed  up 
in  the  garb  of  philosophy.  Such  a  science  was  about  as 
well  adapted  to  the  wants  of  men,  as  a  delicately  raised  city 
beau  to  the  ever  moving  energy  and  enterprise  of  the  west. 
No  Bible  Society  was  then  sending  forth  ship  loads  of  Bibles 
printed  in  every  language.  No  Educational  Societies  stood 
ready  to  pour  the  light  of  knowledge  upon  the  darkness  of 
ignorance.  No  Peace  Societies  were  laboring  to  extinguish 
the  flames  of  war.  No  Sabbath  Schools  creating  reverence  in 
the  minds  of  countless  numbers  of  children,  for  sacred  things 
— cultivating  the  love  of  freedom  and  the  spirit  of  philanthro- 
py. None  of  these  powerful  auxiliaries  in  the  cause  of  truth 
and  righteousness,  now  so  effective,  was  then  in  existence 
What  then  will  be  the  probable  result,  when,  through  the 
medium  of  intercourse,  the  nations  are  drawn  into  one  great 
household,  and  all  these  means,  blessed  and  favored  by 
heaven,  are  brought  to  bear  at  one  time  upon  the  social 
condition  ?  It  requires  no  prophet's  ken  to  answer  this  ques- 
tion. Society  will  be  impelled  into  a  course  of  improvement 
unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world ;  the  crown  will 
fall  from  the  head  of  the  despot ;  the  abject  nations  will  no 
9 


48 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


longer  kiss  the  foot  that  tramples  them  in  the  dust;  the 
shout  of  freedom  will  echo  over  the  whole  earth,  and  the 
serfs  of  Russia  shall  unite  with  the  Tartar  hordes  of  Asia,  and 
these  with  the  oppressed  Africans,  and  shall  swell  the  living 
torrents  that  are  pouring  on  to  the  goal  of  freedom.  God 
has  said,  let  man  be  free,  and  in  the  mighty  sweep  of  his 
providences,  the  means  are  ordained,  and  in  operation  for 
the  accomplishment  of  this  glorious  end. 

But  do  facts  bear  us  out  in  our  position,  that  when  truths 
are  presented,  the  heathen  mind  will  investigate  them  ?  If 
time  would  allow,  we  could  adduce  any  amount  of  testimo- 
ny in  favor  of  this  position  which  could  be  desired.  But  it 
is  unnecessary.  Without  waiting  to  collect  facts  from  his- 
tory, we  have  the  proof  within  man.  Indeed  so  universally 
and  so  undeniably  operative  is  curiosity,  so  powerfully  does 
it  sway  the  soul,  and  collect  all  its  energies  for  research  and 
investigation,  that  even  the  schoolmen,  while  they  have  dis 
puted  almost  every  point,  even  to  the  question  whether  the 
cardinal  virtues  were  not  animals,  have  never  doubted  the 
existence  or  power  of  this  propensity.  Now  when  the  arts 
and  sciences  are  fully  unfolded  before  minds  swayed  by  this 
active  principle,  will  they  remain  unmoved  and  indifferent 
spectators  ?  We  will  believe  this,  when  we  are  convinced, 
man  will  not  admire,  though  the  heavens  are  lighted  up  with 
the  Aurora  Borealis,  or  that,  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  Nia- 
gara, he  will  not  open  his  ears  to  hear  its  unbroken,  intermin- 
able thunder. 

If  we  examine  human  instincts  and  passions,  in  con- 
nection with  these  agencies,  we  are  led  to  the  same  conclu- 
sion asrwhen  we  reason  from  our  propensions.  Man  not 
only  feels,  but  he  desires.  Were  he  capacitated  only  to  feel, 
he  would  necessarily  be  a  miserable  being.  These  inward 
feelings,  these  powerful  emotions  now  so  beneficial,  would 
be  an  insupportable  calamity.  By  them  the  heart  would  be 
agonized,  and  torn  and  distracted  with  an  inconceivable  tu- 
mult of  excitement,  from  which  there  could  be  no  relief. 
But  our  Maker  has  furnished  in  the  desires,  channels  through 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


49 


which  these  excitements  may  flow.  A  desire  implies  an  ob- 
ject, and  we  may  infer  the  identity  of  human  instincts  and 
passions,  from  the  similarity  of  these  objects  of  desire. 
Drawing  our  conclusions  from  this  source,  we  cannot  avoid 
the  conviction  of  the  oneness  of  the  mental  economy — that 
the  great  principles  of  human  nature  are  the  same  the  world 
over,  and  therefore  what  moves  one  man,  when  compre- 
hended, will  move  another  and  all  men.  This,  too  corres- 
ponds with  our  own  experience.  That  which  stirred  the 
soul  in  the  days  of  Homer  and  Virgil  moves  it  now  with 
equal  power,  and  similar  results.  The  harp  of  Orpheus,  by 
which  the  wheel  of  Ixion  was  made  to  stand  still,  the  thirst 
of  Tantalus  was  checked,  and  even  the  Furies  compelled  tore- 
lent,  still  pours  its  melody  upon  our  souls,  and  wields  a  cor- 
responding influence  over  us.  Why  is  it  the  ancient  forms 
of  architecture  are  perpetuated?  Because  man  now  is  what 
he  has  ever  been,  and  these  forms  are  harmonious  with  our 
mental  economy.  They  are  as  much  admired  in  this  age 
as  in  the  age  that  gave  them  birth.  They  are  material  em- 
bodiments of  beautiful  forms  which  our  Maker  has  created 
within  the  soul  of  every  man ;  and  whoever,  has  any  power 
of  mental  analysis,  cannot  fail  to  perceive  the  truthful  and 
natural  development.  We  repeat  again,  man  is  essentially 
the  same  in  all  zones  and  in  all  ages.  Under  similar  cir- 
cumstances, we  may  look  for  corresponding  results.  We 
know  what  results  are  being  experienced  by  a  part  of  the 
race  under  the  operations  of  these  agents  ;  and  it  more  than 
equals  our  anticipations.  If  then,  notwithstanding  the  ver- 
satility of  man's  outward  circumstances,  there  is  a  world 
within  made  by  God,  with  fixed  laws,  and  in  reference  to  so- 
ciety and  an  earthly  existence,  unchangeable  relations,  we 
may  with  confidence  infer  the  universal  progress  of  mankind 
from  that  which  contributes  so  largely  to  the  improvement 
of  a  part. 

The  desire  for  happiness  constitutes  an  invariable  law  of 
mind  among  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth.  Our  maker  has 
given  us  faculties,  and  placed  our  happiness  in  their  exer- 


>u  PRESIDENT  BE&RY'S  ADDRESS. 


cisc.  Internal  faculties,  which  look  without  for  proper  ob- 
jects would  be  of  very  little  use  without  those  objects.  If, 
as  Dr.  Johnson  has  told  us,  "Happiness  is  the  multiplication 
of  agreeable  consciousness,"  and  if  consciousness  can  only 
be  cognizant  of  the  actings  of  the  mind,  supposing  these  ob- 
jects were  cut  off  upon  which  the  mind  acts,  or,  which  is  the 
game  in  eilect,  the  relations  between  our  powers  and  these 
objects  were  broken  up,  then  one  of  the  largest  sources  of 
human  enjoyment  would  be  destroyed.  But  it  is  not  so. 
These  relations  are  designed  to  be  permanent.  In  estab- 
lishing them,  and  giving  us  capacities  to  find  our  enjoyment 
in  them,  the  creator  has  indicated  his  will  that  men  should 
within  proper  bounds,  gratify  their  desires.  But  uncivilized 
men  are  cut  off  from  many  sources  of  gratification.  So  far 
as  actual  enjoyment  is  concerned  in  many  respects,  they 
might  as  well  be  without  faculties.  But  science,  practical 
science,  disseminated  among  them  will  develop  these  sources 
of  pleasure.  A  thousand  new  relations  will  spring  up  be- 
fore their  delighted  eyes.  The  means  for  the  "multiplication 
of  agreeable  consciousness"  will  be  revealed  all  around 
them.  Objects  of  desire  wholly  unknown  before,  will  ap- 
pear for  the  exercise  of  the  appropriate  sensitiveness .  In- 
telligence will  not  only  teach  them  what  will  gratify  desire, 
but  will  put  them  in  possession  of  the  means  to  obtain  the 
desirable  object.  And  then,  when  science  has  thrown  open 
its  store  house  of  wonders  to  the  view  of  all  men,  when  the 
jealousies  of  rival  nations  are  so  far  broken  down,  as  to  give 
man  the  privilege  of  contemplating  these  objects,  how  greed- 
ily will  he  embrace  the  privilege.  How  gladly  will  he  ap- 
propriate the  means  of  happiness.  To  affirm  this,  is  but  to 
aiiirm  that  man  will  act  harmoniously  with  his  relations ; 
that  he  will  obey  the  strongest  impulse  of  his  nature, 
when  those  impulses  are  in  strict  accordance  with  the  laws 
of  his  being ;  that  he  will  prove  himself  a  rational  being. 
But  to  understand  these  relations,  and  to  appreciate  and  en- 
joy the  gratification  to  be  derived  from  them,  implies  a 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


51 


measure  of  social  improvement,  which  will  go  far  towards 
securing  the  extent  of  progress  for  which  we  are  contending. 

The  present  aspect  of  science  further  indicates  the  rapid  ad- 
vancement of  mankind.  It  is  becoming  just  what  it  should  be 
in  order  to  produce  practical  and  social  results.  The  erudi- 
tion of  baronial  castles,  of  the  age  of  chivalry,  or  that  of  the 
schools,  is  wholy  unadapted  to  this  age,  and  to  present  pro- 
gress. It  may  have  served  as  the  vehicle  of  refined  specula- 
tions, but  it  does  not  meet  man's  wants,  nor  contribute  to  his 
elevation.  It  will  not  improve  the  social,  nor  to  any  great  ex- 
tent advance  the  intellectual  condition  of  man.  Of  this  the 
world  seems  fully  conscious.  It  demands  imperatively  that 
science  shall  put  on  a  homely  garb,  and  administer  a  practi- 
cal benefit.  Cui  bono  ?  is  the  brief  but  practical  and  trying 
test  to  which  every  scientific  experiment  of  modern  times  is 
submitted.  The  spirit  of  the  age  demands,  that  whatever 
lays  claim  to  science  shall  pass  through  this  crucible.  The 
children  of  romance,  of  poetry  and  the  scientific  recluse  fret 
and  quarrel,  and  protest  the  world  has  gone  stark  mad  because 
it  has  demanded,  that  science  shall  yield  a  product  for  the 
happiness  and  interests  of  man.  They  wonder  that  certain 
sciences  have  so  suddenly  grown  into  disfavor,  while  others  are 
claiming  universal  attention,  and  eliciting  universal  applause 
No  apparition  could  frighten  them  more  than  the  clamorous ' 
incessant  demand  for  utility.  The  cui  bono?  which  salutes  their 
ears  as  discovery  succeeds  discovery,  is  a  new  and  unex- 
pected test  which  they  insist  is  essentially  degrading.  But 
they  must  dole  out  their  complaints  in  solitude.  The  world 
will  not  pause  to  listen  to  them.  Every  successive  hour  of 
the  world's  onward  career  discloses  new  evidences  of  the 
fitness  and  reasonableness  of  the  demand  for  utility.  Dis- 
covery must  be  applied  to  the  interests  of  real  life ;  and  the 
application  will  be  rejected  unless  it  can  be  plead  in  its  favor 
that  it  facilitates  the  process  of  making  shoes,  or  nails,  or 
leather  ;  it  must  light  our  streets,  or  furnish  our  fuel  at  less 
expense  ;  it  must  give  more  power  to  the  machinery  of  a 
mill,  a  cotton  factory,  the  steam  engine ;  it  must  minister  in 


52 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


some  way  to  utility,  or  it  is  destined  to  little  notoriety,  and 
a  very  precarious  existence.  And  science  has  shown  herself 
capable  of  meeting  such  requisitions,  and  abiding  so  severe 
but  so  natural,  a  test.  Descending  from  the  aerial  regions 
she  has  evinced  a  perfect  adaptation  to  our  earth,  and  an 
earthly  existence.  She  has  shown  herself  capable  of  ad- 
ministering aid  to  man  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places.  Now 
she  thunders  along  our  railroads,  then  she  converts  cotton 
into  a  highly  explosive  substance,  making  it  a  substitute  for 
gunpowder.  Here  she  employs  ether  and  chloroform  as 
anaesthetics,  and  there  uses  them  in  connection  with  the 
steam  engine.  A  discovery  is  made,  and  the  most  obvious 
application  is  pointed  out ;  when  it  is  ascertained  the  same 
discovery  is  susceptible  of  a  multitude  of  valuable  applica- 
tions. When  chemistry  is  discoursing  of  elective  affinities) 
or  teaching  that  "all  chemical  combinations  take  place  be- 
tween the  supposed  ultimate  particles,  or  atoms  of  bodies ; 
and  that  these  unite  either  one  atom  with  one  atom,  or  by 
sums  of  atoms,  which  are  integral  multiples  of  unity,"  we 
can  hardly  imagine  so  delicate,  so  refined,  so  speculative, 
a  science  can  be  made  to  yield  a  practical  benefit ;  but  intel- 
lect gives  it  the  proper  direction,  and  forthwith  it  is  employed 
in  compounding  drugs  and  manures,  or  to  put  to  work  like  a 
serving  maid,  to  scour,  and  dye,  and  cook,  and  brew,  and 
bake.  When  Hadley  applied  light  by  means  of  the  Quad- 
rant to  the  measurement  of  angles,  no  one  dreamed  the  polar- 
ized light  would  be  converted  into  a  time  keeper ;  but  so  it 
is.  When  the  chemist  first  analyzed  coal  he  probably  did  not 
entertain  the  remotest  conjecture  that  one  of  its  gaseous 
elements  would  light  our  streets  and  houses.  The  botanist, 
without  any  utilitarian  or  philanthrophic  aims,  ascertained 
the  secretions  of  the  poppy ;  he  did  not  then  even  imagine 
that  he  had  discovered  an  anodyne,  which,  in  the  hands  of 
physicians,  would  be  almost  universally  applied  to  alleviate 
human  pain.  When  Franklin  discovered  the  laws  of  elec- 
tricity, and  brought  down  the  lightning  from  the  clouds,  he 
probably  had  not  the  remotest  glimpse  that  the  skill  of  man 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


53 


would  erect  for  it  a  highway,  along  which  it  would  travel  in 
the  capacity  of  a  letter  carrier  and  a  message  boy.  A  few 
years  since  magnetism,  as  manifested  in  the  compass  needle, 
seemed  a  creature  endowed  with  life  and  sensation,  of- 
fended with  the  tampering  boldness  of  man,  and  shrinking 
from  contact  with  our  rude  world.  Now  it  is  divested  of  its 
robes  of  mystery,  its  modesty  and  sensitiveness  subdued,  and 
as  if  no  better  than  a  beast  of  burden,  put  to  work  to  drive  our 
turning  lathes.  We  live  more  for  the  future  than  the  past. 
The  nations  seem  to  have  a  distinct  view  of  the  destiny  of 
man,  and  of  the  prospective  perfectability  of  the  social  state. 
Any  science  that  is  retrospective  is  out  of  favor.  They  will 
have  something,  that,  like  the  railroad  and  the  telegraph, 
flashes  or  thunders  on  toward  the  future.  And  it  is  this 
practical  attiude  of  science,  which  argues  improvement,  and 
which  renders  it  so  valuable  an  auxiliary  in  the  work  of  so- 
cial elevation. 

It  is  true,  in  some  respects,  the  ancients  were  in  advance 
of  what  we  can  claim  at  the  present  time.  They  excelled 
us  in  the  forms  and  beauty  of  art;  while  we,  in  depth  of  feeling 
and  idea,  greatly  excel  them.  The  fact  is,  so  rapid  are  the 
discoveries  of  modern  times — so  numerous,  so  vast,  so  com- 
prehensive the  productions  of  intelligence  and  skill — that  we 
cannot  wait  to  polish  and  adorn.  We  quarry  the  blocks,  and 
scatter  them  in  vast  profusion  around  us ;  if  the  world  can 
ever  find  time  again,  as  she  is  rushing  on  in  her  high 
career,  some  future  lapidary  may  apply  his  chisel,  and 
develop  all  the  beautiful  forms,  exquisite  proportions  and 
symmetries,  of  which  they  are  susceptible.  The  beauty  is 
there,  as  in  the  ancient  forms;  the  skill,  too,  is  in  the  lapidary 
to  develop  it,  and  the  soul  to  appreciate  it.  But  there  are 
some  objects  which  we  do  not  consider  beautiful,  for  this 
simple  reason :  there  is  a  perception  of  something  above  the 
beautiful  which  entirely  occupies  the  mind.  The  beauty  is 
there,  but  it  does  not  fix  our  attention,  by  reason  of  the  higher 
quality,  which  is  too  full  and  expansive  to  allow  us  to  con- 
template the  lower  one.    There  is  beauty  in  grandeur,  there 


54 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


is  beauty  in  sublimity ;  but  the  grand  and  the  sublime  hide 
the  beautiful,  the  mind  rising  above  it  to  the  contemplation 
of  loftier  qualities.  Thus  it  is  now  in  the  intellectual  and 
moral  world.  There  is  now  too  much  of  the  element  of 
power  about  the  movements  of  mind  to  claim  aesthetic 
graces.  We  cannot  stop  to  admire  the  rivulet,  beautiful  as 
its  limpid  waters,  its  meanderings,  and  cascades,  may  be  j 
even  the  darkly  rolling  river,  grand  as  it  is  in  its  increasing 
volume  of  waters,  and  in  its  exhibit  of  power,  is  not  able  to 
detain  the  mind  long;  we  hasten  on  to  view  sublimity,  to 
look  upon  a  world  of  waters,  the  illimitable  expanse  of  the 
ocean,  and  to  contemplate  majesty  and  power  in  their  largest 
earthly  exhibitions. 

It  is  on  this  principle  that  mere  abstractions  in  science  are 
now  regarded  as  of  little  worth.  The  world  will  not  be  con- 
tent with  the  showing  that  such  and  such  things  are  so ;  as 
for  instance  that  there  is  a  solar  system.  It  demands  to  know 
what  is  the  centre  of  that  system,  and  what  the  relative  dis- 
tance of  the  planets  which  revolve  around  it.  It  demands 
the  proper  relations  of  a  discovered  fact  to  some  other  fact — 
its  proper  position  amidst  the  great  system  of  harmonious 
truths.  A  fact,  standing  out  in  bold  and  solitary  grandeur, 
like  a  pyramid  in  the  desert,  isolated,  of  unknown  or  no  re- 
lations, is  a  fiction ;  no  such  fact  is  to  be  found.  What  is 
science  but  the  harmony  of  truth  ?  Ignorance  sees  no  con- 
nections, no  dependencies ;  but  science  binds  all  nature,  with 
its  countless  causes  and  effects,  the  high  and  the  low,  its  vast 
and  its  minute  objects,  in  a  golden  chain  of  consecutive 
truths.  Things  in  their  relations,  not  solely  in  themselves,  is 
what  most  nearly  concerns  man.  If  we  can  discover  these, 
we  cheerfully  leave  the  discussion  of  the  questions  concerning 
the  essences  of  bodies  to  Ontologists.  We  have  thus  gained 
the  point  by  which  society  will  be  most  benefited  and  ad- 
vanced, and  with  this  we  are  content. 

The  separation  of  science  from  moral  culture,  thereby  de- 
stroying its  proper  relations,  is  a  very  pernicious  error,  and 
not  the  less  so  because  it  is  sometimes  countenanced,  at  least 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


55 


in  language,  by  men  of  distinguished  ability.  Mr.  Locke 
has  somewhere  said,  "He  would  be  a  foolish  fellow  who 
would  not  value  a  virtuous  or  a  wise  man  before  a  great 
scholar."  The  error  consists  in  dissociating  such  very  friends 
as  practical  wisdom  and  scholarhip.  It  proceeds  upon  the 
supposition  that  the  scholar's  mind  is  a  vast  lumber  yard} 
where  huge  piles  of  intellectual  lumber  are  stowed  away,  to 
moulder  and  rot.  Jt  has  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that  man  may 
accumulate  scientific  truths  till  he  is  blind,  and  still  be  nothing 
more  than  a  literary  dunce.  For  any  great  purpose  or  any 
permanently  valuable  end,  he  is  as  ignorant,  after  he  has 
thus  filled  his  mind,  as  before  he  commenced  the  effort. 
"Knowledge  is  power ;"  but  whatever  of  the  element  of 
power  there  may  be  connected  with  such  knowledge,  it  is 
either  wholly  inefficient,  as  the  result  of  being  without  di- 
rection, or,  acquiring  direction,  it  becomes  like  the  power  of 
Satan,  the  vehicle  of  the  malevolent  affections,  the  fertile 
source  of  vice  and  ruin.  A  great  scholar  will  comprehend 
the  relations  of  things.  There  is  no  truth  without  a  practical 
bearing.  Even  the  most  remote  and  speculative  take  hold 
on  the  real  interest  of  life.  We  turn  away  with  horror  from 
one  who  has  treated  himself  as  a  mere  percipient  being,  as 
from  one  who  has  smothered  human  nature,  and  stifled  the 
noblest  feelings  of  the  soul.  Let  such  know  that  mere  thought, 
however  clear,  laborious,  far-reaching,  does  not  constitute 
man  a  scholar.  This  requires  the  education  of  feeling  and 
action,  as  well  as  the  powers  of  the  intellect.  It  is  only 
when  all  our  powers  are  thus  educated,  that  cultivation  as- 
sumes its  most  interesting  aspect,  and  man  enters  upon  that 
high  career  for  which  his  Maker  endowed  him. 

It  is  this  matter-of-fact  aspect  which  science  has  assumed $ 
that  leads  us  to  regard  it  as  one  of  the  most  efficient  agents 
in  the  work  of  social  reform.  Theories,  mere  metaphysical 
disquisitions,  are  altogether  superseded  by  the  study  of  facts. 
Science  itself  has  become  prudent  and  cautious,  wary  in  its 
inductions,  and  generalizing  only  when  the  basis  has  been 
well  laid  in  a  vigorous,  searching  investigation  of  particulars. 
10 


56 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


This  progress  is  as  great  in  the  scientific  world,  as  the  pro- 
gress of  the  social  state  from  feudal  barbarity  and  despotism 
to  republican  simplicity  and  equality ;  feudal  Germany  in  the 
tenth,  and  the  United  States  in  the  nineteenth  century,  con- 
trasted, are  fair  representatives  of  scientific  improvements. 
Formerly,  if  there  was  intellectual  freedom,  it  was  a  wild, 
undefined,  unsettled  freedom.  Reason  knew  no  laws — im- 
agination was  wholly  unrestrained — extravagant  conjectures 
were  substituted  for  facts — and  conclusions  were  pompously 
denominated  logical  results,  which  bore  a  much  nearer  rela- 
tion to  the  ravings  of  a  distempered  mind  than  to  the  sober 
deductions  of  a  vigorous  and  healthful  one.  To  Lord  Bacon, 
the  father  of  Inductive  Science,  belongs  the  honor  of  guiding 
the  human  mind  out  of  the  mazes  of  error,  of  convincing  the 
world  that  science  is  adapted  to  the  wants  of  man,  and 
can  subsist  in  earthly  relations.  Inductive  science  is  thus 
wedded  to  common  sense ;  and  though  the  world  has  stoutly 
contended  that  it  is  amalgamation — the  union  of  an  etherial 
essence  with  a  gross  earth  born  being — the  union  remains 
indissoluble.  From  this  union  we  have  a  philosophy  reach- 
ing positive  results  through  the  medium  of  unsophisticated 
reasonings.  Imagination  is  chastened,  logic  advances  to  its 
conclusions  only  when  its  premises  are  well  laid  in  a  careful 
and  scrutinizing  induction  of  particulars,  as  legitimated  by 
the  laws  of  thought,  and  discovery  seeks  instantly  some  of 
the  various  forms  of  application.  One  of  the  greatest 
achievements  of  scientific  reform  is  that  by  which  Science 
was  compelled  to  leave  the  airy,  unsubstantial  regions  of 
conjecture,  and  come  down  to  earth,  and  then  required  to 
hold  communion ,  with  man  as  he  is,  and  show  to  what  he 
may,  in  harmony  with  his  nature,  aspire. 

But  this,  it  is  said,  destroys  the  poetry  and  romance  of 
science,  and  renders  it  gross  and  material  in  all  its  aspects. 
Now  were  we  to  admit  this,  as  we  get  the  railroad,  and  the 
telegraph,  and  a  thousand  labor-saving  machines,  in  their 
stead,  we  have  made  a  fortunate  exchange.  We  have  ob- 
tained, and  that  too  without  fraud,  something  for  nothing. 


t 

PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


57 


And  from  exchange  in  this  instance,  as  usual,  society  will 
derive  a  large  benefit.  And  as  to  its  being  material,  we 
greatly  prefer  material  sense  to  immaterial  nonsense.  When 
science  was  sublimated,  its  votaries  were  credulous  enough 
to  believe  that  feathers  had  been  found  which  had  dropped 
from  the  tail  of  the  Phoenix,  and  that  solid  thunderbolts  and 
petrified  babies  were  sober  realities.  In  this  utilitarian  age, 
these  things  are  mentioned  only  to  be  derided. 

But  this  makes  science  cold  and  cheerless ;  it  concentrates 
all  its  powers  upon  self,  and  limits  them  to  this  narrow  circle. 
This  is  not  true.  It  takes  away  the  fanciful,  the  illusory;  it 
gives  man  assurance  that  the  ground  beneath  him  is  firm;  it 
introduces  him  into  a  world  of  realities,  and  makes  him  a 
man  for  that  world;  and  so  far  from  infrigidating,  it  quickens 
human  powers,  and  will  ultimately  enable  man  to  make  the 
whole  earth  smile  with  life  and  beauty.  A  French  philoso- 
pher, when  told  his  house  was  on  fire,  said, "Go  tell  my  wife;"'' 
I  never  meddle  with  household  affairs."  This  was  sublima- 
tion, without  even  a  residuum  of  common  sense.  He  be- 
longed too  entirely  to  a  world  of  abstractions  to  be  entitled 
to  the  name  of  philosopher.  Modern  philosophy  would  turn 
him  over  to  the  physician,  rather  than  recognize  him  among 
her  votaries.  This  has  now  become  the  science  of  truth  and 
reason.  It  takes  man  as  it  finds  him,  a  creature  of  earth, 
not  of  air — inhabiting  a  material  body,  not  an  etherialized 
form — a  rational  animal;  and  it  investigates  both  the  rational 
and  the  animal,  and  without  confounding  the  twain,  it  gives 
them  identity  and  affinities,  and  unfolds  the  laws  that  govern 
their  union.  It  is  not  without  an  exquisite  appreciation  of 
the  beautiful;  but  it  is  the  beautiful  in. nature,  in  thought,  in 
moral  character,  in  benevolent  agents  effecting  beneficent 
ends ;  it  has  no  eye  for  the  beauty  of  unreal  creations  of  the 
intellect ;  reality  and  utility  constitute,  in  its  view,  the  high- 
est elements  of  beauty.  Such  then  being  the  attitude  of 
modern  science,  we  hail  it  as  an  auxiliary  of  sterling  worth 
and  of  great  efficiency  in  the  work  of  social  reform.  It  is 
now  prepared  to  become  the  servant  of  mankind,  and,  in 


58 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


connection  with  moral  agents,  to  exert  an  almost  inconceiv- 
able influence  in  elevating  and  blessing  our  race. 

Progression  is  also  indicated  by  other  facts  which  refer  di- 
rectly to  the  future  as  the  period  when  their  full  results  will 
be  realized .  Amony  these  may  be  enumerated  the  prospective  aboli- 
tion &f  war.  Is  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  a  period  near  at 
hand,  when  the  nations  of  the  earth  will  be  so  elevated  by 
moral  influences,  joined  with  proper  intellectual  culture,  that 
they  will  percieve  the  true  nature  of  war,  and  adjust  all  na- 
tional dificulties  by  arguments  instead  of  arms  ?  War  in 
almost  any  point  of  view  is  irrational.  It  is  so  in  the  ulti- 
timate  object  which  it  proposes  to  reach  through  that  medi- 
um. War  has  peace  for  its  direct  object.  Its  ultimate  ob- 
ject, then,  is  social  elevation,  for  peace  is  no  otherwise  valu- 
able, but  as  it  ministers  to  this  end.  How  is  this  accom- 
plished ?  As  Europe  does  annually  by  lavishing  a  thousand 
million  dollars  on  war,  a  means  at  best  indirect  and  doubt- 
ful, while  Europe  and  America  together  probably  do  not  be- 
stow on  direct  means,  the  efficiency  of  which  have  been 
many  times  tested,  twenty  millions  annually.  The  absurd- 
ity of  this  is  becoming  apparent.  Nations  are  beginning  to 
look  at  the  fruits  of  war,  the  enormous  sums  uselessly  la- 
vished ;  the  changes  that  are  wrought  averse  to  the  physical 
well  being  of  man  ;  the  moral  prostration  that  ensues,  equiva- 
lent to  breaking  asunder  the  bands  of  society  ;  the  over- 
throw of  intellectual  pursuits,  and  the  arrest  of  all  social 
improvements. 

Now  it  is  here  we  mark  the  incipient  stage  of  a  reforma- 
tion which  must  terminate  in  the  abolition  of  war.  Society 
has  gone  so  far  as  to  reprobate  it,  unless  there  are  some 
strong  and  obvious  reasons  of  sufficient  weight  to  make  it 
assume  at  least  the  appearance  of  necessity.  But  even  then 
the  necessity  is  admitted  to  be  a  terrible  one.  It  is  as  though 
you  should  draw  out  half  the  blood  from  a  man's  veins  in 
order  to  keep  the  rest  in  circulation,  or  as  though,  in  a  famine, 
a  family  should  turn  cannibals  and  eat  half  their  number  in 
order  to  preserve  the  other  half.    Fearful  must  be  the  mag^ 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S 'ADDRESS. 


59 


nitude  of  an  evil,  that  can  counterbalance  the  evil  of  such  a 
remedy.  What  reasons  really  exist  for  the  wars  that  are 
generally  prosecuted  ?  Says  Fredrick  the  Great,"  I  had  troops 
entirely  prepared  to  act;  this,  the  fulness  of  my  treasures, 
and  the  vivacity  of  my  character,  were  the  reasons  why  I 
made  war  on  Maria  Theresa,  Queen  of  Hungary."  Such 
are  the  weighty  reasons  assigned  for  violating  solemn  trea- 
ties, and  murdering  thousands  of  human  beings.  And  these 
wars,  notwithstanding  the  high  motives  which  originated 
them,  such  as  standing  armies,  full  treasuries,  and  a  vivacity 
which  can  only  find  its  counter-part  in  the  bosom  of  fiends, 
the  world  are  beginning  to  regard  with  intense  abhorrence. 

May  we  not  safely  affirm  another  advancement  has  been 
made?    This  is  seen  in  the  admission  of  the  enormity  of  the 
evils  which  war  inflicts,  and  of  the  inestimable  benefits 
which  its  abolition  would  involve.    But  this  very  admission, 
with  the  hold  it  has  upon  the  human  mind,  must  go  far  to- 
wards effecting  an  entire  extinction  of  the  trade  in  blood. 
The  number  and  magnitude  of  these  evils  must  furnish  an 
index  to  the  will  of  that  Holy  One,  who  is  the  absolute  pro- 
prietor of  human  existence ;  and  this  must  decide  the  ques- 
tion with  those  who  make  his  will  the  standard  of  right. 
The  only  questions,  then,  to  be  answered  are:  "How  are 
the  nations  to  be  defended  against  aggression?"  and  "  How 
are  they  to  obtain  redress  of  grievances?"    It  is  not  our  in- 
tention to  discuss  these  questions.    The  rapid  progress  of 
society  is  furnishing  satisfactory  solutions.    But  we  may  be 
permitted  to  remark,  if,  by  a  redress  of  grievances,  is  meant 
pecuniary  compensation  for  injuries,  this  is  seldom  obtained 
through  the  medium  of  war.    A  war  to  compel  an  obstinate 
nation  to  pay  a  million  of  dollars,  will  cost,  pecuniarily  ? 
several  millions.    If  the  grievance  be  of  any  other  kind,  in 
seeking  redress  through  this  medium,  we  forget  the  awards 
of  war  are  not  always  on  the  side  of  justice.    The  fate  of 
Hungary  and  Poland  are  but  too  sad  illustrations  of  this 
truth.    And  we  may  remark  still  further,  it  were  better  that 
we  should  endure  the  grievance,  however  great,  than  right 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


ourselves  by  means  which  will  impoverish  a  nation,  not  in 
material  products  merely,  but  in  virtue  and  intelligence. 
What  delightful  changes  will  take  place  among  men,  what 
social  reforms  will  ensue,  when  the  immense  wealth  which 
has  been  squandered  in  war,  shall  be  applied  to  educational, 
benevolent,  and  moral  enterprises.  The  grounds  for  war 
may  thus  be  entirely  removed,  and  the  dire  necessity  so 
often  pleaded  in  its  favor,  be  wholly  extirpated ;  patriotism, 
or  the  love  of  country,  be  expanded  into  philanthropy,  or 
love  of  the  race  ;  all  nations  be  united  by  firmer  and  closer 
ties  than  in  those  social  organizations,  which  unite  as  kin- 
dred the  people  of  one  nation  :  and 

"  Man  to  man  the  warld  o'er 
Shall  hrithers  be,  an'  a'  that." 

Who  will  take  it  upon  himself  to  prove  that  this  is  not 
the  design  of  our  Maker?  That  our  state  of  severance  does 
not  result  from  the  freedom  of  our  nature,  in  violation  of  the 
counsels  of  the  author  of  our  being?  The  will  of  God  is,  in 
this  respect,  very  clearly  indicated.  There  is  surely  a  mani- 
fest design  in  the  administration  of  that  being  wrho  does 
nothing  at  random,  in  multiplying  indefinitely  human  wants, 
and  then  rendering  the  production  of  those  very  articles  es- 
sential to  the  gratification  of  these  wants,  possible  only  in 
certain  latitudes.  There  is  either  caprice  or  benevolence 
in  such  an  arrangement ;  caprice,  if  there  be  no  important 
end  to  be  accomplished  thereby ;  but  the  most  exalted  be- 
nevolence, if  the  design  is,  by  creating  dependence  between 
the  different  sections  of  the  human  family,  to  make  man 
regard  his  fellow  man  as  his  brother,  and  to  furnish  influen- 
tial reasons,  laid  in  pressing  wants,  to  induce  him  to  live  on 
terms  of  amity  with  him.  If  the  relations  existing  between 
the  parts  of  a  watch  are  such  as  to  clearly  indicate,  in  the 
absence  of  any  certain  knowledge  of  its  qualities,  the  inten- 
tion of  the  designer  to  construct  a  time  piece,  how  much 
more  do  such  facts  as  these  indicate  the  will  of  the  great  de- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


signer  to  be  that  discords,  malice,  and  ill-will,  should  cease 
from  among  men,  and  that  they  should  live  in  intimate  frater- 
nal relations  with  each  other;  their  wants,  their  propensities, 
their  intellectual  and  moral  improvement,  everything  inter- 
esting and  valuable  among  them  leading  to  such  relations. 

Our  Maker  has  established  this  system  of  mutual  relations 
and  dependence  to  promote  the  order,  the  peace,  the  uni- 
versal friendship  of  the  race.  He  never  made  a  man  with 
independent  rights  and  interests.  He  has  established  the 
great  law  of  reciprocity,  and  has  bound  every  individual 
with  its  silken  cords.  Hence  our  feelings  answer  responsive 
to  the  voice  of  our  fellow  man,  our  interests  are  identical 
with  his,  and  most  of  the  benefits  of  physical  and  social  ex- 
istence are  derived  from  him.  Man  was  made  for  man  as 
well  as  for  his  Creator.  Social  and  individual  progress  are 
intimately  blended.  The  one  must  ever  result  from  the 
other.  A  clear  comprehension  of  these  relations  will  termi- 
nate war;  and  with  the  termination  of  this  national  and  de- 
vastating curse,  shall  come  a  state  of  exaltation  and  purity 
far  exceeding  all  our  present  conceptions. 

The  characteristic  of  the  present  age  argues  the  progress  of  man. 
What  is  this  but  the  dominion  of  conscience,  the  power  of 
truth?  Simple  truth,  without  anything  to  recommend  it  but 
its  own  intrinsic  merit,  makes  its  way  with  a  rapidity  un- 
paralleled in  the  former  history  of  man  to  the  empire  of 
mind,  and  from  that  moment  sits  enthroned  in  its  convictions. 
There  is  a  power  in  truth  which  no  earthly  monarch  ever 
wielded — a  power  that  goes  down  into  the  depths  of  the 
soul,  takes  hold  of  the  very  elements  of  being,  harmonizes 
with  every  internal  feeling  and  impulse,  and  sways  an  un- 
limited scepter  over  a  willing  and  rejoicing  spirit.  Man  has 
but  to  look  within  and  he  finds  notions  of  order,  justice,  and 
reason.  These  have  always  existed  there ;  but  it  must  be 
admitted  they  now  take  a  wider  range,  a  stronger  hold  on 
his  convictions,  and  influence  his  actions  far  more  exten- 
sively than  at  any  former  period.  They  not  only  exist  with- 
in him,  but  their  application  in  society  becomes  to  him  an 


G2 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


object  of  intense  interest.  Look  at  the  oppressive  govern- 
ments of  Europe,  antl  you  shall  see  how  restless  men  are 
where  principles  obtain  directly  the  opposite  of  these.  These 
ideas  take  entire  possession  of  the  mind  ;  no  power  can 
comprise  or  suppress  them  ;  and  man  becomes  willing  to 
pledge  everything  to  their  exemplification  in  the  social  state. 
He  sees  their  importance,  their  intimate  relations  with  the 
progress  of  the  race,  and  forthwith,  even  at  his  peril,  begins 
to  propogate  them.  How  potent  is  this  truth,  and  who  can 
calculate  its  intluence  upon  human  progress,  that  govern- 
ments have  no  right  to  interfere  with  mind,  or  to  attempt  to 
control  its  freedom  of  thought  with  legal  pains  or  penalties  ; 
to  direct  or  forbid  its  investigations  or  the  expression  ol  its 
convictions;  to  attempt  to  govern  mind  without  the  agree- 
ment of  its  reason  and  the  consent  of  its  will.  No  despot- 
ism will  be  able  to  break  this  truth  from  its  hold  upon  the 
intellect.  It  is  born  with  man,  and,  like  man,  is  constituted 
immortal.  Thought  is  essentially  free.  When  embodied  in 
physical  or  moral  action  in  such  a  manner  as  to  interfere 
with  the  rights  of  others,  ihen,  and  not  till  then,  may  go- 
vernments interfere.  And  interference  short  of  this  will 
only  show  as  it  has  done,  many  times  in  the  history  of  man- 
kind, to  the  terror  and  dismay  of  their  oppressors,  that  the 
dominion  of  truth  in  an  upright  mind  is  unlimited  and  per- 
fect. Mind  will  not  be  treated  as  we  treat  the  unintelligent 
earth  on  which  we  tread,  the  water  which  we  force  into  cer- 
tain channels,  or  any  material  object  which  we  make  sub- 
serve our  purpose  without  leave  asked  or  granted.  Any 
attempt  to  proscribe  free  inquiry,  to  destroy  the  democracy 
of  intellect,  to  make  the  thoughts  of  man  How  in  designated 
channels,  or  to  usurp  dominion  over  conscience,  must  ulti- 
mately prove  futile.  This  is  a  prerogative  mind  will  yield  only 
to  God.  Neither  can  you  force  a  passage  into  such  a  mind. 
If,  by  any  means,  you  attain  an  entrance  there,  it  will  not  be 
until  after  reason  has  opened  the  door.  Reason  stands  as 
the  porter  of  the  soul,  narrowly  inspecting  every  form  that 
approaches.    The  inquisition  has  worked  its  engines  of  tor- 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


63 


ture,  kings  have  issued  their  decrees,  and  the  Vatican  has 
thundered  its  excommunications  in  vain  to  drive  this  inflexi- 
ble sentinel  from  his  post.  Experience  has  shown  you  can- 
not coerce  conviction  by  physical  force.  You  may  force 
obedience ;  you  may  bend  the  will  or  sway  the  affections ; 
or  you  may,  through  the  medium  of  the  passions,  put  reason  in 
chains ;  but  you  can  only  dispute  successfully  with  reason 
and  produce  conviction  by  reason.  Reason  is  the  only  wea- 
pon that  can  triumph  over  an  upright  mind. 

And  we  should  not  forget,  man  may  be  conquered  in  ap- 
pearance when  he  is  by  no  means  vanquished  in  reality. 
Who,  that  has  felt  the  political  pulse  of  Europe,  and  ascer- 
tained the  feverish  excitement  which  prevails  throughout 
the  whole  system,  can  believe  that  the  external  quiet  which 
reigns  there  is  an  index  of  the  real  condition  of  the  public 
mind  ?  The  excessive  pressure  of  tyranny,  like  that  exhi- 
bited by  the  Austrian  government  at  the  present  time,  must  ul- 
timately cause  a  dangerous  and  violent  reaction.  Any  plan 
to  destroy  freedom  of  thought  and  the  rights  of  conscience, 
however  ingeniously  devised,  or  skillfully  executed,  must 
finally  lead  to  an  exhibition  of  man's  inherent  energy,  to  a 
wide  and  daring  development  of  his  inward  appreciation  of 
those  rights,  and  of  those  sacrifices  he  will  make  to  maintain 
them.  Atl  experience  may  show  that  men  "  are  more  dis- 
posed to  suffer  while  evils  are  sufferable,  than  to  right 
themselves,"  but  tyranny,  whether  wielded  by  the  individual 
or  by  society,  must  not  proceed  beyond  the  point  of  pos- 
sible acquiescence.  Despair  makes  men  ferocious ;  and 
even  when  resistance  does  not  assume  that  form,  it  is  seen 
in  the  attitnde  of  fixed  principle,  of  high  and  steady  resolve, 
and  of  inflexible  determination  more  terrible  to  oppressors 
than  armies  of  veteran  soldiers.  Men's  intellects  may  be- 
come more  dangerous  than  their  arms.  And  who  that  is 
acquainted  with  the  present  condition  of  European  nations, 
and  the  history  of  man,  does  not  perceive  this  is  a  true  re- 
presentation of  the  condition  of  those  nations.  Great  political 
and  moral  reforms  are  evidently  in  embryo.  The  nations 
11 


64 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS. 


heave  and  are  unquiet.  The  pause  is  an  ominous  one,  like 
that  in  the  storm  the  moment  before  it  pours  forth  its  fury; 
the  elements  are  combining  by  which  political  freedom  will 
be  achieved ;  the  national  conscience  is  awakened  ;  the  love 
of  truth  is  increasing;  the  conviction  of  personal  rights  and 
responsibilities  is  taking  a  deeper  hold  upon  the  public  mind  ; 
monarchy  is  becoming  more  and  more  enfeebled;  age  and  de- 
crepitude are  creeping  apace  upon  the  ancient  dynasties ; 
while  the  nations  are  standing  in  breathless  silence  awaiting 
the  summons  of  liberty  to  the  banquet  of  freedom.  But  this 
very  condition  argues  a  present  and  prospective  progress, 
without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

It  is  essential  to  human  improvement  that  there  should  be 
religious  freedom.  Conscience  must  be  free.  A  free  man 
and  an  enslaved  conscience  are  contradictions.  Enslave  the 
conscience  and  you  enslave  the  whole  man  ;  and  the  stupe- 
faction, degradation,  and  servility  inseparable  from  slavery 
will  appear  in  all  that  relates  to  him.  The  assertion  that 
man  can  be  free  when  conscience  is  bound  in  chains,  is  en- 
titled to  just  as  much  credit,  as  the  declaration,  that  when 
the  heart  is  deadened  the  circulation  will  go  on,  and  the  or- 
ganism of  the  frame  be  active.  Conscience  is  the  very  cen- 
ter of  man's  spiritual  being;  and  its  freedom  is  to  human 
liberty,  what  the  heart  is  to  the  functions  of  the  living  animal ; 
if  one  ceases  to  pulsate,  the  other  must  die. 

It  is  an  important  question  then  if  religious  freedom  is  ad- 
vancing— if  there  are  any  marked  evidences  of  progress  in 
the  religious  world.  Now  experience  shows  that  religion 
prospers  most  when  left  free  to  exercise  its  functions  accord- 
ing to  its  own  nature.  Its  reliance  is  upon  moral,  not  upon 
physical  force.  While  on  one  hand  it  disdains  the  aid  of 
artifice,  and  does  nothing  in  a  corner,  on  the  other  it  rejects 
from  its  association  the  pains  and  penalties  of  law,  and  all 
coercive  measures  whatever.  Its  votaries  must  be  willing 
votaries.  Its  saving  influences  can  only  be  exerted  on  minds 
voluntarily  conformed  to  its  pure  and  lofty  precepts.  The 
true  lover  of  Zion  asks  merely  the  protection,  not  the  aid,  of 


PRESIDENT  BERRY'S  ADDRESS.  65 


law.  All  aid  rendered  from  such  a  source  is  a  drawback  on 
its  real  prosperity.  Men  are  beginning  to  view  the  question 
in  the  light  in  which  the  Author  of  our  religion  presented  it — 
"  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  Hence,  the  bands  that 
bind  church  to  state  are  being  gradually  loosened  or  violently 
sundered.  On  one  hand  the  church  is  learning  that  such  a 
union  cripples  its  energies,  and  draws  it  down  from  its  high 
sphere ;  that  it  substitutes  weak  and  sensual  motives,  for 
those  that  are  pure  and  elevated,  and  directs  attention  from  a 
heavenly  Saviour,  to  an  earthly  establishment.  On  the  other 
hand,  statesmen  are  beginning  to  learn  that  their  province 
is  the  government  of  civil,  not  of  religious  society  as  such. 
And  on  either  hand,  they  will  agree  with  John  Knox,  the 
celebrated  Scotch  Reformer,  in  saying  of  the  union  of 
church  and  state,  "  Cloak  it  as  you  will,  and  you  cannot  con- 
ceal the  devil,"  On  every  side,  religious  freedom  is  being 
strengthened.  But  wThile  so  many  agencies  are  in  operation 
producing  in  surprising  number  and  rapidity,  effects  bearing 
on  this  great  and  vital  interest  of  man,  we  should  not  forget 
that  he  has  barely  entered  on  his  career  of  improvement. 
We  have  no  reason  to  hope  that  that  career  will  be  an  un- 
interrupted one.  There  may  be  periods  when  in  some  parts 
of  the  world,  society  will  retrograde.  But  on  the  whole  it 
will  advance,  until  all  that  was  seen  in  prophetic  vision  will 
be  realized  ;  social  developments  be  perfected ;  moral  and  in- 
tellectual improvements  carried  to  the  limit  of  earthly  capa- 
cities ;  "  the  light  of  the  moon  be  as  the  light  of  the  sun,  and 
the  light  of  the  sun  sevenfold  as  the  light  of  seven  days  the 
kindreds  of  the  earth  take  up  the  the  chorus  of  the  skies, 
"  peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  man ;"  and  our  world  re- 
joice in  the  universal  concord  of  man  and  the  favor  of  God. 


w, 


ELLS  BINDERY  I 
ALTHAM,  MASS. 
Mil  1958 


