WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 

PRESENTED  BY 

Ella  Smith  Elbert  '88 
in  memoriam 
Katharine  E.  Coman 

-  ^  .  1 


S.  6.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


THE 


AMERICAN  CONFLICT: 

_A_  HISTORY 

OF 

THE  GREAT  REBELLION 

IN  THE 

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA, 

1860-'64 : 

ITS 

CAUSES,  INCIDENTS,  AND  RESULTS: 

INTENDED  TO  EXHIBIT  ESPECIALLY  ITS  MORAL  AND  POLITICAL  PHASES, 

WITH  THE 

DRIFT  AND  PROGRESS  OF  AMERICAN  OPINION 

RESPECTING 

HUMAN  SLAVERY 

From  1776   to  tine   Close  of  the  War  for  the  Union.. 

By  HOEACE  GREELEY. 

ILLUSTRATED  BY  F0ETEAIT8  ON  STEEL  OF  GENEEALS,  STATESMEN,  AND  OTHER  EMINENT  MEN  :  VIEWS  OF 
PLACES  OF  HISTORIC  INTEEEST ;  MAPS,  DIAGRAMS  OF  BATTLE-FIELDS,  NAVAL 
ACTIONS,  ETC.:  FROM  OFFICIAL  SOURCES. 

YOL.  I 

HARTFORD: 
PUBLISHED  BY  O.  D.  CASE  &  COMPANY. 
CHICAGO:  GEO.  &  C.  W.  SHERWOOD. 
1864. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1864, 

By  0.  D.  CASE  &  COMPANY, 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the 
District  of  Connecticut. 


CASE,  LOCKWOOD  &  CO., 

Electrotypes  Printers  and  Bookbinders, 

HAKTFORD,  CONN. 


TO 


JOHN  BRIGHT, 


BRITISH  COMMONER  AND  CHRISTIAN  STATESMAN : 


THE  FRIEND  OF  MY  COUNTRY,  BECAUSE  THE  FRIEND  OF  MANKIND . 


<£l)ts  liccoru  of  a  Nation's  Struggle 


UP 


FROM  DARKNESS  AND  BONDAGE  TO  LIGHT  AND  LIBERTY 


IS  REGARDFULLY,  GRATEFULLY  INSCRIBED 


BY 


THE  AUTHOR 


PRELIMINARY  EGOTISM. 


No  one  can  realize  more  vividly  than  I  do,  that  the  History  through  whose  pages  our 
great-grand-children  will  contemplate  the  momentous  struggle  whereof  this  country  has 
recently  been  and  still  is  the  arena,  will  not  and  canDOt  now  be  written ;  and  that  its  author 
must  give  to  the  patient,  careful,  critical  study  of  innumerable  documents  and  letters,  an 
amount  of  time  and  thought  which  I  could  not  have  commanded,  unless  I  had  been  able  to  de- 
vote years,  instead  of  months  only,  to  the  preparation  of  this  volume.  I  know,  at  least,  what 
History  is,  and  how  it  must  be  made ;  I  know  how  very  far  this  work  must  fall  short  of  the 
lofty  ideal.  If  any  of  my  numerous  fellow-laborers  in  this  field  is  deluded  with  the  notion 
that  he  has  written  the  history  of  our  gigantic  civil  war,  i",  certainly,  am  free  from  like  hallu- 
cination. 

"What  I  have  aimed  to  do,  is  so  to  arrange  the  material  facts,  and  so  to  embody  the  more 
essential  documents,  or  parts  of  documents,  illustrating  those  facts,  that  the  attentive,  intel- 
ligent reader  may  learn  from  this  work  not  only  what  were  the  leading  incidents  of  our 
civil  war,  but  its  causes,  incitements,  and  the  inevitable  sequence  whereby  ideas  proved 
the  germ  of  events.  I  believe  the  thoughtful  reader  of  this  volume  can  hardly  fail  to  see 
that  the  great  struggle  in  which  we  are  engaged  was  the  unavoidable  result  of  antagonisms 
imbedded  in  the  very  nature  of  our  heterogeneous  institutions  ; — that  ours  was  indeed  '  an 
irrepressible  conflict,'  which  might  have  been  precipitated  or  postponed,  but  could  by  no 
means  have  been  prevented  ; — that  the  successive  'compromises.'  whereby  it  was  so  long 
put  off,  were — however  intended — deplorable  mistakes,  detrimental  to  our  National  charac- 
ter;— that  we  ought — so  early,  at  least,  as  1819 — to  have  definitively  and  conclusively  estab- 
lished the  right  of  the  constitutional  majority  to  shape  our  National  policy  according  to 
their  settled  convictions,  subject  only  to  the  Constitution  as  legally  expounded  and  applied. 
Had  the  majority  then  stood  firm,  they  would  have  precluded  the  waste  of  thousands  of 
millions  of  treasure  and  rivers  of  generous  blood. 

I  presume  this  work  goes  further  back,  and  devotes  more  attention  to  the  remoter,  more 
recondite  causes  of  our  civil  strife,  than  any  rival.  At  all  events,  I  have  aimed  to  give  a  full 
and  fair,  though  necessarily  condensed,  view  of  all  that  impelled  to  our  desperate  struggle. 
I  have  so  often  heard  or  read  this  demurrer — u  You  Abolitionists  begin  with  Secession,  or 
the  bombardment  of  Sumter,  slurring  over  all  that  you  had  done,  through  a  series  of  years, 
to  provoke  the  South  to  hostilities,"  that  I  have  endeavored  to  meet  that  objection  fairly 
and  fully.  If  I  have  failed  to  dig  down  to  the  foundations,  the  defect  flows  from  lack  of 
capacity  or  deficiency  of  perception  in  the  author  ;  for  he  has  intently  purposed  and  aimed 
to  begin  at  the  beginning. 

I  have  made  frequent  and  copious  citations  from  letters,  speeches,  messages,  and  other 
documents,  many  of  which  have  not  the  merit  of  rarity ;  mainly  because  I  could  only  thus 
present  the  views  of  political  antagonists  in  terms  which  they  must  recognize  and  respect 
as  authentic.  In  an  age  of  passionate  controversy,  few  are  capable  even  of  stating  an 
opponent's  position  in  language  that  he  will  admit  to  be  accurate  and  fair.  And  there  are 
thousands  who  cannot  to-day  realize  that  they  ever  held  opinions  and  accepted  dogmas  to 
which  they  unhesitatingly  subscribed  less  than  ten  years  ago.    There  is,  then,  but  one  safe 


10 


PRELIMINARY  EGOTISM. 


and  just  way  to  deal  with  the  tenets  and  positions  from  time  to  time  held  by  contending 
parties — this,  namely :  to  cite  fully  and  fairly  from  the  '  platforms'  and  other  formal  decla- 
rations of  sentiment  put  forth  by  each  ;  or  (in  the  absence  of  these)  from  the  speeches,  mes- 
sages, and  other  authentic  utterances,  of  their  accepted,  recognized  chiefs.  This  I  have  con- 
stantly and  very  freely  done  throughout  this  volume.  Regarding  the  progress  of  Opinion 
toward  absolute,  universal  justice,  as  the  one  great  end  which  hallows  effort  and  recom- 
penses sacrifice,  I  have  endeavored  to  set  forth  clearly,  not  only  what  my  countrymen,  at 
different  times,  have  done,  but  what  the  great  parties  into  which  they  are  or  have  been 
divided  have  believed  and  affirmed,  with  regard  more  especially  to  Human  Slavery,  and  its 
rights  and  privileges  in  our  Union.  And,  however  imperfectly  my  task  may  have  been 
performed,  I  believe  that  no  preexisting  work  has  so  fully  and  consistently  exhibited  the 
influences  of  Slavery  in  molding  the  opinions  of  our  people,  as  well  as  in  shaping  the  des- 
tinies of  our  country. 

To  the  future  historian,  much  will  be  very  easy  that  now  is  difficult ;  as  much  will  in  his 
day  be  lucid  which  is  now  obscure ;  and  he  may  take  for  granted,  and  dispatch  in  a  sen- 
tence, truths  that  have  now  to  be  established  by  pains-taking  research  and  elaborate  citation. 
But  it  is  the  faithful  fulfillment  of  the  duties  incumbent  on  us,  his  predecessors,  that  his 
labors  will  be  lightened  and  his  averments  rendered  concise,  positive,  and  correct.  Our 
work,  well  done,  will  render  his  task  easy,  while  increasing  the  value  of  its  fruits. 

Some  ancient  historians  favor  their  readers  with  speeches  of  generals  and  chiefs  to  their 
soldiers  on  the  eve  of  battle,  and  on  other  memorable  occasions ;  which,  however  charac- 
teristic and  fitting,  are  often  of  questionable  authenticity.  Modern  history  draws  on  am- 
pler resources,  and  knows  that  its  materials  are  seldom  apocryphal.  "What  Franklin, 
Washington,  Adams,  Jefferson,  Laurens,  the  Pinckneys,  Marshall,  Jackson,  Clay,  Calhoun, 
"Webster,  etc.,  etc.,  have  from  time  to  time  propounded  as  to  the  nature  and  elements  of  our 
Federal  pact,  the  right  or  wrong  of  Secession,  the  extension  or  restriction  of  Slavery  under 
our  National  flag,  etc.,  etc.,  is  on  record ;  and  we  know,  beyond  the  possibility  of  mistake, 
its  precise  terms  as  well  as  its  general  purport.  "We  stand,  as  it  were,  in  the  immediate 
presence  of  the  patriot  sages  and  heroes  who  made  us  a  nation,  and  listen  to  their  well- 
weighed  utterances  as  if  they  moved  in  life  among  us  to-day.  Not  to  have  cited  them  in 
exposure  and  condemnation  of  the  novelties  that  have  so  fearfully  disturbed  our  peace, 
would  have  been  to  slight  and  ignore  some  of  the  noblest  lessons  ever  given  by  wisdom  and 
virtue  for  the  instruction  and  guidance  of  mankind. 

It  has  been  my  aim  to  recognize  more  fully  than  has  been  usual  the  legitimate  position 
and  necessary  influence  of  the  Newspaper  Press  of  our  day  in  the  discussion  and  decision 
of  the  great  and  grave  questions  from  time  to  time  arising  among  us.  To-day,  the  history 
of  our  country  is  found  recorded  in  the  columns  of  her  journals  more  fully,  promptly, 
vividly,  than  elsewhere.  More  and  more  is  this  becoming  the  case  with  other  countrie-i 
throughout  the  civilized  world.  A  history  which  takes  no  account  of  what  was  said  by 
the  Press  in  memorable  emergencies  befits  an  earlier  age  than  ours. 

As  my  plan  does  not  contemplate  the  invention  of  any  facts,  I  must,  of  course,  in  narra- 
ting the  events  of  the  war,  draw  largely  from  sources  common,  to  all  writers  on  this  theme, 
but  especially  from  The  Rebellion  Record  of  Mr.  Frank  Moore,  wherein  the  documents  eluci- 


PRELIMINARY  EGOTISM. 


11 


dating  our  great  struggle  are,  in  good  part,  preserved.  Perhaps  the  events  of  no  former 
war  were  ever  so  fully  and  promptly  embodied  in  a  single  work  as  are  those  of  our  great 
contest  in  The  Record,  which  must  prove  the  generous  fountain  whence  all  future  historians 
of  our  country  may  draw  at  will.  But  I  am  also  considerably  indebted  to  Mr.  Orville  J. 
Victor's  History  of  the  Southern  Rebellion,  wherein  is  embodied  much  valuable,  important, 
and  interesting  material  not  contained  in  The  Record.  I  shall  doubtless  appear  to  have 
made  more  use  of  Mr.  Edward  A.  Pollard's  Southern  Historij  of  the  War ;  which  I  have 
often  cited,  and  shall  continue  to  cite,  for  peculiar  reasons.  Its  author  is  so  hot-headed  a 
devotee  of  Slavery  and  the  Eebellion,  that  nothing  which  seems  to  favor  that  side  is  too 
marvelous  for  his  deglutition ;  so  that,  if  he  were  told  that  a  single  Confederate  had  con- 
strained a  Union  regiment  to  lay  down  their  arms  and  surrender,  he  would  swallow  it, 
without  scrutiny  or  doubt.  His  work,  therefore,  is  utterly  untrustworthy  as  a  whole  ;  yet, 
in  certain  aspects,  it  has  great  value.  He  is  so  headlong  and  unquestioning  a  believer  in 
the  Confederacy,  that  he  never  dreams  of  concealing  or  disavowing  the  fundamental  ideas 
whereon  it  is  based ;  it  is  precisely  because  it  stands  and  strikes  for  Slavery  that  he  loves 
and  glories  in  the  Confederate  cause.  Then  his  statements  of  the  numbers  engaged  or  of 
the  losses  on  either  side  are  valuable  in  one  aspect:  You  know  that  he  never  overstates 
the  strength  nor  the  losses  of  the  Confederates ;  while  he  seems,  in  some  instances,  to 
have  had  access  to  official  reports  and  other  documents  which  have  not  been  seen  this  side 
of  the  Potomac.  Hence  the  use  I  have  made,  and  shall  doubtless  continue  to  make,  of 
his  work.  But  I  trust  that  it  has  been  further  serviceable  to  me,  in  putting  me  on  my 
guard  against  those  monstrous  exaggerations  of  the  numbers  opposed  to  them  with 
which  weak,  incompetent,  and  worsted  commanders  habitually  excuse,  or  seek  to  cover  up, 
their  failures,  defeats,  and  losses. 

I  have  not  found,  and  do  not  expect  to  find,  room  for  biographic  accounts  of  the  gene- 
rals and  other  commanders  who  figure  in  our  great  struggle,  whether  those  who  have  hon- 
ored and  blessed  or  those  who  have  betrayed  and  shamed  their  country.  To  have  admit- 
ted these  would  have  been  to  expand  my  work  inevitably  beyond  the  prescribed  limits. 
By  nature  little  inclined  to  man-worship,  and  valuing  individuals  only  as  the  promoters  of 
measures,  the  exponents  of  ideas,  I  have  dealt  with  personal  careers  only  when  they  clearly 
exhibited  some  phase  of  our  National  character,  elucidated  the  state  of  contemporary  opinion, 
or  palpably  and  powerfully  modified  our  National  destinies.  Thomas  Jefferson,  Eli  "Whit- 
ney, Andrew  Jackson,  Daniel  Webster,  John  C.  Calhoun,  Benjamin  Lundy,  Elijah  P.  Love- 
joy,  John  Brown — men  differing  most  widely  in  intellectual  caliber  as  well  as  in  aspira- 
tions, instincts,  convictions,  and  purposes — may  fairly  be  regarded  as,  in  their  several 
spheres,  representative  Americans,  each  of  whom  in  some  sense  contributed  to  lay  the 
train  which  we  have  seen  fired  by  the  Secessionists  of  our  day  with  so  magnificent  a 
pyrotechnic  display,  so  majestic  a  resulting  conflagration;  and  of  these,  accordingly,  some 
notion  may  be  acquired  from  the  following  pages ;  while,  of  our  generals  and  commodores, 
the  miniature  Portraits  contained  in  these  volumes,  and  the  record  of  their  respective 
achievements,  are  all  that  I  can  give.  So  many  battles,  sieges,  marches,  campaigns,  etc., 
remain  to  be  narrated,  that — ample  as  this  work  would  seem  to  be,  and  capacious  as  are  its 
pages — a  naked  record  of  the  remaining  events  of  the  war,  especially  should  it  be  protracted 


12 


PRELIMINARY  EGOTISM. 


for  a  full  year  more,  will  test  to  the  utmost  my  power  of  condensation  to  conclude  the  work 
in  another  volume  of  the  generous  amplitude  of  this. 

My  subject  naturally  divides  itself  into  two  parts:  I.  How  we  got  into  the  War  for  the 
Union  ;  and  II.  How  we  get  out  of  it.  I  have  respected  this  division  in  my  cast  of  the 
present  work,  and  submit  this  volume  as  a  clear  elucidation  of  the  former  of  these 
problems,  hoping  to  be  at  least  equally  satisfactory  in  my  treatment  of  the  latter. 

It  is  the  task  of  the  historian  to  eliminate  from  the  million  facts  that  seemed  important 
in  their  day  and  sphere  respectively,  the  two  or  three  thousand  that  have  an  abiding  and 
general  interest,  presenting  these  in  their  due  proportions,  and  with  their  proper  relative 
emphasis.  Any  success  in  this  task  must,  of  course,  be  comparative  and  approximate ;  and  no 
historical  work  ever  was  or  will  be  written  whereof  a  well-informed  and  competent  critic 
might  not  forcibly  say, '  Why  was  this  fact  stated  and  that  omitted  ?  Why  give  a  page  to 
this  occurrence,  and  ignore  that,  which  was  of  at  least  equal  consequence  ?  Why  praise  the 
achievement  of  A,  yet  pass  over  that  of  B,  which  was  equally  meritorious  and  important?' 
But,  especially  in  dealing  with  events  so  fresh  and  recent  as  those  of  our  great  convulsion, 
must  the  historian  expose  himself  to  such  strictures.  Time,  with  its  unerring  perspec- 
tive, reduces  every  incident  to  its  true  proportions ;  so  that  we  are  no  longer  liable  to  mis- 
conceptions and  apprehensions  which  were  once  natural  and  all  but  universal.  We  know, 
beyond  question,  that  Braddock's  defeat  and  death  before  Fort  Du  Quesne  had  not  the  im- 
portance which  they  seemed  to  wear  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  heard  of  them  within  the 
month  after  their  occurrence  ;  that  Bunker  Hill,  though  tactically  a  defeat,  was  practically  a 
triumph  to  the  arms  of  our  Revolutionary  fathers ;  that  the  return  of  Bonaparte  from  Elba 
exerted  but  little  influence  over  the  destinies  of  Europe,  and  that  little  of  questionable  be- 
neficence; and  that  'fillibusterism,'  so  called,  since  its  first  brilliant  achievement  in  wrest- 
ing Texas  from  Mexico  and  annexing  her  to  this  country,  though  attempting  much,  has 
accomplished  very  little,  toward  the  diffusion  either  of  Freedom  or  Slavery.  And  so,  much 
that  now  seems  of  momentous  consequence  will  doubtless  have  shrunk,  a  century  hence,  to 
very  moderate  dimensions,  or  perhaps  been  forgotten  altogether. 

The  volume  which  is  to  conclude  this  work  cannot,  of  course,  appear  till  some  time  after 
the  close  of  the  contest ;  and  I  hope  to  be  able  to  bestow  upon  it  at  least  double  the  time 
that  I  was  at  liberty  to  devote  to  this.  I  shall  labor  constantly  to  guard  against  Mr.  Pol- 
lard's chief  error — that  of  supposing  that  all  the  heroism,  devotedness,  humanity,  chivalry, 
evinced  in  the  contest,  were  displayed  on  one  side;  all  the  cowardice,  ferocity,  cruelty, 
rapacity,  and  general  depravity,  on  the  other.  I  believe  it  to  be  the  truth,  and  as  such  I 
shall  endeavor  to  show,  that,  while  this  war  has  been  signalized  by  some  deeds  disgraceful 
to  human  nature,  the  general  behavior  of  the  combatants  on  either  side  has  been  calculated 
to  do  honor  even  to  the  men  who,  though  fearfully  misguided,  are  still  our  countrymen, 
and  to  exalt  the  prestige  of  the  American  name. 

That  the  issue  of  this  terrible  contest  may  be  such  as  God,  in  His  inscrutable  wis- 
dom, shall  deem  most  directly  conducive  to  the  progress  of  our  race  in  knowledge,  virtue, 
liberty,  and  consequent  happiness,  is  not  more  the  fervent  aspiration,  than  it  is  the  conso- 
ling and  steadfast  faith,  of  H.  G. 
New  York,  April  10,  1864. 


INDEX  BY  CHAPTERS. 


PAGE 

I.  Our  Country  in  1182  and  in  1860  17 

Increase  of  Population  and  Wealth. 

II.  Slavery  in  America,  prior  to  1176. ...  24 

III.  Do.    in  the  American  Revolution. .  .  33 

IV.  Do.    under  the  Confederation   37 

Jefferson's  Proposal  of  Restriction— Nathan  Dane's  do. 

Y.  The  Convention  of  1787  and  the  Fed- 
eral Constitution  41 

YI.  Slavery  after  1787   49 

Persistent  Hostility  of  Congress  to  Slavery  Extension 
—  Purchase  of  Louisiana— Eli  Whitney  and  his  Cot- 
ton-Gin — Colonization. 

YIL  Missouri — the  Struggle  for  Restriction .  74 

Scott— Clay— Pinkney— P.  P.  Barbour— Webster- 
John  W.  Taylor — Thomas — the  Compromise. 

VIII.  State  Rights— Resolutions  of  '98   81 

Nullification— Hayne— Webster— Jackson— Calhoun 
— Georgia  and  the  Indians. 

IX.  Abolition — Its  Rise  and  Progress  107 

Early  efforts  for  Emancipation — Slave-holders  con- 
demn Slavery — Virginia— Benjamin  Lundy — Wm. 
Lloyd  Garrison. 

X.  The  Churches  on  Slav'y  and  Abolition  .117 
XI.  The  Pro-Slavery  Reaction— Riots  122 

Rifling  the  Mails— Persecution  and  Murder  of  Rev. 
E.  P.  Lovejoy — The  Struggle  in  Congress  for  the 
Right  of  Petition. 

XII.  Texas  and  her  Annexation  to  the  U.  S .  147 

Sam.  Houston— M.  Hunt— Webster— T.  W.  Gilmer- 
Jackson— J.  Q.  Adams— Van  Buren— Clay— Benton 
—Polk— Tyler— Calhoun. 

XIII.  The  Mission  of  Samuel  Hoar  to  S.  C. .  178 
XIY.  War  with  Mexico — "Wilmot  Proviso. . .  185 

Gen.  Cass— Letter  to  Nicholson— Gen.  Taylor  chosen 
President— Attempts  by  Gen.  Burt,  of  S.  C,  and  by 
Senator  Douglas,  to  extend  the  Compromise  Line  of 
36°  30'  to  the  Pacific. 

XY.  The  Struggle  for  Compromise  in  1850 . .  198 

— Gov.  Seward — James  Brooks — Gen.  Taylor — Hen- 
ry Clay— Jetferson  Davis— Webster's  7th  of  March 
Speech— The  Texas  Job. 

XYI.  The  Era  of  Slave-Hunting— 1850-60. 210 

Fugitive  Slave  Law— John  Van  Buren— Judge  Grier 
— R.  R.  Sloane — Margaret  Garner — Anthony  Burns 
— 'The  Flaunting  Lie' — National  Party  Platforms 
of  1852— Gen.  Scott— Election  of  Pierce  and  King. 


XYH.  The  Nebraska-Kansas  Struggle  224 

1854-61 — Pierce— Atchison — A.  C.  Dodge — Douglas 
— Archibald  Dixon — Salmon  P.  Chase — Badger  of 
N.  C— English  of  Ind.— A.  H.  Stephens— Gov.  Reed- 
er— William  Phillips— John  W.  Whitfield— Civil 
War  in  Kansas — Wm.  Dow — Sheriff  Jones — Nomi- 
nation of  Fremont — President  Fillmore  at  Albany — 
Election  of  Buchanan — Lecompton — Wyandot — Ad- 
mission of  Kansas  as  a  Free  State. 

XYIII.  Case  of  Dred  Scott  in  Sup.  Court.  ..251 

Views  of  President  Buchanan— Chief  Justice  Taney 
— Judge  Wayne — Judge  Nelson — Judge  Grier — 
Judge  Daniel — Judge  Campbell — Judge  Catron — 
Col.  Benton— Wm.  L.  Yancey — Daniel  Webster — 
Judge  McLean — Judge  Curtis. 

XIX.  Our  Foreign  Policy — Monroe — Cuba.  2  64 

Treaty  with  France — Washington — Jefferson — The 
1  Monroe  Doctrine' — The  Panama  Congress — Se 
cret  Intrigues  for  the  Acquisition  of  Cuba — Ed- 
ward Everett  on  the  Proposition  of  France  and 
England  for  a  triplicate  guarantee  of  Cuba  to  Spain 
— TheOstend  Manifesto— William  Walker  and  the 
'regeneration' of  Centra!  America — Mr.  Buchanan  on 
Cuba — Democratic  National  resolve  of  1860  respect- 
ing Cuba. 


XX.  John  Brown  and  his  Raid. 


.279 


Lineage  and  early  life  of  John  Brown — His  Kansas 
Experiences — His  Convention  in  Canada — Repairs 
to  Virginia— Seizes  Harper's  Ferry — Is  overpowered 
— captured — convicted— hung. 

XXI.  The  Presidential  Canvass  of  1860.  .299 

State  Elections  of  1857-8-9 — Lincoln  versus  Douglas 
— Gov.  Seward's  '  Irrepressible  Conflict' — Slavery 
legally  established  in  New  Mexico — 'Helper's  Im- 
pending Crisis'  in  Congress — defeats  John  Sherman 
for  Speaker — Pennington  chosen — Jeff.  Davis's  new- 
Democratic  Platform — The  National  Democratic 
Convention  at  Charleston — -Splits  on  a  Platform — 
The  fragments  adjourn  to  Baltimore  and  Richmond — 
Douglas  and  Fitzpatrick  nominated  by  the  larger 
fraction — Breckinridge  and  Lane  by  the  smaller — 
Fitzpatrick  declines — H.  V.  Johnson  substituted — 
Bell  and  Everett  nominated  by  the  Constitutional 
Union  Party — Lincoln  and  Hamlin  by  the  Re- 
publicans— The  Canvass — Gov.  Seward's  closing 
words. 

XXII.  Secession  inaugurated  in  S.  C  328 

Legislature  called — Gov.  Gist's  Message — Senator 
Chesnut's  Speech  —  Boyce  —  Moses  —  Trenholm — 
McGowan — Mullins — Ruffin — Judge  Magrath  re- 
signs— Military  Convention  in  Georgia — Votes  to  se- 
cede— Facilities  to  Disunion — Houston — Letcher — 
Magoffin — Conway— C.  F.  Jackson — Alex.  II.  Ste- 
phens— S.  C.  Convention — Ordinance  of  Secession 
immediately  and  unanimously  passed — (Georgia  fol- 
lows— so  do  Alabama,  Florida,  Mississippi,  Louis- 
iana, and  Texas— Arkansas,  North  Carolina,  Vir- 
ginia, Missouri,  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  Maryland  and 
Delaware,  refuse  to  do  likewise — The  Secessionists  a 
minority  in  the  Slave  States. 


14 


INDEX  BY  CHAPTERS. 


XXIII.  The  Press  and  People  of  the  North 

deprecate  Civil  War  351 

The  Tribune's  overture — The  Albany  Evening 
Journal's — The  Philadelphia  Meeting — Mayor 
Henry — Judge  Woodward — George  W.  Curtis 
suppressed. 

XXIV.  Attempts  at  'Conciliation1  in  Cong.  367 

Buchanan  and  Black  condemn  'coercion' — 
Mr.  Crittenden  and  his  Compromise — Mr.  Cor- 
win's  Committee  of  Thirty -one — Senator  Antho-„ 
ny's  proffer — C.  L.  Vallandigham's  project — The 
Corwin  Constitutional  Amendment  adopted  by 
either  House. 

XXY.  Peace  Democracy  at  the  North,  and 
the  Peace  Conference  at  Wash- 
ington 3S8 

,  The  Tweddle  Hall  Convention  at  Albany,  18C1 

— Seymour,  Thayer,  etc. — Peace  Conference  or 
Congress  at  Washington — Modified  Crittenden 
Compromise  adopted  thereby — Congress  non- 
concurs— Failure  to  compromise — Why. 

XXVI.  The  Union  versus  the  Confederacy.  .407 

Organization  of  the  Confederacy — Jefferson  Da- 
vis chosen  President,  and  Alex.  H.  Stephens 
Vice-President — Davis's  Inaugural — Stephens's 
'  corner-stone'  speech — Mr.  Lincoln's  journey  to 
Washington — Speeches — Inaugural. 

XXVII.  The  Pause  before  the  Shock  428 

The  two  Cabinets — Attempts  to  Negotiato  by 
Forsyth  and  Crawford — Repelled  by  Gov.  Sew- 
ard— Judge  Campbell's  Statement — Northern 
proposals  to  join  the  Confederacy — Society  for 
the  promotion  of  National  Unity. 

XXVIII.  Siege  and  Reduction  of  Ft.  Sumter  440 

Hesitation — Futile  Negotiations — Attempt  to 
provision — Order  to  open  fire — Bombardment 


need — Fire  returned — Interior  of  the  fort 
in  flames — Wigf'oll's  volunteer  embassy — Ander 
son  surrenders — Garrison  leaves  for  New  York — 
Dixie  jubilant 

XXIX.  The  Nation  called  to  arms — and 

responds  449 

Virginia  sends  Envoys  to  Washington — The 
President's  response  to  them — He  calls  for 
75,000  Militia — Comments  of  the  Press — Re- 
sponse of  the  Border  State  Governors — Balti- 
more in  a  ferment — Attack  on  the  6th  Massachu- 
setts— Do.  on  Pennsylvanians — The  Rebels  up- 
permost— Railroads  and  telegraphs  broken  up — 
Mayor  Brown  and  the  Young  Christians  visit 
Washington  to  demand  that  no  more  Northern 
troops  enter  Baltimore — Their  success — General 
Butler  lands  at  Annapolis  and  recovers  Mary- 
land— Her  traitorous  Legislature. 

XXX.  Secession  resumes  its  march  473 

Shameful  surrender  of  the  Norfolk  Navy  Yard — 
Secession  of  Virginia — Tennessee — North  Caro- 
lina— Arkansas — Missouri — Blair  and  Lyon  rally 
a  Union  force  at  St.  Louis — Kentucky. 

XXXI.  The  Opposing  Forces  in  conflict.  ..497 

Davis's  first  Message — Relative  strength  of  the 
North  and  the  South — European  opinion — 
Slavery  —  Cotton  —  Military  training  —  Army 
Officers— Northern  sympathy  with  'the^South' 
—The  heart  of  the  People  for  the  old  flag  and 
their  whole  country. ' 


XXXII.  West  Virginia  clings  to  the  Union  516 

Convention  called — State  organization  effected 
— McClellan  advances — Fight  at  Rich  Moun- 
tain—Rebel rout  aT.  Carrick's  Ford— Union  Re- 
pulse at  Scarytown — Surprise  at  Cross  Lanes — 
Carnifex  Ferry — Guyandotte— Romney — Alle- 
ghany Summit — Huntersville. 

XXXIII.  The  War  in  Old  Virginia  528 

Ft.  Monroe — Great  Bethel — Alexandria  occu- 
,  pied — Vienna — Patterson's  advance — His  flank 

movement  to  Charlestown — Johnston  rushes  to 
Manassas — Gen.  Sanford's  testimony — McDow- 
ell advances  to  Centerville — Blackburn's  Ford 
—Bull  Run— Union  defeat  and  flight— Causes 
thereof — Gen.  Scott's  plan — Criticised  by  Hon. 
F.  P.  Blair — Consequences  of  our  failure. 

XXXIV.  First  session  of  the  37th  Congress  553 

Organization  of  the  House — Mr.  Lincoln's  first 
Message — Various  propositions — Henry  May's 
visit  to  Richmond — Conservative  Republicans 
on  Slavery  and  the  Union — Mr.  Crittenden's 
resolve — Proposals  to  Compromise — Confisca- 
tion of  Slaves  used  to  promote  the  Rebellion — 
The  President's  acts  approved — Adjournment. 

XXXV.  Rebellion  and  War  in  Missouri. 572 

State  preparations  to  aid  the  Rebellion — Flight 
of  Jackson  from  Jefferson  City — Fight  at 
Boone ville — Camp  Cole — State  Convention — 
Jackson's  Proclamation  of  War — Dug  Springs 
—battle  of  Wilson's  Creek— Death  of  Lyon- 
Fremont  in  command — Letter  to  the  President 
— Proclaims  Martial  Law — Mulligan  besieged 
at  Lexington — Surrenders  —  Price  retreats — 
Fremont  pursues — Zagonyi's  Charge  at  Spring- 
field— Fremont  superseded — Halleck  in  com- 
mand— Battle  of  Belmont. 

XXXVI.  War  on  the  Seaboard  and  Ocean.  597 

The  Privateer  Savannah— The  Potrel— Fort 
Hatteras — Pensacola  and  Pickens — The  Sum- 
.  ter — Hollins's  Ram  exploit — Dupout  and  Sher- 
man's Expedition— Capture  of  Port  Royal — 
The  Trent  Case — Surrender  of  Mason  and  Sli- 
deil. 

XXXVII.  Kentucky  adheres  to  the  Union. 608 

Politicians — Elections — Overwhelming  Union 
majorities — Magoffin's  neutrality — The  Presi- 
dent's response — Rebel  Invasion — Legislature 
protests — Gen.  Grant  occupies  Paducab — Zol- 
lkoffer  at  Wild  Cat — Nelson  at  Piketon — 
Schoepfs  Retreat — Rebel  Government  organ- 
ized at  Russellville — Geo.  W.  Johnson  made 
Governor — Kentucky  gravely  admitted  into 
the  Southern  Confederacy — Full  delegation 
sent  to  the  Congress  at  Richmond — Richard 
Hawes  finally  declared  Governor. 

XXXVIII.  The  Potomac— Ball's  Bluff.  617 

Scott  a  failure— Gen.  McClellan  called  to 
Washington — Brings  Order  out  of  Chaos — 
Great  increase  of  our  Army — No  advance — 
Ball's  Bluff—  Dranesville— \A11  Quiet'— The 
Hutchinsons  expelled — Whittier'a  Lyric. 

Appended  Notes  631 

I.  The  Synod  of  Kentucky  and  Slavery.  II. 
New  School  Presbyterians  condemn  the  insti- 
tution. 111.  The  Albany  Evening  Journal  on 
Gov.  Seward  and  Judge  Campbell.  IV.  Jere. 
Clemens  on  Alabama  secession — the  Rebels 
feared  delay.  V.  The  confidence  of  the  Rebels 
— Russell  on  the  capture  of  Washington.  VL 
The  North  Carolina  Convention— an  error 
corrected. 

Analytical  Index  633 


ILLUSTEATIONS. 


PKESIDENT  AND  CABINET. 

1.  Abraham  Lincoln,  President  .    .  Frontispiece. 

2.  Hannibal  Hamlin,  Vice-President   " 

3.  William  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State   " 

4.  Salmon  P.  Chase,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury   " 

5.  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War   " 

6.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy   " 

7.  John  P.  Usher,  Secretary  of  the  Interior   " 

8.  Montgomery  Blair,  Postmaster-General   " 

9.  Edward  Bates,  Attorney-General   " 

10.  Simon  Cameron,  ex-Secretary  of  War   " 

11.  Caleb  B.  Smith,  ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior   " 


EMINENT  OPPONENTS  OF  THE  SLA  YE  POWER 


PAGE 

PAGE 

12.  John  Quincy  Adams  .  . 

.  112 

112 

13.  Benjamin  Lundy  .... 

ft 

19.  Joshua  R.  Giddings  .    .  . 

n 

14.  Henry  Ward  Beecher  .  . 

a 

20.  William  Lloyd  Garrison  . 

u. 

15.  Wendell  Phillips  .... 

a 

u 

16.  William  Cullen  Bryant  . 

u 

u 

17.  John  Greenleaf  Whittier 

a 

u 

CONFEDERATE  chieftains. 

,  336 

29.  John  B.  Floyd  

.  336 

25.  Alexander  H.  Stephens 

30.  R.  Barnwell  Rhett  .    .  . 

« 

26.  Judah  P.  Benjamin    .    .  . 

u 

31.  James  M.  Mason  .... 

a 

27.  Robert  Toombs  

u 

32.  John  Slidell  

u 

a 

33.  Isham  G.  Harris  .... 

a 

34.  Henry  A.  Wise    .    .    ...    .  336 


UNION  GENEKALS. 


35.  Lieut.-Gcn.  W'infield  Scott     .  448 

36.  Maj.-Gen.  John  E.  Wool     .    .  " 

37.  "     "     Henry  W.  Halleck  " 

38.  "     "     Geo.  B.  McClellan  " 

39.  "     "    Irwin  McDowell.    .  " 

40.  "     "    John  C.  Fremont     .  " 


41.  Maj.-Gen.  Don  Carlos  Buell  .  448 

42.  "     "    Joseph  Hooker    .    .  " 

43.  "     "    Ambrose  E.  Burnside  " 

44.  "     "     Benjamin  F.  Butler  " 

45.  "     "    David  Hunter.    .    .  " 

46.  Brig. -Gen.  Robert  Anderson  .  " 


16 


ILLUSTRATION  S— Continued. 


CONFEDERATE  GENTERALS. 


47.  General  Robert  E.  Lee    .    .  . 

48.  "     Joseph  E.  Johnston  . 

49.  "     Braxton  Bragg  .    .  . 

50.  Lt.-Gen.  P.  G.  T.  Beauregard 

51.  "     "    Thomas  J.  Jackson 

52.  "     "    James  Longstreet. 


PAGE 

528 


PAGE 

528 


53.  Lt.-Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton 

54.  "     "    Leonidas  Polk  .    .    .  " 

55.  Maj.-Gen.  Jno.  C.  Breckinridge  ** 

56.  "     "    Simon  B.  Buckner   .  " 

57.  "     "    Albert  Syd.  Johnston  " 

58.  " n  «    Sterling  Price    .    .  " 


TJNIOK  NATAL  OFFICERS. 


59.  Rear-Adm'l  Andrew  H.  Foote  608 


60. 

a 

U 

David  G.  Farragut 

u 

61. 

U 

it 

L.  M.  Goldsborough 

u 

62. 

a 

a 

Sam'l  FrDu  Pont  . 

u 

63. 

<  t 

u 

David  D.  Porter  . 

u 

64. 

u 

u 

John  A.  Dahlgren 

u 

65.  Commodore  Charles  Wilkes  .  608 

66.  "        Charles  H.  Davis  " 

67.  u        Henry  W.  Morris  " 

68.  Captain  James  H.  Ward     .    .  " 

69.  "      John  L.  Worden   .    .  " 

70.  "      Charles  S.  Boggs  .    .  " 


ILLUSTRATIONS— Continued. 


Texas  as  she  was,  and  as  she  claimed  to  be   160 

View  of  Harper's  Ferry  288 

View  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley  294 

Fort  Sumter    440 

The  Approaches  to  Charleston  445 

Norfolk,  Portsmouth,  and  the  Navy  Yard  474 

West  Virginia  ...517 

Ten  Miles  around  Fortress  Monroe  530 

Washington  City  and  Vicinity  532 

Bull  Run  Battle-Field  and  Centerville  540 

Missouri   .  573 

Battle-Field  of  Wilson's  Creek,  near  Springfield,  Mo  578 

Lexington  (Missouri)  defended  by  Mulligan  586 

Battle-Field  of  Belmont,  Missouri  595 

Hatteras  Inlet — Forts  Hatteras  and  Clark  599 

Sinking  of  the  Petrel  by  the  St.  Lawrence  600 

Fort  Pickens — Santa  Rosa  Island — Pensacola  601 

Hilton  Head — Reduction  of  Fort  Beauregard  604 

Battle-Field  of  Ball's  Bluff — Harrison  Island,  etc  620 

Battle-Field  of  Dranesville,  Virginia  624 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT, 


OTJE  COUNTRY 


The  United  States  of  America, 
whose  independence,  won  on  the 
battle-fields  of  the  Revolution,  was 
tardily  and  reluctantly  conceded  by 
Great  Britain  on  the  30th  of  Novem- 
ber, 178 2,  contained  at  that  time  a 
population  of  a  little  less  than  Three 
Millions,  of  whom  half  a  million 
were  slaves.  This  population  was 
mainly  settled  upon  and  around  the 
bays,  harbors,  and  inlets,  which  ir- 
regularly indent  the  western  shore  of 
the  Atlantic  Ocean,  for  a  distance 
of  about  a  thousand  miles,  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Penobscot  to  that  of  the 
Altamaha.  The  extent  of  the  settle- 
ments inland  from  the  coast  may  have 
averaged  a  hundred  miles,  although 
there  were  many  points  at  which  the 
primitive  forest  still  looked  off  upon 
the  broad  expanse  of  the  ocean. 
Nominally,  and  as  distinguished 
from  those  of  other  civilized  nations, 
the  territories  of  the  Confederation 
stretched  westward  to  the  Mississippi, 
and  northward,  as  now,  to  the  Great 
Lakes,  giving  a  total  area  of  a  little 
more  than  eight  hundred  thousand 
square  miles.  At  several  inviting 
localities,  the  "  clearings"  were  push- 


ed two  or  three  hundred  miles  west- 
ward, to  the  bases  and  more  fertile 
valleys  of  the  eastern  slope  of  the 
Alleghanies ;  and  there  were  three 
or  four  settlements  quite  beyond  that 
formidable  but  not  impassable  barrier, 
mainly  in  that  portion  of  Virginia 
which  is  now  the  State  of  Kentucky. 
But,  in  the  absence  of  steam,  of  ca- 
nals, and  even  of  tolerable  highways,, 
and  with  the  mouth  of  the  Missis- 
sippi held  and  sealed  by  a  jealous 
and  not  very  friendly  foreign  power,, 
the  fertile  valleys  of  the  Illinois,  the 
Wabash,  and  even  of  the  Ohio  itself, 
were  scarcely  habitable  for  civilized 
communities.  No  staple  that  their 
pioneer  population  would  be  likely, 
for  many  years,  to  produce,  could  be 
sold  on  the  sea-board  for  the  cost 
of  its  transportation,  even  from  the 
site  whereon  Cincinnati  has  since 
been  founded  and  built,  much  less 
from  that  of  Indianapolis  or  Chicago. 
The  delicate,  costly  fabrics  of  Europe, 
and  even  of  Asia,  could  be  trans- 
ferred to  the  newest  and  most  inland 
settlement  for  a  small  fraction  of  the 
price  at  which  they  would  there  be 
eagerly  bought ;  but  when  the  few 


18  THE  AMERICA 

coins  which  the  settlers  had  taken 
with  them  in  their  journey  of  emi- 
gration had  been  exhausted,  there 
was  nothing  left  wherewith  to  pay 
for  these  costly  luxuries ;  and  debt, 
embarrassment,  bankruptcy,  were  the 
inevitable  results.  A  people  clothed 
in  skins,  living  on  the  products  of  the 
chase  and  the  spontaneous  abund- 
ance of  nature,  might  maintain  ex- 
istence and  a  rude  social  organization 
amid  the  forests  and  on  the  prairies 
of  the  Great  Yalley  ;  any  other  must 
have  experienced  striking  alterna- 
tions of  factitious  prosperity  and  uni- 
versal distress  ;  seeing  its  villages  and 
commercial  depots  rise,  nourish,  and 
decay,  after  the  manner  of  Jonah's 
gourd,  and  its  rural  population  con- 
stantly hunted  by  debt  and  disaster 
to  new '  and  still  newer  locations. 
The  Great  "West  of  to-day  owes  its 
unequaled  growth  and  progress, 
its  population,  productiveness,  and 
wealth,  primarily,  to  the  framers  of 
the  Federal  Constitution,  by  which 
its  development  was  rendered  possi- 
ble ;  but  more  immediately  and  pal- 
pably to  the  sagacity  and  statesman- 
ship of  Jefferson,  the  purchaser  of 
Louisiana ;  to  the  genius  of  Fitch  and 
Fulton,  the  projector  and  achiever, 
respectively,  of  steam-navigation ;  to 
De  Witt  Clinton,  the  early,  unswerv- 
ing, and  successful  champion  of  artifi- 
cial inland  navigation ;  and  to  Henry 
Clay,  the  eminent,  eloquent,  and  effec- 
tive champion  of  the  diversification 
of  our  National  Industry  through  the 
Protection  of  Home  Manufactures. 

The  difficulties  which  surrounded 
the  infancy  and  impeded  the  growth 
of  the  thirteen  original  or  Atlantic 
States,  were  less  formidable,  but  kin- 
dred, and  not  less  real.  Our  fathers 
emerged  from  their  arduous,  protract- 


or CONFLICT. 

ed,  desolating  Revolutionary  strug- 
gle, rich,  indeed,  in  hope,  but  poor  in 
worldly  goods.  Their  country  had, 
for  seven  years,  been  traversed  and 
wasted  by  contending  armies,  almost 
from  end  to  end.  Cities  and  villages 
had  been  laid  in  ashes.  Habitations 
had  been  deserted  and  left  to  decay. 
Farms,  stripped  of  their  fences,  and 
deserted  by  their  owners,  had  for 
years  produced  only  weeds.  Camp 
fevers,  with  the  hardships  and  pri- 
vations of  war,  had  destroyed  many 
more  than  the  sword ;  and  all  alike 
had  been  subtracted  from  the  most 
effective  and  valuable  part  of  a  pop- 
ulation, always,  as  yet,  quite  inade- 
quate. Cripples  and  invalids,  melan- 
choly mementoes  of  the  yet  recent 
struggle,  abounded  in  every  village 
and  township.  Habits  of  industry 
had  been  unsettled  and  destroyed  by 
the  anxieties  and  uncertainties  of 
war.  The  gold  and  silver  of  ante- 
revolutionary  days  had  crossed  the 
ocean  in  exchange  for  arms  and 
munitions.  The  Continental  paper, 
which  for  a  time  more  than  supplied 
(in  volume)  its  place,  had  become 
utterly  worthless.  In  the  absence  of 
a  tariff,  which  the  Confederate  Con- 
gress lacked  power  to  impose,  our 
ports,  immediately  after  peace,  were 
glutted  with  foreign  luxuries — gew- 
gaws which  our  people  were  eager 
enough  to  buy,  but  for  which  they 
soon  found  themselves  utterly  unable 
to  pay.  They  were  almost  exclusively 
an  agricultural  people,  and  their 
products,  save  only  Tobacco  and  In- 
digo, were  not  wanted  by  the  Old 
World,  and  found  but  a  very  restrict- 
ed and  inconsiderable  market  even 
in  the  West  Indies,  whose  trade  was 
closely  monopolized  by  the  nations 
to  which  they  respectively  belonged. 


OUR  COUNTRY  AFTER  THE  REVOLUTION". 


19 


Indian  Corn  and  Potatoes,  the  two 
principal  edibles  for  which  the  poor 
of  the  Old  World  are  largely  indebt- 
ed to  America,  were  consnmed  to  a 
very  limited  extent,  and  not  at  all 
imported,  by  the  people  of  the  eastern 
hemisphere.  The  wheat-producing 
capacity  of  our  soil,  at  first  unsur- 
passed, was  soon  exhausted  by  the 
unskillful  and  thriftless  cultivation  of 
the  Eighteenth  Century.  Though 
one-third  of  the  labor  of  the  country 
was  probably  devoted  to  the  cutting 
of  timber,  the  axe-helve  was  but  a 
pudding-stick;  while  the  plow  was 
a  rude  structure  of  wood,  clumsily 
pointed  and  shielded  with  iron.  A 
thousand  bushels  of  corn  (maize)  are 
now  grown  on  our  western  prairies  at 
a  cost  of  fewer  days'  labor  than  were 
required  for  the  production  of  a  hun- 
dred in  New  York  or  New  England 
eighty  years  ago.  And,  though  the 
settlements  of  that  day  were  nearly 
all  within  a  hundred  miles  of  tide- 
water, the  cost  of  transporting  bulky 
staples,  for  even  that  distance,  over 
the  execrable  roads  that  then  existed, 
was  about  equal  to  the  present  charge 
for  transportation  from  Illinois  to 
New  York.  Industry  was  paralyzed 
by  the  absence  or  uncertainty  of  mar- 
kets. Idleness  tempted  to  dissipation, 
of  which  the  tumult  and  excitement 
of  civil  war  had  long  been  the  school. 
Unquestionably,  the  moral  condition 
of  our  people  had  sadly  deteriorated 
through  the  course  of  the  Revolution. 
Intemperance  had  extended  its  rav- 
ages ;  profanity  and  licentiousness 
had  overspread  the  land ;  a  coarse 
and  scoffing  infidelity  had  become 

1  "  That  spirit  of  freedom,  which,  at  the  com- 
mencement of  this  contest,  would  have  gladly 
sacrificed  every  thing  to  the  attainment  of  its 
object,  has  long  since  subsided,  and  every  self- 
ish passion  has  taken  its  place.    It  is  not  the 


fashionable,  even  in  high  quarters ; 
and  the  letters  of  Washington1  and 
his  compatriots  bear  testimony  to  the 
wide-spread  prevalence  of  venality 
and  corruption,  even  while  the  great 
issue  of  independence  or  subjugation 
was  still  undecided. 

The  return  of  peace,  though  it 
arrested  the  calamities,  the  miseries, 
and  the  desolations  of  war,  was  far 
from  ushering  in  that  halcyon  state 
of  universal  prosperity  and  happiness 
which  had  been  fondly  and  sanguine- 
ly  anticipated.  Thousands  were  sud- 
denly deprived  by  it  of  their  ac- 
customed employment  and  means  of 
subsistence,  and  were  unable  at  once 
to  replace  them.  Those  accepted 
though  precarious  avenues  to  fame 
and  fortune,  in  which  they  had  found 
at  least  competence,  were  instantly 
closed,  and  no  new  ones  seemed  to 
open  before  them.  In  the  absence 
of  aught  that  could,  with  justice,  be 
termed  a  currency,  Trade  and  Busi- 
ness were  even  more  depressed  than 
Industry.  Commerce  and  Navigation, 
unfettered  by  legislative  restriction, 
ought  to  have  been,  or  ought  soon  to 
have  become,  most  flourishing,  if  the 
dicta  of  the  world's  accepted  political 
economists  had  been  sound  ;  but  the 
facts  were  deplorably  at  variance  with 
their  inculcations.  Trade,  emanci- 
pated from  the  vexatious  trammels 
of  the  custom-house  marker  and 
gauger,  fell  tangled  and  prostrate 
in  the  toils  of  the  usurer  and  the 
sheriff.  The  common  people,  writh- 
ing under  the  intolerable  pressure  of 
debt,  for  which  no  means  of  payment 
existed,  were  continually  prompting 

public,  but  private  interest,  which  influences  the 
generality  of  mankind,  nor  can  the  Americans 
any  longer  boast  of  an  exception." — Washing- 
ton's Letter  to  Henry  Laurens,  July  10  (1782). 
"  Shoddy,"  it  seems,  dates  away  back  of  1861. 


20 


THE  AMEKICAN  CONFLICT. 


their  legislators  to  authorize  and  di- 
rect those  baseless  issues  of  irredeem- 
able paper  money,  by  which  a  tem- 
porary relief  is  achieved,  at  the  cost 
of  more  pervading  and  less  curable 
disorders.  In  the  year  1786,  the 
legislature  of  New  Hampshire,  then 
sitting  at  Exeter,  was  surrounded,  evi- 
dently by  preconcert,  by  a  gathering 
of  angry  and  desperate  men,  iatent 
on  overawing  it  into  an  authorization 
of  such  an  issue.  In  1786,  the  famous 
Shays's  Insurrection  occurred  in  west- 
ern Massachusetts,  wherein  fifteen 
hundred  men,  stung  to  madness  by 
the  snow-shower  of  writs  to  which 
they  could  not  respond,  and  execu- 
tions which  they  had  no  means  of 
satisfying,  undertook  to  relieve  them- 
selves from  intolerable  infestation, 
and  save  their  families  from  being 
turned  into  the  highways,  by  dis- 
persing the  courts  and  arresting  the 
enforcement  of  legal  process  alto- 
gether. That  the  sea-board  cities, 
depending  entirely  on  foreign  com- 
merce, neither  manufacturing  them- 
selves, nor  having  any  other  than 
foreign  fabrics  to  dispose  of,  should 
participate  in  the  general  suffering, 
and  earnestly  scan  the  political  and 
social  horizon  in  quest  of  sources  and 
conditions  of  comprehensive  and  en- 
during relief,  was  inevitable.  And 
thus  industrial  paralysis,  commercial 
embarrassment,  and  political  disorder, 
combined  to  overbear  inveterate  pre- 
judice, sectional  jealousy,  and  the 
ambition  of  local  magnates,  in  cre- 
ating that  more  perfect  Union,  where- 
of the  foundations  were  laid  and  the 
pillars  erected  by  "Washington,  Ham- 
ilton, Franklin,  Madison,  and  their 
compeers,  in  the  Convention  which 
framed  the  Federal  Constitution. 
Yet  it  would  not  be  just  to  close 


this  hasty  and  casual  glance  at  our 
country,  under  the  old  federation, 
without  noting  some  features  which 
tend  to  relieve  the  darkness  of  the 
picture.  The  abundance  and  excel- 
lence of  the  timber,  which  still  cover- 
ed at  least  two-thirds  of  the  area  of 
the  then  States,  enabled  the  common 
people  to  supply  themselves  with 
habitations,  which,  however  rude  and 
uncomely,  were  more  substantial  and 
comfortable  than  those  possessed  by 
the  masses  of  any  other  country  on 
earth.  The  luxuriant  and  omnipres- 
ent forests  were  likewise  the  sources 
of  cheap  and  ample  supplies  of  fuel, 
whereby  the  severity  of  our  northern 
winters  was  mitigated,  and  the  warm, 
bright  fireside  of  even  the  humblest 
family,  in  the  long  winter  evenings 
of  our  latitude,  rendered  centers  of 
cheer  and  enjoyment.  Social  inter- 
course was  more  general,  less  formal, 
more  hearty,  more  valued,  than  at 
present.  Friendships  were  warmer 
and  deeper.  Relationship,  by  blood 
or  by  marriage,  was  more  profoundly 
regarded.  Men  were  not  ashamed 
to  own  that  they  loved  their  cousins 
better  than  their  other  neighbors, 
and  their  neighbors  better  than 
the  rest*  of  mankind.  To  spend  a 
month,  in  the  dead  of  winter,  in  a 
visit  to  the  dear  old  homestead,  and 
in  interchanges  of  affectionate  greet- 
ings with  brothers  and  sisters,  mar- 
ried  and  settled  at  distances  of 
twenty  to  fifty  miles  apart,  was  not 
deemed  an  absolute  waste  of  time, 
nor  even  an  experiment  on  fraternal 
civility  and  hospitality.  And,  though 
cultivation  was  far  less  effective  than 
now,  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  food 
was  scanty  or  hunger  predominant. 
The  woods  were  alive  with  game, 
and  nearly  every  boy  and  man  be- 


OUR  COUNTRY  AFTE 


R  THE  REVOLUTION. 


21 


tween  fifteen  and  sixty  years  of  age 
was  a  hunter.  The  larger  and  smaller 
rivers,  as  yet  unobstructed  by  the 
dams  and  wheels  of  the  cotton-spin- 
ner and  power-loom  weaver,  abound- 
ed in  excellent  fish,  and  at  seasons 
fairly  swarmed  with  them.  The 
potato,  usually  planted  in  the  vege- 
table mold  left  by  recently  extermi- 
nated forests,  yielded  its  edible  tubers 
with  a  bounteous  profusion  unknown 
to  the  husbandry  of  our  day.  Hills 
the  most  granitic  and  apparently 
sterile,  from  which  the  wood  was 
burned  one  season,  would,  the  next 
year,  produce  any  grain  in  ample 
measure,  and  at  a  moderate  cost  of 
labor  and  care.  Almost  every  farm- 
er's house  was  a  hive,  wherein  the 
'  great  wheel'  and  the  '  little  wheel' 
— the  former  kept  in  motion  by  the 
hands  and  feet  of  all  the  daughters 
ten  years  old  and  upward,  the  latter 
plied  by  their  not  less  industrious 
mother — hummed  and  whirled  from 
morning  till  night.  In  the  back 
room,  or  some  convenient  appendage, 
the  loom  responded  day  by  day  to 
the  movements  of  the  busy  shuttle, 
whereby  the  fleeces  of  the  farmer's 
flock  and  the  flax  of  his  field  were 
slowly  but  steadily  converted  into 
substantial  though  homely  cloth, 
sufficient  for  the  annual  wear  of  the 
family,  and  often  with  something 
over  to  exchange  at  the  neighboring 

2 "  Vagabonds,  without  visible  property  or 
vocation,  are  placed  in  workhouses,  where  they 
are  well  clothed,  fed,  lodged,  and  made  to  labor. 
Nearly  the  same  method  of  providing  for  the 
poor  prevails  through  all  the  States  ;  and,  from 
Savannah  to  Portsmouth,  you  will  seldom  meet 
a  beggar.  In  the  larger  towns,  indeed,  they 
sometimes  present  themselves.  These  are 
usually  foreigners  who  have  never  obtained  a 
settlement  in  any  parish.  I  never  saw  a  native 
American  begging  in  the  streets  or  highways. 
A  subsistence  is  easily  gained  here :  and  if,  by 
misfortunes,  they  are  thrown  on  the  charities  of 
the  world,  those  provided  by  their  own  country 


merchant's  for  his  groceries  and 
wares.  A  few  bushels  of  corn,  a  few 
sheep,  a  fattened  steer,  with,  perhaps, 
a  few  saw-logs,  or  loads  of  hoop-poles, 
made  up  the  annual  surplus  of  the 
husbandman's  products,  helping  to 
square  accounts  with  the  blacksmith, 
the  wheelwright,  the  minister,  and 
the  lawyer,  if  the  farmer  were  so  un- 
fortunate as  to  have  any  dealings 
with  the  latter  personage.  His  life, 
during  peace,  was  passed  in  a  nar- 
rower round  than  ours,  and  may  well 
seem  to  us  tame,  limited,  monot- 
onous; but  the  sun  which  warmed 
him  was  identical  with  ours ;  the 
breezes  which  refreshed  him  were 
like  those  we  gladly  welcome ;  and, 
while  his  road  to  mill  and  to  meeting 
was  longer  and  rougher  than  those 
we  daily  traverse,  he  doubtless  passed 
them  unvexed  by  apprehensions  of  a 
snorting  locomotive,  at  least  as  con- 
tented as  we,  and  with  small  suspi- 
cion of  his  ill-fortune  in  having  been 
born  in  the  Eighteenth  instead  of  the 
Nineteenth  Century.2 

The  illusion  that  the  times  that 
were  are  better  than  those  that  are, 
has  probably  pervaded  all  ages.  Yet 
a  passionately  earnest  assertion,  which 
many  of  us  have  heard  from  the  lips 
of  the  old  men  of  thirty  to  fifty  years 
ago,  that  the  days  of  their  youth 
were  sweeter  and  happier  than  those 
we  have  known,  will  doubtless  justify 

are  so  comfortable  and  so  certain,  that  they 
never  think  of  relinquishing  them  to  become 
strolling  beggars.  Their  situation,  too,  when 
sick,  in  the  family  of  a  good  farmer,  where  every 
member  is  anxious  to  do  them  kind  offices,  where 
they  are  visited  by  all  the  neighbors,  who  bring 
them  little  rarities  which  their  sickly  appetites 
may  cra  ve,  and  who  take  by  rotation  the  nightly 
watch  over  them,  when  their  condition  requires 
it,  is,  without  comparison,  better  than  in  a  general 
hospital,  where  the  sick,  the  dying,  and  the  dead, 
are  crammed  together  in  the  same  rooms,  and 
often  in  the  same  beds." — Jefferson's  Notes  on 
Virginia,  p.  196. 


22 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


118  in  believing  that  they  were  by  no 
means  intolerable.  It  is  not  too 
much  to  assume  that  the  men  by 
whose  valor  and  virtue  American  in- 
dependence was  achieved,  and  who 
lived  to  enjoy,  for  half  a  century 
thereafter,  the  gratitude  of  their 
country,  and  the  honest  pride  of  their 
children,  saw  wealth  as  fairly  dis- 
tributed, and  the  labor  of  freemen 
as  adequately  rewarded,  as  those  of 
almost  any  other  country  or  of  any 
previous  generation. 

Eighty  years  had  not  passed  since 
the  acknowledgment  of  our  inde- 
pendence, when  the  returns  of  the 
Eighth  Decennial  Census  afforded  us 
the  means  of  measuring  our  coun- 
try's growth  and  physical  progress 
during  nearly  its  whole  national  his- 
tory. The  retrospect  and  the  pros- 
pect might  well  minister  to  the  pride 
(though  that  were  needless)  of  a  pa- 
triotic apostle  of  '  manifest  destiny.' 
During  those  eighty  years,  or  within 
the  memory  of  many  still  living,  the 
area  of  our  country  had  been  ex- 
panded, by  successive  and,  in  good 
part,  peaceful  acquisitions,  from 
Eight  Hundred  Thousand  to  about 
Three  Millions  of  square  miles.  Its 
population,  excluding  the  Aboriginal 
savages,  had  increased  from  Three  to 
more  than  Thirty  Millions.  Of  its 
two  thousand  millions  of  acres  of  dry 
land,  about  five  hundred  millions  had 
been  divided  into  farms;  leaving 
three-fourths  of  its  surface  as  yet  un- 
improved, though  but  in  part  unap- 
propriated. Its  farms  were  officially 
estimated  as  worth  six  thousand  six 
hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars, 
and  were  doubtless  actually  worth 
not  less  than  Ten  Thousand  Millions 
of  dollars.  On  these  farms  were  over 
eleven  hundred  millions'  worth  of 


live  stock,  and  nearly  two  hundred 
and  fifty  millions'  worth  of  imple- 
ments and  machinery.  The  value  of 
animals  annually  slaughtered  was  re- 
turned at  over  two  hundred  millions 
of  dollars.  The  annual  product  of 
Wheat  was  more  than  one  hundred 
and  seventy  millions  of  bushels,  with 
an  equal  quantity  of  Oats,  and  more 
than  eight  hundred  millions  of  bush- 
els of  Indian  Corn.  Of  Tobacco,  our 
annual  product  was  more  than  four 
hundred  millions  of  pounds;  and  of 
Rice,  nearly  two  millions.  Of  Wool, 
our  annual  clip  was  over  sixty  mil- 
lions of  pounds,  and  our  consumption 
probably  double  that  amount.  Of 
ginned  Cotton,  ready  for  market,  our 
product  was  about  one  million  of 
tuns,  or  more  than  Five  Millions  of 
bales  of  four  hundred  pounds  each. 
Four  hundred  and  sixty  millions  of 
I  pounds  of  Butter,  and  one  hundred 
and  five  millions  of  pounds  of  Cheese, 
!  were  likewise  returned  as  our  aggre- 
gate product  for  the  year  1859.  We 
made  in  that  year  three  hundred  and 
forty  millions  of  pounds  of  Sugar, 
and  more  than  twenty-five  millions 
of  gallons  of  Molasses.  And,  beside 
consuming  all  this,  with  twenty-five 
millions  of  pounds  of  home-made 
Honey,  we  imported  from  abroad  to 
the  value  of  over  thirty-six  millions 
of  dollars.  We  dragged  from  our 
forests,  not  including  fuel,  Timber 
valued  at  more  than  Ninety-three 
Millions  of  dollars.  We  made  Flour 
to  the  value  of  Two  Hundred  Mil- 
lions. We  manufactured  over  fifty- 
five  millions'  worth  of  Cotton  into 
fabrics,  worth  one  hundred  and 
fifteen  millions  of  dollars,  beside  im- 
porting largely  from  abroad.  We 
fabricated  over  eighty  millions  of 
pounds  of  Wool,  costing  forty  mil- 


OUR  COUNTRY  IN"  1  8  59-60. 


23 


lions  of  dollars,  into  sixty-eight  mil- 
lions' worth  of  goods,  though  import- 
ing nearly  all  our  finer  woolen 
fabrics.  We  produced  sixty-three 
millions'  worth  of  Leather;  eight 
hundred  and  seventy-five  thousand 
tuns  of  Pig  Iron,  worth  twenty  mil- 
lions of  dollars ;  four  hundred  thou- 
sand tuns  of  Wrought  Iron,  worth 
twenty-one  millions ;  and  Agricul- 
tural Implements  to  the  value  of 
seventeen  millions.  The  grand 
total  of  Manufactures,  returned  by 
this  Census,  amounted  in  value  to 
One  Thousand  Nine  Hundred  Mil- 
lions— an  increase  of  forty-five  per 
cent,  within  ten  years.  Our  Exports, 
for  the  year  ending  in  1860,  amounted 
to  a  little  more  than  Four  Hundred 
Millions  of  dollars,  whereof  all  but 
Twenty-seven  Millions  were  of  do- 
mestic production.  Our  Imports 
were  a  little  over  Three  Hundred 
and  Sixty  Millions.  Of  Gold  and 
Silver,  we  exported,  in  that  year, 
nearly  fifty-seven  millions  of  dollars, 
and  imported  about  eight  millions 
and  a  half ;  indicating  that  ours  had 
become  one  of  the  great  gold-pro- 
ducing countries  on  earth,  if  not  the 
very  greatest.  The  number  of  ocean 
voyages  terminating  in  our  ports 
during  the  year  ending  June  30, 
1861,  was  Twenty-two  Thousand,  less 
forty;  their  aggregate  tunnage  a 
little  more  than  seven  millions  two 
hundred  and  forty  thousand — more 
than  two-thirds  of  it  American. 
About  fifty  thousand  churches,  with 
forty  thousand  clergymen  ;  two  hun- 
dred and  thirty-nine  Colleges,  having 
one  thousand  six  hundred  and  seven- 
ty-eight teachers  and  twenty-seven 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty- 
one  pupils ;  six  thousand  and  eighty- 
five  Academies  and  Private  Schools, 


with  twelve  thousand  two  hundred 
and  sixty  teachers  and  two  hundred 
and  sixty-three  thousand  and  ninety- 
six  pupils;  eighty  thousand  nine 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  Common 
Schools,  with  three  millions  three 
hundred  and  fifty-four  thousand  and 
eleven  pupils;  three  hundred  and 
eighty-six  Daily  Newspapers,  circulat- 
ing in  the  aggregate  one  million  four 
hundred  and  seventy-eight  thousand 
four  hundred  and  thirty-five  copies ; 
one  hundred  and  forty-six  Tri- 
Weekly  and  Semi- Weekly,  and  three 
thousand  one  hundred  and  fifty-three 
Weekly  journals,  circulating  seven 
millions  five  hundred  and  sixty-four 
thousand  three  hundred  and  four- 
teen copies ;  with  nineteen  Quarter- 
lies, five  hundred  and  twenty-one 
Literary,  and  two  hundred  and  seven- 
ty-one Religious  periodicals,  mainly 
issued  weekly,  sufficiently  attest  that 
our  progress  had  not  been  purely 
physical,  but  intellectual  and  moral 
as  well. 

The  temptation  to  increase  these 
citations  from  the  Census  is  one  hard 
to  resist.  Yet  any  multiplication  of 
details  would  tend  rather  to  confuse 
than  to  deepen  their  impression  on 
the  mind  of  the  general  reader.  Let 
it  suffice,  then,  in  conclusion,  that  the 
Real  and  Personal  Estate  of  our 
people,  which  in  1850  was  returned 
as  of  the  aggregate  value  of  a  little 
over  Seven  Thousand  Millions  of 
dollars,  was,  in  1860,  returned  as 
worth  over  Sixteen  Thousand  Mil- 
lions— an  increase  in  ten  years  of 
more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
five  per  cent.  It  is  quite  probable 
that  both  these  aggregates  are  largely 
under  the  truth;  but,  conceding 
their  accuracy,  it  is  perfectly  safe 
to  assume  that  Fifteen  of  the  Six- 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


24 

teen  Thousand  Millions  of  property 
returned  in  1860  had  been  created 
and  added  to  the  wealth  of  the 


world  by  the  industry,  enterprise, 
and  thrift  of  our  people  during  the 
eighty  preceding  years. 


n. 

SLAYEEY  BEFORE   THE  REVOLUTION. 


Yice,  whether  individual  or  gene- 
ral, is  ever  conceived  in  darkness  and 
cradled  in  obscurity.  It  challenges 
observation  only  in  its  hardy  matu- 
rity and  conscious  strength.  Slavery 
is  older  than  Civilization — older  than 
History.  Its  origin  is  commonly  re- 
ferred to  war — to  the  captivity  of  the 
vanquished,  and  to  the  thrift  and 
clemency  of  the  victor,  who  learns 
by  experience  that  the  gratification 
of,  killing  his  prisoner  is  transient, 
while  the  profit  of  sparing  him  for 
servitude  is  enduring ;  and  thus,  in 
rude  ages,  not  merely  the  vanquished 
warriors,  but  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, their  dependents  and  subjects, 
were  accounted  legitimate  "spoils 
of  victory,"  along  with  the  land-, 
houses,  flocks  and  herds,  the  goods 
and  chattels  of  the  conquered  people. 
"  Woe  to  the  conquered !"  is  the  pri- 
mary rule  of  savage  and  of  barbarian 
warfare ;  and  the  captivity  of  the 
Jews  in  Babylon,  the  destruction  by 
Rome  of  Capua,  of  Carthage,  and  of 
other  cities  and  peoples  which  had 
provoked  her  special  enmity,  prove 
that  nations  which  regarded  them- 
selves as  far  advanced  in  civilization, 
were  hardly  more  merciful  than  sav- 
ages, when  maddened  by  fear  and 
hate.  War  wastes  and  devastates. 
The  earth,  plowed  however  deeply 
with  cannon-wheels,  yields  uncertain 


harvests;  yet  armies  and  their  de- 
pendents must  be  fed.  Rapacity,  as 
well  as  destruction,  seems  almost  in- 
separable from  war.  The  soldier, 
impelled  to  destroy  for  his  chiefs,  or 
his  country's  sake,  soon  learns  to  save 
and  appropriate  for  his  own.  The 
natural  and  necessary  distinction  be- 
tween 'mine'  and  'thine'  becomes 
in  his  mind  confused,  if  not  obliter- 
ated. The  right  of  every  one  to  the 
product  of  his  own  labor  is  one  which 
his  vocation  incites,  and  even  com- 
pels, him  to  disregard.  To  enslave 
those  whom,  whether  combatants  or 
otherwise,  he  might  justifiably  kill, 
appears  to  him  rather  an  act  of  hu- 
manity than  of  injustice  and  wrong. 
Hence,  the  warlike,  conquering, 
dominating  races  of  antiquity  almost 
universally  rejoiced,  when  at  their 
acme  of  power  and  greatness,  in  the 
possession  of  innumerable  slaves. 

Slavery  of  a  mild  and  gentle 
type  may  very  well  have  grown  up 
insensibly,  even  in  the  absence  of 
war.  The  patriarch  has  shelter  and 
food,  with  employment  for  various 
capacities ;  and  his  stronghold,  if  he 
be  stationary,  or  his  tents,  if  he  be 
nomadic,  become  the  refuge  of  the 
unfortunate  and  the  destitute  from 
the  region  around  him.  The  aban- 
doned wife,  the  unwedded  mother, 
the  crippled  or  infirm  of  either  sex, 


SLAVERY  AMONG 


THE  ANCIENTS. 


25 


the  tender  orphan,  and  the  out-worn, 
seedj  prodigal,  betake  themselves  to 
his  lodge,  and  humbly  solicit  his  per- 
mission to  earn  bread  and  shelter  by 
tending  his  flocks  and  herds,  or  by 
any  other  service  to  which  their  ca- 
pacities are  adequate.  Some  are  ac- 
cepted from  motives  of  thrift ;  others 
under  the  impulse  of  charity ;  and 
the  greater  portion  of  either  class, 
exulting  in  their  escape  from  hunger, 
cold,  and  nakedness,  gladly  remain 
through  life.  Marriages  are  formed 
among  them  and  children  are  born, 
who  grow  up  adepts  in  the  labor  the 
patriarch  requires  of  them,  contented 
with  their  station,  and  ignorant  of 
the  world  outside  of  his  posses- 
sions. If  his  circumstances  require 
a  military  force,  he  organizes  it  of 
Servants  born  in  his  household.' 
His  possessions  steadily  increase,  and 
he  becomes  in  time  a  feudal  chieftain, 
ruling  over  vassals  proud  of  his  emi- 
nence and  docile  to  his  will.  Thus 
it  has  been  justly  remarked  that  the 
condition  of  Slavery  has  ever  preceded 
the  laws  by  which  it  is  ultimately 
regulated;  and  it  is  not  without 
plausibility  that  its  champions  have 
contended  for  it  as  a  natural  form  of 
society — a  normal  development  of 
the  necessary  association  of  Capital 
with  Labor  in  Man's  progress  from 
rude  ignorance  and  want  to  abund- 
ance, refinement,  and  luxury. 

But  Slavery,  primarily  considered, 
has  still  another  aspect — that  of  a 
natural  relation  of  simplicity  to  cun- 
ning, of  ignorance  to  knowledge,  of 
weakness  to  power.  Thomas  Car- 
lyle,1  before  his  melancholy  decline 
and  fall  in^o  devil-worship,  truly  ob- 
served, that  the  capital  mistake  of 
Rob  Roy  was  his  failure  to  compre- 


hend that  it  was  cheaper  to  buy  the 
beef  he  required  in  the  grass-market 
at  Glasgow  than  to  obtain  it  with- 
out price,  by  harrying  the  lowland 
farms.  So  the  first  man  who  ever 
imbibed  or  conceived  the  fatal  delu- 
sion that  it  was  more  advantageous 
to  him,  or  to  any  human  being,  to 
procure  whatever  his  necessities  or 
his  appetites  required  by  address  and 
scheming  than  by  honest  work — by 
the  unrequited  rather  than  the  fairly 
and  faithfully  recompensed  toil  of  his 
fellow-creatures — was,  in  essence  and 
in  he'art,  a  slaveholder,  and  only 
awaited  opportunity  to  become  one 
in  deed  and  practice.  And  this  sin- 
gle truth,  operating  upon  the  infinite 
varieties  of  human  capacity  and  cul- 
ture, suffices  to  account  for  the  uni- 
versality of  slaveholding  in  the  ante- 
Christian  ages,  for  its  tenacity  of  life, 
and  for  the  extreme  difficulty  of 
even  its  partial  eradication.  The  an- 
cients, while  they  apprehended,  per- 
haps adequately,  the  bitterness  of 
bondage,  which  many  of  them  had 
experienced,  do  not  seem  to  have 
perceived  so  vividly  the  correspond- 
ing evils  of  slaveholding.  They  saw 
that  end  of  the  chain  which  encircled 
the  ankle  of  the  bondman ;  they  do 
not  seem  to  have  so  clearly  perceived 
that  the  other  lay  heavily  across  the 
throat  of  even  his  sleeping  master. 
Homer — if  we  may  take  Pope's  word 
for  it — observed  that 

"Jove  fixed  it  certain,  that  whatever  day- 
Makes  man  a  slave,  takes  half  his  worth  away;" 

but  that  the  slaveholding  relation  ef- 
fected an  equal  discount  on  the  value 
of  the  master  appears  to  have  escaped 
him.  It  is  none  the  less  true,  how- 
ever, that  ancient  civilization,  in  its 


In  a  letter  on  Copyright. 


26 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


various  national  developments,  was 
habitually  corrupted,  debauched, 
and  ultimately  ruined,  by  Slavery, 
which  rendered  labor  dishonorable, 
and  divided  society  horizontally  into 
a  small  caste  of  the  wealthy,  edu- 
cated, refined,  and  independent,  and 
a  vast  hungry,  sensual,  thriftless,  and 
worthless  populace  ;  rendered  impos- 
sible the  preservation  of  republican 
liberty  and  of  legalized  equality,  even 
among  the  nominally  free.  Dioge- 
nes, with  his  lantern,  might  have 
vainly  looked,  through  many  a  long 
day,  among  the  followers  of  Marius, 
or  Catiline,  or  Caesar,  for  a  speci- 
men of  the  poor  but  virtuous  and 
self-respecting  Roman  citizen  of 
the  days  of  Cincinnatus,  or  even  of 
Regulus. 

The  Slavery  of  antiquity  survived 
the  religions,  the  ideas,  the  polities, 
and  even  the  empires,  in  which  it  had 
its  origin.  It  should  have  been  abol- 
ished, with  gladiatorial  combats  and 
other  moral  abominations,  on  the 
accession  of  Christianity  to  recog- 
nized supremacy  over  the  Roman 
world;  but  the  simple  and  sublime 
doctrine  of  Jesus  and  his  disciples,  of 
Paul  and  the  Apostles,  had  ere  this 
been  grievously  corrupted  and  per- 
verted. The  subtleties  of  Greek 
speculation,  the  pomp  and  pride  of  im- 
perial Rome,  had  already  commenced 
drawing  the  Church  insensibly  fur- 
ther and  further  away  from  its  divine 
source.  A  robed  and  mitered  eccle- 
siasticism,  treacherous  to  humanity 
and  truckling  to  power,  had  usurped 
the  place  of  that  austere,  intrepid 
spirit  which  openly  rebuked  the  guilt 
of  regal,  voluptuous  Herod,  and  made 

2  "In  the  year  990,  Moorish  merchants  from 
the  Barbary  coast  first  reached  the  cities  of  Ni- 
gritia,  and  established  an  uninterrupted  ex- 
change of  Saracen  and  European  luxuries  for 


courtly  Felix  tremble.  The  prelates 
of  the  lately  persecuted  Church  were 
the  favored  companions  and  coun- 
selors— too  often,  alas !  the  courtiers 
also — of  Emperors  and  Caesars ;  but 
they  seldom  improved  or  risked  their 
great  opportunity  to  demand  obe- 
dience, in  all  cases,  to  the  dictates  of 
the  Golden  Rule.  The  Church  had 
become  an  estate  above  the  people ; 
and  their  just  complaints  of  the  op- 
pressions and  inhumanities  of  the 
powerful  were  not  often  breathed 
into  its  reluctant  ears.  White  Sla- 
very gradually  wore  out,  or  faded 
out;  but  it  was  not  grappled 
with  and  crushed  as  it  should  have 
been.  The  Dark  Ages,  justly  so 
called,  are  still  quite  dark  enough ; 
but  sufficient  light  has  been  shed 
upon  them  to  assure  us  that  the 
accord  of  priest  and  noble  was  com- 
plete, and  that  serf  and  peasant 
groaned  and  suffered  beneath  their 
iron  sway. 

The  invention  of  Printing,  the  dis- 
covery of  America,  the  Protestant 
Reformation,  the  decline  and  fall  of 
Feudalism,  gradually  changed  the 
condition  and  brightened  the  pros- 
pect of  the  masses.  Ancient  Slavery 
was  dead  ;  modern  Serfdom  was  sub- 
stantially confined  to  cold  and  bar- 
barous Russia ;  but  African  Slavery 
— the  slavery  of  heathen  negroes — 
had  been  revived,  or  reintroduced,  on 
the  northern  coast  of  the  Mediterra- 
nean, by  Moorish  traders,  about  the 
Tenth  Century,  and  began  to  make 
its  way  among  Spanish  and  Portu- 
guese Christians  somewhere  near  the 
middle  of  the  Fifteenth.2 

The  great  name  of  Columbus  is 

the  gold  and  slaves  of  Central  Africa." — Ban- 
croft's History  of  the  United  States,  voL  i.,  p. 
165. 

"  The  Portuguese  are  next  in  the  market.  Ab- 


ORIGIN  OF  NEGRO  SL 


AYERY  IN  AMERICA. 


27 


indeliblj  soiled  and  stained  by  his 
undeniable  and  conspicuous  implica- 
tion in  the  enslavement  of  the  Abori- 
gines of  this  continent,  so  improperly 
termed  Indians.  Within  two  years 
after  his  great  discovery,  before  he 
had  set  foot  on  the  continent,  he  was 
concerned  in  seizing  some  scores  of 
natives,  carrying  them  to  Spain,  and 
selling  them  there  as  slaves.3  His 
example  was  extensively  followed. 
The  fierce  lust  for  gold,  which  in- 
flamed the  early  adventurers  on  his 
track,  incited  the  most  reckless, 
shameless  disregard  of  the  rights  and 
happiness  of  a  harmless  and  guileless 
people,  whose  very  helplessness  should 
have  been  their  defense.4  Forced  to 
hunt  incessantly  for  gold,  and  to 
minister  in  every  way  to  the  imperi- 
ous appetites  of  their  stranger  tyrants, 
they  found  in  speedy  death  their  only 
relief  from  intolerable  suffering.  In 
a  few  years,  but  a  miserable  remnant 
remained.  And  now  the  western 
coast  of  Africa  was  thrown  open  to 
replace  them  by  a  race  more  indura- 
ted to  hardship,  toil,  and  suffering.5 

tonio  Gonzales,  who  had  brought  some  Moorish 
slaves  into  Portugal,  -was  commanded  to  release 
them.  He  did  so ;  and  the  Moors  gave  him,  as 
their  ransom,  not  gold,  but  black  Moors  with 
curled  hair.  Thus  negro  slaves  came  into  Eu- 
rope." 

"In  1444,  Spain  also  took  part  in  the  traffic. 
The  historian  of  her  maritime  discoveries  even 
claims  for  her  the  unenviable  distinction  of  hav- 
ing anticipated  the  Portuguese  in  introducing 
negroes  into  Europe." — Ibid.,  p.  166. 

3  u  Columbus  himself  did  not  escape  the  stain. 
Enslaving  five  hundred  native  Americans,  he 
sent  them  to  Spain,  that  they  might  be  publicly 
sold  at  Seville."— ibid. 

4  "In  1500,  the  generous  Isabella  commanded 
the  liberation  of  the  Indians  held  in  bondage  in 
her  European  possessions.  Yet  her  native 
benevolence  extended  not  to  the  Moors,  whose 
valor  had  been  punished  by  slavery,  nor  to  the 
Africans ;  and  even  her  compassion  for  the  New 
World  was  but  a  transient  feeling,  which  relieves 
the  miserable  who  are  in  sight,  not  the  delibera- 
tion of  a  just  principle." — Bancroft's  Hist  U.  S., 
voL  L,  p.  123. 


Eeligion  was  speciously  invoked  to 
cover  this  new  atrocity  with  her 
broad  mantle,  under  the  plea  of  re- 
lieving the  Indians  from  a  servitude, 
which  they  had  already  escaped 
through  the  gate  of  death.  But, 
though  the  Papacy  was  earnestly  im- 
portuned to  lend  its  sanction  to  this 
device,  and  though  its  compliance 
has  been  stoutly  asserted,  and  was 
long  widely  believed,  the  charge  rests 
upon  no  evidence,  is  squarely  denied, 
and  has  been  silently  abandoned. 
For  once,  at  least,  avarice  and  cruelty 
have  'been  unable  to  gain  a  sacer- 
dotal sanction,  and  compelled  to  fall 
back  in  good  order  upon  Canaan  and 
Ham.6  But,  even  without  benefit  of 
clergy,  Negro  Slavery,  once  introduc- 
ed, rapidly,  though  thinly,  overspread 
the  whole  vast  area  of  Spanish  and 
Portuguese  America,  with  Dutch  and 
French  Guiana  and  the  West  India 
Islands ;  and  the  African  slave-trade 
was,  for  two  or  three  centuries,  the 
most  lucrative,  though  most  abhor- 
rent, traffic  pursued  by  or  known  to 
mankind.7    It  was  the  subject  of 

5  "  It  was  not  Las  Casas  who  first  suggested 
the  plan  of  transporting  African  slaves  to  His- 
paniola ;  Spanish  slaveholders,  as  they  emigra- 
ted, were  accompanied  by  their  negroes." — 
Ibid. 

6  "  Even  the  voluptuous  Leo  X.  declared  that 
'  not  the  Christian  religion  only,  but  nature  her- 
self, cries  out  against  the  state  of  Slavery.'  And 
Paul  III.,  in  two  separate  briefs,  imprecated  a 
curse  on  the  Europeans  who  would  enslave  In- 
dians, or  any  other  class  of  men." — Ibid.,  p.  172. 

7  Upon  the  suggestion  of  Las  Casas  in  favor  of 
negroes  for  American  slaves,  in  contradiction  to 
the  Indians,  negroes  began  to  be  poured  into  the 
West  Indies. 

"  It  had  been  proposed  to  allow  four  for  each 
emigrant.  Deliberate  calculation  fixed  the 
number  esteemed  necessary  at  four  thousand. 
That  very  year  in  which  Charles  Y.  sailed  with 
a  powerful  expedition  against  Tunis,  to  attack 
the  pirates  of  the  Barbary  States,  and  to  emanci- 
pate Christian  slaves  in  Africa,  he  gave  an  open, 
legal  sanction  to  the  African  slave-trade." — Ibid., 
p.  170. 


28 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


gainful  and  jealous  monopolies,  and 
its  profits  were  greedily  shared  by 
philosophers,  statesmen,  and  kings.8 

When,  in  1607,  the  first  abid- 
ing English  colony — Virginia — was 
founded  on  the  Atlantic  coast  of 
what  is  now  our  country,  Negro 
Slavery,  based  on  the  African  slave- 
trade,  was  more  than  a  century  old 
throughout  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
America,  and  so  had  already  acquired 
the  stability  and  respectability  of  an 
institution.  It  was  nearly  half  a 
century  old  in  the  British  West  In- 
dies. Spanish,  Dutch,  Portuguese, 
and  British  vessels  and  trading  com- 
panies* vied  with  each  other  for  the 
gains  to  be  speedily  acquired  by 
purchasing,  or  kidnapping,  young 
negroes  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  and 
selling  them  in  the  American  colonies 
of  their  own  and  other  nations.  The 
early  colonists  of  Virginia  were 
mainly  adventurers  of  an  unusually 
bad  type — bankrupt  prodigals,  gen- 
teel spendthrifts,  and  incorrigible 
profligates^  many  of  whom  had  left 
their  native  country  for  that  country's 
good,  in  obedience  to  the  urgent  per- 
suasion of  sheriffs,  judges,  and  juries. 
All  were  intoxicated  by  the  common 
illusions  of  emigrants  with  regard  to 

8  "  A  Flemish  favorite  of  Charles  V.  having 
obtained  of  this  king  a  patent  containing  an  ex- 
clusive right  of  importing  four  thousand  negroes 
annually  to  the  West  Indies,  sold  it  for  twenty- 
five  thousand  ducats,  to  some  Genoese  mer- 
chants, who  first  brought  into  a  regular  form  the 
commerce  for  slaves  between  Africa  and  Ame- 
rica."— Holmes's  Annals  of  America^  vol.  L,  p.  35. 

"  In  1563,  the  English  began  to  import  negroes 
into  the  West  Indies.  Their  first  slave-trade 
was  opened' the  preceding  year  on  the  coast  of 
Guinea.  John  Hawkins,  in  the  prospect  of  a 
great  gain,  resolved  to  make  trial  of  this  nefari- 
ous and  inhuman  traffic.  Communicating  the 
design  to  several  gentlemen  in  London,  who  be- 
came liberal  contributors  and  adventurers, 
three  good  ships  were  immediately  provided; 
and,  with  these  and  one  hundred  men,  Hawkins 
sailed  to  the  coast  of  Guinea,  where,  by  money, 


the  facilities  for  acquiring  vast  wealth 
at  the  cost  of  little  or  no  labor  in  the 
Eden  to  which  they  were  attracted. 
Probably  no  other  colony  that  ever 
succeeded  or  endured  was  so  largely 
made  up  of  unfit  and  unpromising 
materials.  Had  it  not  been  backed 
by  a  strong  and  liberal  London  com- 
pany, which  enjoyed  for  two  or  three 
generations  the  special  favor  and 
patronage  of  the  Crown,  it  must  have 
perished  in  its  infancy.  But  the 
climate  of  tide-water  Virginia  is  ge- 
nial, the  soil  remarkably  fertile  and 
facile,  the  timber  abundant  and  ex- 
cellent, while  its  numerous  bays  and 
inlets  abound  in  the  choicest  shell- 
fish ;  so  that  a  colony  that  would  fail 
here  could  succeed  nowhere.  To- 
bacco, too,  that  bewitching  but 
poisonous  narcotic,  wherewith  Provi- 
dence has  seen  fit  to  balance  the  in- 
estimable gifts  of  Indian  Corn  and 
the  Potato  by  the  New  World  to  the 
Old,  grew  luxuriantly  on  the  inter- 
vals of  her  rivers,  and  was  eagerly 
bought  at  high  prices  by  the  British 
merchants,  through  whom  nearly 
every  want  of  the  colonists  was  sup- 
plied. Manual  labor  of  all  kinds 
was  in  great  demand  in  the  English 
colonies  ;  so  that,  for  some  time,  the 

treachery,  and  force,  he  procured  at  least  three 
hundred  negroes,  and  now  sold  them  at  His- 
paniola." — Ibid.,  p.  83. 

"Ferdinand"  (in  1513)  ''issued  a  decree  de- 
claring that  the  servitude  of  the  Indians  is  war- 
ranted by  the  laws  of  God  and  man." — Ibid.,  p.32. 

"  Every  freeman  of  Carolina  shall  have  abso- 
lute power  and  authority  over  his  negro  slaves, 
of  what  nation  or  religion  whatsoever."— Locke's 
Fundamental  Constitution  for  South  Carolina. 

9  According  to  Bancroft,  upon  the  establish- 
ment of  the  Assiento  Treaty  in  1713,  creating  a 
Company  for  the  prosecution  of  the  African  Slave 
Trade,  one-quarter  of  the  stock  was  taken  by 
Philip  of  Spain ;  Queen  Anne  reserved  to  herself 
another  quarter,  and  the  remaining  moiety  was 
to  be  divided  among  her  subjects.  "  Thus  did  the 
sovereigns  of  England  and  Spain  become  the 
largest  slave-merchants  in  the  world." 


LAWYER'S  LAW 


FOR  SLAVERY. 


29 


banishment  thither  of  felons  from  the 
mother  country  seems  to  have  pro- 
voked no  serious  objection.  That 
such  a  colony,  in  such  an  age,  should 
have  existed  thirteen  years  prior  to 
the  introduction  of  Negro  Slavery, 
indicates  rather  its  weakness  and 
poverty  than  its  virtue.  The  proba- 
bility is  that  its  planters  bought  the 
first  slaves  that  were  offered  them ; 
at  any  rate,  the  first  that  they  were 
able  to  pay  for.  When  the  Pilgrim 
Fathers  landed  on  the  rock  of  Ply- 
mouth,10 Virginia  had  already  re- 
ceived and  distributed  her  first  cargo 
of  slaves.11 

There  is  no  record  of  any  serious 
opposition,  whether  on  moral  or  eco- 
nomic grounds,  to  the  introduction  of 
slaves  and  establishment  of  Slavery 
in  the  various  British,  Dutch,  and 
Swedish  Colonies,  planted  along  the 
coast  between  the  Penobscot  and  the 
Savannah  rivers  during  the  succeed- 
ing century.  At  the  outset,  it  is  cer- 
tain that  the  importation  of  negro 
chattels  into  the  various  seaports,  by 
merchants  trading  thither,  was  re- 

10  December  22,  1G20.  The  first  slaves  brought 
to  Virginia  were  sold  from  a  Dutch  vessel,  which 
landed  twenty  at  Jamestown,  in  1620. 

11  "In the  first  recorded  case  (Butts  v.  Penny, 
2  Lev.,  201;  3  Kib.,  785),  in  1677,  in  which  the 
question  of  property  in  negroes  appears  to  have 
come  before  the  English  courts,  it  was  held, 
1  that,  being  usually  bought  and  sold  among  mer- 
chants as  merchandise,  and  also  being  infidels, 
there  might  be  a  property  in  them  sufficient  to 
maintain  trover.' " — HildretKs  Hist.  U.  S.,  voL  ii., 
p.  214. 

"  What  precisely  the  English  law  might  be 
on  the  subject  of  Slavery,  still  remained  a  mat- 
ter of  doubt.  Lord  Holt  had  expressed  the 
opinion,  as  quoted  in  a  previous  chapter,  that 
Slavery  was  a  condition  unknown  to  English 
law,  and  that  every  person  setting  foot  in  Eng- 
land thereby  became  free.  American  planters, 
on  their  visits  to  England,  seem  to  have  been 
annoyed  by  claims  of  freedom  set  up  on  this 
ground,  and  that,  also,  of  baptism.  To  relieve 
their  embarrassments,  the  merchants  concerned 
in  the  American  trade"  (in  1729)  "had  obtained 
a  written  opinion  from  Yorke  and  Talbot,  the 


garded  only  with  vague  curiosity  and 
marvel,  like  that  which  would  now 
be  excited  by  the  experimental  in- 
troduction of  elephants  or  hippopot- 
ami as  beasts  of  burden.  Human 
rights,  in  the  abstract,  had  .not  yet 
been  made  a  theme  of  popular  dis- 
cussion, hardly  of  philosophic  specu- 
lation :  for  English  liberty,  John 
Hampden  had  not  yet  poured  out  his 
blooci  on  the  battle-field,  nor  Alger- 
non Sidney  laid  his  head  on  the 
block.  The  negroes,  uncouth  and 
repulsive,  could  speak  no  word  intel- 
ligible to  British  or  Colonial  ears, 
when  first  imported,  and  probably 
had  a  scarcely  clearer  conception  of 
their  own  rights  and  wrongs  than 
had  those  by  whom  they  were  sur- 
rounded. Some  time  ere  the  middle 
of  the  Seventeenth  Century,  a  British 
Attorney-General,  having  the  ques- 
tion formally  submitted  to  him,  gave 
his  official  opinion,  that  negroes,  be- 
ing pagans,  might  justly  be  held 
in  Slavery,  even  in  England  itself. 
The  amount  of  the  fee  paid  by  the 
wealthy  and  prosperous  slave-traders 

attorney  and  solicitor  general  of  that  day.  Ac- 
cording to  this  opinion,  which  passed  for  more 
than  forty  years  as  good  law,  not  only  was  bap- 
tism no  bar  to  Slavery,  but  negro  slaves  might 
be  held  in  England  just  as  well  as  in  the  Colo- 
nies. The  two  lawyers  by  whom  this  opinion 
was  given  rose  afterward,  one  of  them  to  be 
chief  justice  of  England,  and  both  to  be  chancel- 
lors. Torke,  sitting  in  the  latter  capacity,  with 
the  title  of  Lord  Hardwicke"  (in  1749),  "had 
recently  recognized  the  doctrine  of  that  opinion 
as  sound  law.  (Pearce  v.  Lisle,  Ambler,  76.) 
He  objects  to  Lord  Holt's  doctrine  of  freedom, 
secured  by  setting  foot  on  English  soil,  that  no 
reason  could  be  found  why  slaves  should  not  be 
equally  free  when  they  set  foot  in  Jamaica,  or 
any  other  English  plantation.  All  our  colonies 
are  subject  to  the  laws  of  England,  although  as 
to  some  purposes  they  have  laws  of  their  own  1 
His  argument  is  that,  if  Slavery  be  contrary  to 
English  law,  no  local  enactments  in  the  Colonies 
could  give  it  any  validity.  To  avoid  overturn- 
ing Slavery  in  the  Colonies,  it  was  absolutely 
necessary  to  uphold  it  in  England." — Ibid.,  p. 
426. 


30  THE  AMERICA 

for  this  remarkable  display  of  legal 
erudition  and  acumen,  is  not  re- 
corded, but  it  probably  included  a 
liberal  consideration  for  wear-and- 
tear  of  conscience.  Two  or  three  de- 
cisions from  British  courts  were,  at 
different  times  thereafter,  obtained, 
substantially  echoing  this  opinion. 
It  was  not  till  1772  that  Lord  Mans- 
field pronounced,  in  the  ever-memo- 
rable Somerset  case,  his  judgment 
that,  by  the  laws  of  England,  no  man 
could  be  held  in  Slavery.  That  judg- 
ment has  never  since  been  disturbed, 
nor  seriously  questioned. 

The  austere  morality  and  demo- 
cratic spirit  of  the  Puritans  ought  to 
have  kept  their  skirts  clear  from  the 
stain  of  human  bondage.  But,  be- 
neath all  their  fierce  antagonism, 
there  was  a  certain  kinship  between 
the  disciples  of  Calvin  and  those  of 
Loyola.  Each  were  ready  to  suffer 
and  die  for  God's  truth  as  they  under- 
stood it,  and  neither  cherished  any 
appreciable  sympathy  or  considera- 
tion for  those  they  esteemed  God's 
enemies,  in  which  category  the  sav- 
ages of  America  and  the  heathen  ne- 
groes of  Africa  were  so  unlucky  as 
to  be  found.  The  Puritan  pioneers 
of  New  England  were  early  involved 
in  desperate,  life-or-death  struggles 
with  their  Aboriginal  neighbors,  in 
whom  they  failed  to  discover  those 
poetic  and  fascinating  traits  which 
irradiate  them  in  the  novels  of  Coo- 
per and  the  poems  of  Longfellow. 
Their  experience  of  Indian  ferocity 
and  treachery,  acting  upon  their  the- 
ologic  convictions,  led  them  early 
and  readily  to  the  belief  that  these 
savages,  and  by  logical  inference  all 
savages,  were  the  .children  of  the 
devil,  to  be  subjugated,  if  not  extir- 
pated, as  the  Philistine  inhabitants 


N  CONFLICT. 

of  Canaan  had  been  by  the  Israelites 
under  Joshua.  Indian  slavery,  some- 
times forbidden  by  law,  but  usually 
tolerated,  if  not  entirely  approved,  by 
public  opinion,  was  among  the  early 
usages  of  New  England ;  and  from 
this  to  negro  slavery — the  slavery  of 
any  variety  of  pagan  barbarians — was 
an  easy  transition.  That  the  slaves 
in  the  Eastern  colonies  were  few,  and 
mainly  confined  to  the  seaports,  does 
not  disprove  this  statement.  The 
harsh  climate,  the  rocky  soil,  the  rug- 
ged topography  of  New  England, 
presented  formidable,  though  not 
impassable,  barriers  to  slaveholding. 
Her  narrow  patches  of  arable  soil, 
hemmed  in  between  bogs  and  naked 
blocks  of  granite,  were  poorly  adapt- 
ed to  cultivation  by  slaves.  The 
labor  of  the  hands  without  the  brain, 
of  muscle  divorced  from  intelligence, 
would  procure  but  a  scanty  livelihood 
on  those  bleak  hills.  He  who  was 
compelled,  for  a  subsistence,  to  be, 
by  turns,  farmer,  mechanic,  lumber- 
man, navigator,  and  fisherman,  might 
possibly  support  one  slave,  but  would 
be  utterly  ruined  by  half  a  dozen. 
Slaveholding  in  the  Northern  States 
was  rather  coveted  as  a  social  dis- 
tinction, a  badge  of  aristocracy  and 
wealth,  than  resorted  to  with  any 
idea  of  profit  or  pecuniary  advan- 
tage. 

It  was  different  southward  of  the 
Susquehanna,  but  especially  in  South 
Carolina,  where  the  cultivation  of 
Eice  and  Indigo  on  the  seaboard  had 
early  furnished  lucrative  employment 
for  a  number  of  slaves  far  exceeding 
that  of  the  white  population,  and 
whose  Sea  Islands  afforded  peculiar 
facilities  for  limiting  the  intercourse 
of  the  slaves  with  each  other,  and 
their  means  of  escape  to  the  wilder- 


GEORGIA  A  FREE  COLONY. 


31 


ness  and  to  the  savages.  South  Car- 
olina, a  century  ago,  was  as  intense- 
ly, conspicuously  aristocratic  and 
slaveholding  as  in  our  own  day. 
But  when  Slavery  had  obtained  eve- 
rywhere a  foothold,  and,  in  most  col- 
onies, a  distinct  legal  recognition, 
without  encountering  aught  deserv- 
ing the  name  of  serious  resistance,  it 
were  absurd  to  claim  for  any  colony 
or  section  a  moral  superiority  in  this 
regard  over  any  other. 

The  single  and  most  honorable  ex- 
ception to  the  general  facility  with 
which  this  giant  wrong  was  adopted 
and  acquiesced  in,  is  presented  by 
the  history  of  Georgia.  That  colony 
may  owe  something  of  her  preemi- 
nence to  her  comparatively  recent 
foundation ;  but  she  is  far  more  in- 
debted to  the  character  and  efforts  of 
her  illustrious  founder.  James  Ogle- 
thorpe was  born  in  1688,  or  1689,  at 
Godalming,  Surry  County,  Eng- 
land ;  entered  the  British  army  in 
1710;  and,  having  resigned  on  the 
restoration  of  peace,  was,  in  1714, 
commended  by  the  great  Marlborough 
to  his  former  associate  in  command, 
the  famous  Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy, 
by  whom  he  was  appointed  one  of  his 
aids.  He  fought  under  Eugene  in 
his  brilliant  and  successful  campaign 
against  the  Turks  in  1716  and  1717, 
closing  with  the  siege  and  capture  of 
Belgrade,  which  ended  the  war. 
Declining  to  remain  in  the  Austrian 
service,  he  returned,  in  1722,  to  Eng- 
land, where,  on  the  death  of  his 
elder  brother  about  this  time,  he  in- 
herited the  family  estate ;  was  elected 
to  Parliament  for  the  borough  of 
Hazelmere,  which  he  represented  for 
the  ensuing  thirty-two  years,  and,  be- 
coming acquainted  with  the  frightful 
abuses  and  inhumanities  which  then 


characterized  the  British  system  of 
Imprisonment  for  Debt,  he  devoted 
himself  to  their  reform,  and  carried 
through  the  House  an  act  to  this  end. 
His  interest  in  the  fortunes  of  bank- 
rupt and  needy  debtors  led  him  to 
plan  the  establishment  of  a  colony 
to  which  they  should  be  invited,  and 
in  which  they  might  hope,  by  in- 
dustry and  prudence,  to  attain  inde- 
pendence. This  colony  was  also  in- 
tended to  afford  an  asvlum  for  the 
oppressed  Protestants  of  Germany 
and  other  portions  of  the  continent. 
He  interested  many  eminent  and  in- 
fluential personages  in  his  project, 
obtained  for  it  a  grant  of  nearly  ten 
thousand  pounds  sterling  from  Par- 
liament, with  subscriptions  to  the 
amount  of  sixteen  thousand  more, 
and  organized  a  company  for  its 
realization,  whereof  the  directors 
were  nearly  all  noblemen  and  mem- 
bers of  Parliament.  Its  constitution 
forbade  any  director  to  receive  any 
pecuniary  advantage  therefrom.  Be- 
ing himself  the  animating  soul  of  the 
enterprise,  he  was  persuaded  to  ac- 
cept the  arduous  trust  of  governor 
of  the  colony,  for  which  a  royal 
grant  had  been  obtained  of  the 
western  coast  of  the  Atlantic  from 
the  mouth  of  the  Savannah  to  that 
of  the  Altamaha,  and  to  which  the 
name  of  Georgia  was  given  in  honor 
of  the  reigning  sovereign.  The 
trustees  were  incorporated  in  June, 

1732.  The  pioneer  colonists  left 
England  in  November  of  that  year, 
and  landed  at  Charleston  in  January, 

1733.  Proceeding  directly  to  their 
territory,  they  founded  the  city  of 
Savannah  in  the  course  of  the  en- 
suing month.  Oglethorpe,  as  director 
and  vice-president  of  the  African 
Company,  had  previously  become 


32 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


acquainted  with  an  African  prince, 
captured  and  sold  into  slavery  by 
some  neighboring  chief,  and  had  re- 
turned him  to  his  native  country, 
after  imbibing  from  his  acquaintance 
with  the  facts  a  profound  detestation 
of  the  Slave-Trade  and  of  Slavery. 
One  of  the  fundamental  laws  devised 
by  Oglethorpe  for  the  government  of 
his  colony  was  a  prohibition  of  slave- 
holding  ;  another  was  an  interdiction 
of  the  sale  or  use  of  Rum — neither  of 
them  calculated  to  be  popular  with 
the  jail-birds,  idlers,  and  profligates, 
who  eagerly  sought  escape  from  their 
debts  and  their  miseries  by  becoming 
members  of  the  new  colony.  The 
spectacle  of  men,  no  wiser  nor  bet- 
ter than  themselves,  living  idly  and 
luxuriously,  just  across  the  Savannah 
river,  on  the  fruits  of  constrained 
and  unpaid  negro  labor,  doubtless 
inflamed  their  discontent  and  their 
hostility.  As  if  to  add  to  the  gov- 
ernor's troubles,  war  between  Spain 
and  England  broke  out  in  1739,  and 
Georgia,  as  the  frontier  colony,  con- 
tiguous to  the  far  older  and  stronger 
Spanish  settlement  of  East  Florida, 
was  peculiarly  exposed  to  its  ravages. 
Oglethorpe,  at  the  head  of  the  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia  militia,  made 
an  attempt  on  Saint  Augustine, 
which  miscarried  ;  and  this,  in  1742, 

12  Oglethorpe  lived  to  be  nearly  a  hundred 
years  old — dying  at  Cranham  Hall,  Essex,  Eng- 
land, June  30,  1787.  It  is  not  recorded  nor 
probable  that  he  ever  revisited  America  after 
his  relinquishment  of  the  governorship  of  Geor- 
gia; but  he  remained  a  warm,  active,  well- 
informed  friend  of  our  country  after,  as  well  as 
before  and  during,  her  struggle  for  independence. 
In  1784,  Hannah  More  thus  wrote  of  him  : 

"  I  have  got  a  new  admirer ;  it  is  Gen.  Ogle- 
thorpe, perhaps  the  most  remarkable  man  of  his 
time.    He  was  foster-brother  to  the  Pretender, 


was  retaliated  by  a  much  stronger 
Spanish  expedition,  which  took  Fort 
St.  Simon,  on  the  Altamaha,  and 
might  easily  have  subdued  the  whole 
colony,  but  it  was  alarmed  and  re- 
pelled by  a  stratagem  of  his  concep- 
tion. Oglethorpe  soon  after  returned 
to  England ;  the  trustees  finally  sur- 
rendered their  charter  to  the  Crown  ; 
and  in  1752  Georgia  became  a  royal 
colony,  whereby  its  inhabitants  were 
enabled  to  gratify,  without  restraint, 
their  longing  for  Slavery  and  Rum. 
The  struggle  of  Oglethorpe13  in 
Georgia  was  aided  by  the  presence, 
counsels,  and  active  sympathy,  of 
the  famous  John  Wesley,  the  founder 
of  Methodism,  whose  pungent  de- 
scription of  Slavery  as  "  the  sum  of 
all  villainies,"  was  based  on  personal 
observation  and  experience  during 
his  sojourn  in  these  colonies.  But 
"  another  king  arose,- who  knew  not 
Joseph the  magisterial  hostility  to 
bondage  was  relaxed,  if  not  wholly 
withdrawn  ;  the  temptation  remained 
and  increased,  while  the  resistance 
faded  and  disappeared ;  and  soon 
Georgia  yielded  silently,  passively,  to 
the  contagion  of  evil  example,  and 
soon  became  not  only  slaveholding, 
but,  next  to  South  Carolina,  the  most 
infatuated  of  all  the  thirteen  colonies 
in  its  devotion  to  the  mighty  evil. 

and  is  much  above  ninety  years  old ;  the  finest 
figure  you  ever  saw.  He  perfectly  realizes  all 
my  ideas  of  Nestor.  His  literature  is  great,  his 
knowledge  of  the  world  extensive,  and  his  facul- 
ties as  bright  as  ever.  *  *  He  is  quite  a  prtux 
chevalier ;  heroic,  romantic,  and  full  of  the  old 
gallantry." 

Pope — who  praised  so  sparingly — had  spoken 
of  him,  not  quite  half  a  century  earlier,  in  terms 
evincing  like  admiration;  and  many  other  contem- 
poraries of  literary  eminence  bore  testimony  to 
his  signal  merits. — See  Sparks' s  American  Bio- 
graphy. 


III. 


SLAYEEY  1ST  THE  REVOLUTION. 


The  American  Revolution  was  no 
sudden  outbreak.  It  was  preceded 
by  eleven  years  of  peaceful  remon- 
strance and  animated  discussion. 
The  vital  question  concerned  the 
right  of  the  British  Parliament  to 
impose  taxes,  at  its  discretion,  on 
British  subjects  in  any  and  every 
part  of  the  empire.  This  question  pre- 
sented many  phases,  and  prompted 
various  acts  and  propositions.  But 
its  essence  was  always  the  same  ;  and 
it  was  impossible  that  such  men  as 
James  Otis,  John  Adams,  Thomas 
J efferson,  and  Patrick  Henry,  should 
discuss  it  without  laying  broad  foun- 
dations for  their  argument  in  pre- 
mises affecting  the  natural  and  gene- 
ral Rights  of  Man  to  self-government, 
with  the  control  of  his  own  products 
or  earnings.  The  enthusiast  who 
imagines  that  our  patriots  were  all 

1  Witness  the  Darien  (Ga.)  resolutions.  In  the 
Darien committee,  Thursday,  June  12,  1775: 

"  When  the  most  valuable  privileges  of  a  peo- 
ple are  invaded,  not  only  by  open  violence,  but 
|  by  every  kind  of  fraud,  sophistry,  and  cunning, 
it  behooves  every  individual  to  be  upon  his 
guard,  and  every  member  of  society,  like  bea- 
cons in  a  country  surrounded  by  enemies,  to 
give  the  alarm,  not  only  when  their  liberties 
in  general  are  invaded,  but  separately,  lest  the 
precedent  in  one  may  affect  the  whole ;  and  to 
enable  the  collective  wisdom  of  such  a  people 
to  judge  of  its  consequences,  and  how  far  their 
respective  grievances  concern  all,  or  should  be 
opposed  to  preserve  their  necessary  union. 
Every  laudable  attempt  of  this  kind  by  the  good 
people  of  this  Coiony,  in  a  constitutional  manner, 
has  been  hitherto  frustrated  by  the  influence 
and  authority  of  men  in  office  and  their  numer- 
ous dependents,  and  in  every  other  natural  and 
just  way  by  the  various  arts  they  have  put  in 
practice.  We.  therefore,  the  representatives  of 
the  extensive  district  of  Darien,  in  the  colony 
of  Georgia,  being  now  assembled  in  congress 
by  the  authority  and  free  choice  of  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  said  district,  now  free  from  their 
fetters,  do  Eesolve — " 

There  are  six:  resolutions  in  alL    The  first 

3 


convinced  of  the  danger  and  essential 
iniquity  of  Slavery,  "and  the  conserva- 
tive who  argues  that  few  or  none 
perceived  and  admitted  the  direct 
application  of  their  logic  to  the  case 
of  men  held  in  perpetual  and  limit- 
less bondage,  are  alike  mistaken. 
There  were  doubtless  some  who  did 
not  perceive,  or  did  not  admit,  the 
inseparable  connection  between  the 
rights  they  claimed  as  British  free- 
men and  the  rights  of  all  men  every- 
where ;  but  the  more  discerning  and 
logical  of  the  patriots  comprehended 
and  confessed  that  their  assertion  of 
the  rightful  inseparability  of  Repre- 
sentation from  Taxation  necessarily 
affirmed  the  grander  and  more  essen- 
tial right  of  each  innocent,  rational 
being  to  the  control  and  use  of  his 
own  capacities  and  faculties,  and  to 
the  enjoyment  of  his  own  earnings.1 

eulogizes  "the  firm  and  manly  conduct  of  the 
people  of  Boston  and  Massachusetts,"  acquiescing 
in  all  the  resolutions  of  the  "  grand  American 
Congress  iu  Philadelphia  last  October."  The 
second  resolution  is  denunciatory  of  England, 
in  shutting  up  the  land  office,  and  in  other  op- 
pressive acts.  The  third  is  opposed  to  ministe- 
rial mandates  under  the  name  of  constitutions. 
The  fourth  is  denunciatory  of  the  number  of 
officers  appointed  over  the  colonies  by  the 
British  crown,  and  their  exorbitant  salaries. 
The  fifth  is  as  follows  : 

"  5th.  To  show  the  world  that  we  are  not  in- 
fluenced by  any  contracted  or  interested  motive, 
but  a  general  philanthropy  for  all  mankind,  of 
whatever  climate,  language,  or  complexion,  we 
hereby  declare  our  disapprobation  and  abhor- 
rence of  the  unnatural  practice  of  Slavery  in 
America  (however  the  uncultivated  state  of  our 
country,  and  other  specious  arguments,  may  plead 
for  it),  a  practice  founded  in  injustice  and  cruelty, 
and  highly  dangerous  to  our  liberties  (as  well 
as  lives),  debasing  part  of  our  fellow-creatures 
below  men,  and  corrupting  the  virtue  and  moraU 
of  the  rest,  and  as  laying  the  basis  of  that  liberty 
we  contend  for  (and  which  we  pray  the  Almighty 
to  continue  to  the  latest  posterity)  i|)on  a  very 
wrong  foundation.  We  therefore  resolve  at  all 
times,  to  use  our  utmost  efforts  for  the  manumis- 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


The  principles  of  civil  and  political 
liberty,  so  patiently  evolved  and  so 
thoroughly  commended  during  the 
long  controversy  which  preceded 
the  appeal  to  arms,  were  reduced 
to  axioms,  and  became  portions  of 
the  popular  faith.  When  'Jeffer- 
son, in  drafting  our  immortal 
Declaration  of  Independence,  em- 
bodied in  its  preamble  a  formal  and 
emphatic  assertion  of  the  inalienable 
Rights  of  Man,  he  set  forth  propo- 
sitions novel  and  startling  to  Euro- 
pean ears,  but  which  eloquence  and 
patriotic  fervor  had  already  engraven 
deeply  on  the  American  heart.  That 
Declaration  was  not  merely,  as  Mr. 
Choate  has  termed  it,  "  the  passion- 
ate manifesto  of  a  revolutionary 
war ;"  it  was  the  embodiment  of  our 
forefathers'  deepest  and  most  rooted 
convictions ;  and  when,  in  penning 
that  Declaration,  he  charged  the 
British  government  with  upholding 
and  promoting  the  African  slave- 
trade  against  the  protests  of  the 
colonists/  and  in  violation  of  the 
dictates  of  humanity,  he  asserted 
truths  which  the  jealous  devotion  of 
South  Carolina  and  Georgia  to  slave- 
holding  rendered  it  impolitic  to  send 
forth  as  an  integral  portion  of  our 

sion  of  our  slaves  in  this  colony  upon  the  most  safe 
and  equitable  footing  for  the  masters  and  them- 
selves."— American  Archives,  4th  Series,  voL  i., 
1774  and  1775. 

2 The  following  is  the  indictment  of  George  III., 
as  a  patron  and  upholder  of  the  African  slave- 
trade,  embodied  by  Mr.  Jefferson  in  his  original 
draft  of  the  Declaration  : 

u  Determined  to  keep  open  a  market  where  men 
should  be  bought  and  sold,  he  has  prostituted  his 
negative  for  suppressing  every  legislative  attempt  to 
prohibit  or  to  restrain  this  execrable  commerce.  And 
that  this  assemblage  of  horrors  might  want  no  fact 
of  distinguished  dye,  he  is  now  exciting  those  very 
people  to  rise  in  arms  among  us,  and  purchase 
that  liberty  of  which  he  has  deprived  them,  by 
murdering  the  people  on  whom  he  also  obtruded 
them:  thus  paying  off  former  crimes  committed 


arraignment  of  British  tyranny;  but 
which  were,  nevertheless,  widely  and 
deeply  felt  to  be  an  important  and 
integral  portion  of  our  case.3  Even 
divested  of  this,  the  Declaration 
stands  to-day  an  evidence  that  our 
fathers  regarded  the  rule  of  Great 
Britain  as  no  more  destructive  to 
their  own  rights  than  to  the  rights  of 
mankind. 

No  other  document  was  ever  issued 
which  so  completely  reflected  and 
developed  the  popular  convictions 
which  underlaid  and  impelled  it  as 
that  Declaration  of  Independence. 
The  cavil  that  its  ideas  'were  not 
original  with  Jefferson  is  a  striking 
testimonial  to  its  worth.  Originality 
of  conception  was  the  very  last  merit 
to  which  he  would  have  chosen  to 
lay  claim,  his  purpose  being  to  em- 
body the  general  convictions  of  his 
countrymen  —  their  conceptions  of 
human,  as  well  as  colonial,  rights  and 
British  wrongs,  in  the  fewest,  strong- 
est, and  clearest  words.  The  fact 
that  some  of  these  words  had  already 
been  employed — some  of  them  a 
hundred  times — to  set  forth  the  same 
general  truths,  in  no  manner  unfitted 
them  for  his  use. 

The  claim  that  his  draft  was  a  pla- 

against  the  liberties  of  one  people,  with  crimes 
which  he  urges  them  to  commit  against  the  lives 
of  another." 

3  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  his  Autobiography,  gives  the 
following  reason  for  the  omission  of  this  re- 
markable passage  from  the  Declaration  as  adopt- 
ed, issued,  and  published: 

"The  clause,  too,  reprobating  the  enslaving 
the  inhabitants  of  Africa,  was  struck  out  in 
complaisance  to  South  Carolina  and  Georgia,  who 
had  never  attempted  to  restrain  the  importation 
of  slaves,  and  who,  on  the  contrary,  still  wished 
to  continue  it.  Our  Northern  brethren  also,  I 
believe,  felt  a  little  tender  under  those  censures  ; 
for,  though  their  people  had  very  few  slaves 
themselves,  yet  they  had  been  pretty  considera- 
ble carriers  of  them  to  others."  —  Jefferson's 
Works,  voL  L,  p.  170. 


SLAVERY  IN  TH 


E  REVOLUTION. 


35 


giarism  from  the  Mecklenburg  (N. 
C.)  Declaration  of  April  20th,  pre- 
ceding, he  indignantly  repelled ;  but 
he  always  observed  that  he  employed 
whatever  terms  best  expressed  his 
thought,  and  would  not  say  how  far 
he  was  indebted  for  them  to  his  read- 
ing, how  far  to  his  original  reflec- 
tions. Even  the  great  fundamental 
assertion  of  Human  Rights,  which  he 
has  so  memorably  set  forth  as  follows : 
"We  hold  these  truths  to  be  self- 
evident,  that  all  men  are  created 
equal;  that  they  are  endowed  by 
their  Creator  with  certain  inaliena- 
ble rights  ;  that  among  these,  are  life, 
liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness  ; 
that  to  secure  these  rights  govern- 
ments are  instituted  among  men, 
deriving  their  just  powers  from  the 
consent  of  the  governed  ;  that,  when- 
ever any  form  of  government  be- 
comes destructive  of  these  ends,  it  is 
the  right  of  the  people  to  alter  or  to 
abolish  it,  and  to  institute  a  new  gov- 
ernment, laying  its  foundations  on 
such  principles,  and  organizing  its 
powers  in  such  form,  as  to  them  shall 
seem  most  likely  to  effect  their  safety 
and  happiness,"  was  no  novelty  to 
those  who  hailed  and  responded  to 
it.  Three  weeks  before,  the  Virginia 
Convention  had  unanimously  adopt- 
ed a  Declaration  of  Eights,  reported 
on  the  27th  of  May  by  George  Ma- 
son,4 which  proclaims  that  "All  men 
are  by  nature  equally  free,  and  have 
inherent  rights,  of  which,  when  they 
enter  into  a  state  of  society,  they 
cannot,  by  any  compact,  deprive  or 
divest  their  posterity;  namely,  the 
enjoyment  of  life  and  liberty,  with 
the  means  of  acquiring  and  possess- 
ing property,  and  pursuing  and  ob- 

4  The  grandfather  of  James  M.  Mason,  late 
U.S.  Senator  from  Virginia,  since  Confederate 


taining  happiness  and  safety."  See 
also  the  Mecklenburg  Declaration. 

The  original  draft  of  the  Declara- 
tion of  American  Independence  was 
first  communicated  by  Mr.  Jefferson 
separately  to  two  of  his  colleagues, 
John  Adams  and  Benjamin  Frank- 
lin, on  the  committee  chosen  by  Con- 
gress to  prepare  it ;  then  to  the  whole 
committee,  consisting,  in  addition,  of 
Roger  Sherman  and  Robert  R.  Liv- 
ingston ;  reported,  after  twenty  days' 
gestation,  on  the  28th  of  J une  ;  read 
in  Committee  of  the  "Whole  on  the 
1st  of,  July ;  earnestly  debated  and 
scanned  throughout  the  three  follow- 
ing days,  until  finally  adopted  on  the 
evening  of  the  4th.  It  may  safely 
be  said  that  not  an  affirmation,  not  a 
sentiment,  was  put  forth  therein  to 
the  world,  which  had  not  received 
the  deliberate  approbation  of  such 
cautious,  conservative  minds  as  those 
of  Franklin,  John  Adams,  and  Roger 
Sherman,  and  of  the  American  Peo- 
ple, as  well  as  their  representatives 
in  Congress,  those  of  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia  included. 

The  progress  of  the  Revolution 
justified  and  deepened  these  convic- 
tions. Slavery  was  soon  proved  our 
chief  source  of  weakness  and  of  peril. 
Of  our  three  millions  of  people,  half 
a  million  were  the  chattels  of  others ; 
and  though  all  the  colonies  tolerated, 
and  most  of  them  expressly  legalized 
slaveholding,  the  slaves,  nearly  con- 
centrated in  the  Southern  States, 
paralyzed  the  energies  and  enfeebled 
the  efforts  of  their  patriots.  Incited 
by  proclamations  of  royal  governors 
and  military  commanders,  thousands 
of  the  negroes  escaped  to  British 
camps  and  garrisons,  and  were  there 

Emissary  to  England.  George  Mason  was  one 
of  Virginia's  most  illustrious  sons. 


36 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


manumitted  and  protected;  while 
the  master  race,  alarmed  for  the 
safety  of  their  families,  were  unable 
or  unwilling  to  enlist  in  the  Conti- 
nental armies,  or  even  to  be  called 
into  service  as  militia.5 

The  number  of  slaves  in  the  States 
respectively,  at  the  time  of  the  Revo- 
lution, is  not  known.  But  it  may  be 
closely  approximated  by  the  aid  of 
the  census  of  1790,  wherein  the 
slave  population  is  returned  as  fol- 
lows : 


NORTTT. 

sorrn. 

153 

8.887 

17 

103.036 

952 

Virginia  

.  293.427 

Connecticut  

..  2,751) 

100.572 

Massachusetts  6.. . . 

. .  none 

South  Carolina  

107.094 

New  York  

.  21.324 

,,  29.264 

New  Jersey  

.  11.423 

Kentucky  

.  11.830 

Pennsylvania  i  . 

..  3,737 

,  3,417 

Total  

40,370 

Total  

.  657,527 

The  documents  and  correspondence 
of  the  Revolution  are  full  of  com- 
plaints by  Southern  slaveholders  of 
their  helplessness  and  peril,  because 
of  Slavery,  and  of  the  necessity  there- 
by created  of  their  more  efficient  de- 
fense and  protection.8  The  New 
England  States,  with  a  population 
less  numerous  than  that  of  Yirginia, 
the  Carolinas,  and  Georgia,  furnished 
more  than  double  the  number  of 
soldiers  to  battle  for  the  common 
cause.  The  South  was  repeatedly 
overrun,  and  regarded  as  substan- 
tially subdued,  by  armies  that  would 
not  have  ventured  to  invade  New 
England,  and  could  not  have  main- 
tained themselves  a  month  on  her 
soil.    Indeed,  after  Gage's  expulsion 


5  The  number  of  troops  employed  by  the  Colo- 
nies during  the  entire  Revolutionary  war,  as 
well  as  the  number  furnished  by  each,  is  shown 
by  the  following,  which  is  compiled  from  statis-- 
tics  contained  in  a  work  published  by  Jacob 
Moore,  Concord,  entitled,  "Collections  of  the 
New  Hampshire  Historical  Society  for  the  year 
1824,"  vol.  L,  p.  236. 


CONTINENTAL. 

12,496 

MILITIA. 

2,093 

68,007 

15,155 

5,878 

4,284 

32,039 

7,792 

18,331 

3,304 

10,726 

6,055 

25,608 

7,357 

2.317 

376 

1.1.912 

4,127 

26,668 

5,620 

7,263 

6,417 

2,679 

232,341 

56,163 

6  Massachusetts  adopted  a  new  State  Consti- 
tution in  1780,  to  which  a  bill  of  rights  was  pre- 
fixed, which  her  Supreme  Court  soon  after  de- 
cided was  inconsistent  with  the  maintenance  of 
Slavery,  which  had  been  thus  abolished. 

7  Pennsylvania  had  passed  an  act  of  Gradual 
Emancipation  in  1780. 

8  Henry  Laurens  of  South  Carolina,  two  years 
President  of  the  Continental  Congress,  appointed 
Minister  to  Holland,  and  captured  on  his  way 
thither  by  a  British  cruiser,  finally  Commissioner 


with  Franklin  and  Jay  for  negotiating  peace 
with  Great  Britain,  on  the  14th  of  August,  1776, 
wrote  from  Charleston,  S.  C,  to  his  son,  then  in 
England,  a  letter  explaining  and  justifying  his 
resolution  to  stand  or  fall  with  the  cause  of 
American  Independence,  in  which  he  said : 

"  You  know,  my  dear  son,  I  abhor  Slavery.  I 
was  born  in  a  country  where  Slavery  had  been 
established  by  British  kings  and  parliaments,  as 
by  the  laws  of  that  country,  ages  before  my  ex- 
istence. I  found  the  Christian  religion  and 
Slavery  growing  under  the  same  authority  and 
cultivation.  I  nevertheless  disliked  it.  In 
former  days,  there  was  no  combating  the  preju- 
dices of  men  supported  by  interest :  the  day,  I 
hope,  is  approaching,  when  from  principles  of 
gratitude,  as  well  as  justice,  every  man  shall 
strive  to  be  foremost  in  showing  his  readiness  to 
comply  with  the  golden  rule.  Not  less  than 
twenty  thousand  pounds  sterling  would  all  my 
negroes  produce,  if  sold  at  public  auction  to- 
morrow. I  am  not  the  man  who  enslaved  them ; 
they  are  indebted  to  Englishmen  for  that  favor: 
nevertheless,  I  am  devising  means  for  manumit- 
ting many  of  them,  and  for  cutting  off  the  entail 
of  slavery.  Great  powers  oppose  me, — the  laws 
and  customs  of  my  country,  my  own  and  the 
avarice  of  my  countrymen.  What  will  my  chil- 
dren say  if  I  deprive  them  of  so  much  estate  ? 
These  are  difficulties,  but  not  insuperable.  I 
will  do  as  much  as  I  can  in  my  time,  and  leave 
the  rest  to  a  better  hand. 

"Iam  not  one  of  those  who  arrogate  the  pe- 
culiar care  of  Providence  in  each  fortunate  event ; 
nor  one  of  those  who  dare  trust  in  Providence 
for  defense  and  security  of  their  own  liberty, 
while  they  enslave,  and  wish  to  continue  in 
slavery,  thousands  who  are  as  well  entitled  to 


THE    STATES    AND  T 


HEIR  TERRITORIES. 


37 


from  Boston,  and  Burgoyne's  surren- 
der at  Saratoga,  New  England,  save 
the  islands  on  her  coast,  was  pretty 
carefully  avoided  by  the  Royalist 
generals,  and  only  assailed  by  raids, 
which  were  finished  almost  as  soon 
as  begun.  These  facts,  vividly  im- 
pressed on  the  general  mind  by  the 


necessities  and  sacrifices  of  the  times,9 
in  connection  with  the  discovery 
and  elucidation,  already  noticed,  of 
elemental  principles,  had  pretty 
thoroughly  cured  the  North  of  all 
attachment  to,  or  disposition  to  jus- 
tify Slavery  before  the  close  of  the 
Kevolutionary  war. 


IV. 

SLAVERY  UNDER   THE  CONFEDERATION. 


As  the  public  burdens  were  con- 
stantly swelled,  and  the  debts  of  the 
several  States  increased,  by  the  mag- 
nitude and  duration  of  our  Revolu- 
tionary struggle,  the  sale  of  yet  un- 
settled lands,  especially  in  the  vast 
and  fertile  West,  began  to  be  regard- 
ed as  a  principal  resource  for  the 
ultimate  discharge  of  these  constantly 
augmenting  liabilities  :  and  it  be- 
came a  matter  of  just  complaint  and 
uneasiness  on  the  part  of  those  States- 
Rhode  Island,  New  Jersey,  Delaware, 
and  South  Carolina — which  had  no 

freedom  as  themselves.  I  perceive  the  work 
before  me  is  great.  I  shall  appear  to  many  as  a 
promoter  not  only  of  strange,  but  of  dangerous 
doctrines :  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  pro- 
ceed with  caution.  You  are  apparently  deeply 
interested  in  this  affair ;  but,  as  I  have  no  doubts 
concerning  your  concurrence  and  approbation,  I 
most  sincerely  wish  for  your  advice  and  assist- 
ance, and  hope  to  receive  both  in  good  time." — 
Collection  of  the  Zenger  Club,  pp.  20,  21. 

9  The  famous  Rev.  Samuel  Hopkins,  D.D.,  an 
eminent  Calvinist  divine,  published,  soon  after 
the  commencement  of  the  war,  a  dialogue  con- 
cerning the  slavery  of  the  Africans,  which  he 
dedicated  to  "The  Honorable  Continental 
Congress,"  and  of  which  the  following  passage 
exhibits  the  drift  and  purpose : 

"  God  is  so  ordering  it  in  his  providence,  that 
it  seems  absolutely  necessary  something  should 
be  speedily  done  with  respect  to  the  slaves 
among  us,  in  order  to  our  safety,  and  to  prevent 
their  turning  against  us  in  our.  present  struggle, 


chartered  claim  to  such  lands  much 
beyond  the  limits  of  their  then  actual 
settlements,  that  their  partners  in  the 
efforts,  responsibilities,  and  sacrifices 
of  the  common  struggle  were  likely 
to  reap  a  peculiar  and  dispropor- 
tionate advantage  from  its  success. 
Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New 
York,  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  and 
Georgia,  each  claimed,  under  their 
several  charters,  a  right  of  almost  in- 
finite extension  westward,  and,  in  the 
event  of  the  establishment  of  Ameri- 
can independence,  would  naturally 

in  order  to  get  their  liberty.  Our  oppressors 
have  planned  to  gain  the  blacks,  and  induce  them 
to  take  up  arms  against  us,  by  promising  them 
liberty  on  this  condition;  and  this  plan  they  are 
prosecuting  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,  by 
which  means  they  have  persuaded  numbers  to 
join  them.  And,  should  we  attempt  to  restrain 
them  by  force  and  severity,  keeping  a  strict 
guard  over  them,  and  punishing  them  severely 
who  shall  be  detected  in  attempting  to  join  our 
opposers,  this  will  only  be  making  bad  worse, 
and  serve  to  render  our  inconsistence,  oppression, 
and  cruelty  more  criminal,  perspicuous,  and 
shocking,  and  bring  down  the  righteous  ven- 
geance of  Heaven  on  our  heads.  The  only  way 
pointed  out  to  prevent  this  threatening  evil  is  to 
set  the  blacks  at  liberty  ourselves,  by  some  public 
acts  and  laws,  and  then  give  them  proper  en- 
couragement to  labor,  or  take  arms  in  the  defense 
of  the  American  cause,  as  they  shall  choose.  This 
would  at  once  be  doing  them  some  degree  of 
justice,  and  defeating  our  enemies  in  the  scheme 
that  they  are  prosecuting." — Hopkins's  Works, 
voL  ii.,  p.  584. 


38  THE  AM  ERIC 

each  possess  a  vast  area  of  unpeopled, 
ungranted,  and  ultimately  valuable 
lands.  The  landless  States,  with  ob- 
vious reason  and  justice,  insisted  that 
these  lands,  won  by  the  common 
valor  and  sacrifices  of  the  whole 
American  people,  should  be  regarded 
as  their  common  property,  and  to 
this  end  should  be  surrendered  or 
ceded  by  the  States  claiming  them 
respectively  to  the  Confederation. 
The  colonial  charters,  moreover,  were 
glaringly  inconsistent  with  eacli 
other ;  vast  tracts  being  ceded  by 
them  to  two  or  more  colonies  respect- 
ively ;  and  it  was  a  puzzling  question, 
even  for  lawyers,  to  determine  wheth- 
er the  earliest  or  the  latest  royal  con- 
cession, if  either,  should  have  the  pre- 
cedence. There  was  but  one  benefi- 
cent and  just  solution  for  all  dis- 
putes and  difficulties  in  the  premises ; 
and  this  was  a  quit-claim  by  the  re- 
spective States  of  their  several  rights 
and  pretensions  to  lands  exterior  to 
their  own  proper  boundaries,  in  favor 
of  the  common  Confederacy.  This 
consummation  was,  for  the  most  part, 
seasonably  and  cheerfully  agreed  to. 
Connecticut  made  a  moderate  reser- 
vation of  wild  lands  assured  to  her 
by  her  charter  in  what  is  now  North- 
ern Ohio.  Virginia,  beside  retain- 
ing her  partially  settled  country 
south  of  the  Ohio,  now  forming  the 

_____  '  o 

State  of  Kentucky,  reserved  a  suffi- 
ciency north  of  the  Ohio  to  provide 
liberal  bounties  for  her  officers  and 
soldiers  who  fought  in  the  war  of  the 
Revolution,  conceding  all  other  ter- 
ritory north  of  the  river,  and  all  ju- 
risdiction over  this.  And  it  was  pre- 
sumed, at  the  close  of  the  war,  that 
North  Carolina  and  Georgia  would 
promptly  make  similar  concessions  of 
the  then  savage  regions  covered  by 


CONFLICT. 

their  respective  charters,  now  known 
as  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and  Missis- 
sippi. 

Though  the  war  was  practically 
concluded  by  the  surrender  of  Corn- 
wallis  at   Yorktown,  October  19, 

1781,  and  though  the  treaty  of  peace 
was  signed  at  Paris,  November  30, 

1782,  the  British  did  not  evacuate 
New  York  till  November  25,  1783 ; 
and  the  Ninth  Continental  Congress, 
which  convened  at  Philadelphia  on 
the  3d  of  that  month,  adjourned  next 
day  to  Annapolis.  A  bare  quorum 
of  members  responded  to  their  names, 
but  one  and  another  soon  dropped 
off ;  so  that  the  journal  of  most  days 
records  no  quorum  present,  and  no 
business  done,  until  about  the  1st 
day  of  March,  1784.  On  that  day, 
Mr.  Jefferson,  on  behalf  of  the  dele- 
gates from  his  State,  presented  the 
deed  of  cession  to  the  Confederation, 
by  Virginia,  of  all  her  claims  to  ju- 
risdiction over  territory  northwest  of 
the  Ohio,  and  to  the  soil  also  of  that 
territory,  subject  to  the  reservation 
in  behalf  of  her  soldiers  already 
noted.  This  deed  being  formally 
accepted,  Mr.  Jefferson  moved  the 
appointment  of  a  select  committee  to 
report  a  plan  of  government  for  the 
western  territory ;  and  Messrs.  J effer- 
son,  Chase  of  Maryland,  and  Howell 
of  Rhode  Island,  were  appointed  such 
committee.  From  this  committee, 
Mr.  Jefferson,  in  due  time,  reported 
an  Ordinance  for  the  government  of 
"the  territory,  ceded  already,  or  to 
1)6  ceded,  by  individual  States  to  the 
United  States,"  specifying  that  such 
territory  extends  from  the  31st  to  the 
47th  degree  of  north  latitude,  so  as 
to  include  what  now  constitutes  the 
States  of  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and 
Mississippi,  but  which  was  then,  and 


THE  JEFFERSONIAN 


ORDINANCE   OF  1184. 


39 


remained  for  some  years  thereafter, 
unceded  to  the  Union  by  North  Car- 
olina and  Georgia.  This  entire  ter- 
ritory, ceded  and  to  be  ceded,  was 
divided  prospectively  by  the  Ordi- 
nance into  embryo  States,  to  which 
names  were  given  ;  each  of  them  to 
receive,  in  due  time,  a  temporary  or 
territorial  government,  and  ulti- 
mately to  be  admitted  into  the  Con- 
federation of  States  upon  the  express 
assent  of  two-thirds  of  the  preceding 
States;  but  both  their  temporary 
and  their  permanent  governments 
were  to  be  established  on  these  fun- 
damental conditions : 

"  1.  That  they  shall  forever  remain  a  part 
of  the  United  States  of  America. 

"2.  That,  in  their  persons,  property,  and 
territory,  they  shall  be  subject  to  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States,  in  Congress 
assembled,  and  to  the  Articles  of  Confedera- 
tion, in  all  those  cases  in  which  the  original 
States  shall  be  so  subject. 

."3.  That  they  shall  be  subject  to  pay  a 
part  of  the  Federal  debts,  contracted  or  to 
be  contracted ;  to  be  apportioned  on  them  by 
Congress,  according  to  the  same  common 
rule  and  measure  by  which  apportionments 
thereof  shall  be  made  on  the  other  States. 

"4.  That  their  respective  governments 
shall  be  in  republican  forms,  and  shall  admit 
no  person  to  be  a  citizen  who  holds  an  he- 
reditary title. 

"  5.  That  after  the  year  1800  of  the  Chris- 
tian era,  there  shall  be  neither  Slavery  nor 
involuntary  servitude  in  any  of  the  said 
States,  otherwise  than  in  punishment  of 
crimes,  whereof  the  party  shall  have  been 
duly  convicted  to  have  been  personally 
guilty.1' 

The  Ordinance  concluded  as  fol- 
lows : 

"  That  all  the  preceding  articles  shall  be 
formed  into  a  charter  of  compact ;  shall  be 
duly  executed  by  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  under  his 
hand  and  the  seal  of  the  United  States ;  shall 
be  promulgated,  and  shall  stand  as  funda- 
mental conditions  between  the  thirteen  orig- 
inal States  and  those  newly  described,  unal- 
terable but  by  the  joint  consent  of  the  United 
States,  in  Congress  assembled,  and  of  the 


particular  State  within  which  such  alteration 
is  proposed  to  be  made." 

On  the  19th  of  April,  Congress 
took  up  this  plan  for  consideration 
and  action,  and  Mr.  Spaight  of  N. 
C.  moved  that  the  fifth  proposition 
above  quoted,  prohibiting  Slavery 
after  the  year  1800,  be  stricken  out 
of  the  Ordinance ;  and  Mr.  Read  of  S. 
C.  seconded  the  motion.  The  ques- 
tion wTas  put  in  this  form :  "  Shall 
the  words  moved  to  be  stricken  out 
stand  f  and  on  this  question  the 
Ays  and  Noes  were  required  and 
taken,,  with  the  following  result : 

Hamp.  .  .Mr.  Foster  ay,  )  A 

Mr.  Blanchard....ay,  \Ay' 
MASsAcuiJ..Mr.  Gerry  ay,  )  , 

Mr.  Partridge..  .  .ay,  \  ^' 
R.  Island. .Mr.  Ellery  ay,  [a 

Mr.  II o v; ell  ay,  ) 

Connect..  .  Mr.  Sherman  ay,  /  » 

Mr.  Wadsworth. ..ay,  \  ^* 
ISTew  Yoke:. Mr.  De  Witt  ay,  )  a 

Mr.  Paine  ay,  \  ^' 

N\  Jersey.. Mr.  Dick  ay,  |  No  vote.1 

Penxsyl..  .Mr.  Mifflin  ay,  ) 

Mr.  Montgomery.. ay,  >■  Ay. 

Mr.  Hand  ay,  ) 

Maryland. Mr.  Henry  no,  )  w 

Mr.  Stone  no,  \  iV<?* 

Virginia.  .  Mr.  Jefferson  ay,  ) 

Mr.  Hardy  no,  >  No. 

Mr.  Mercer  no,  ) 

K.  CAROLL.Mr.  Williamson.. .ay,  )  ri^^A 

Mr.  Spaight  no,  \  nnided' 

S.  CAROLi...Mr.  Read  no,  \  ^fo 

Mr.  Beresford. ...  no,  ) 

The  votes  of  members  were  sixteen 
for  Mr.  Jefferson's  interdiction  of 
Slavery  to  seven  against  it,  and  the 
States  stood  recorded  six  for  it  to  three 
asrainst  it.  But  the  Articles  of  Con- 
federation  required  an  affirmative 
vote  of  a  majority  of  all  the  States  to 
sustain  a  proposition ;  and  thus  the 
restriction  failed  through  the  absence 
of  a  member  from  New  Jersey,  ren- 
dering the  vote  of  that  State  null  for 

cast  the  vote  of  a  State.  New  Jersey,  therefore, 
failed  to  vote. 


1  By  the  Articles  of  Confederation,  two  or 
more  delegates  were  required  to  be  present  to 


40  THE  AMERICA 

want  of  a  quorum.  Had  Delaware 
been  then  represented,  she  might, 
and  might  not,  have  voted  in  the  af- 
firmative ;  but  it  is  not  probable  that 
Georgia,  had  she  been  present,  would 
have  cast  an  affirmative  vote.  Hu- 
manly speaking,  we  may  say,  that 

•  the  accident — a  most  deplorable  and 
fatal  accident — of  the  absence  of  a 
member  from  New  Jersey,  prevented 
the  adoption,  at  that  time,  of  a  prop- 
osition which  would  have  confined 
Slavery  in  our  country  within  the 
limits  of  the  then  existing  States,  and 
precluded  all  reasonable  probability  of 
subsequent  contentions,  collisions,  and 
bloody  strife  touching  its  extension. 

The  Jeffersonian  Ordinance,  thus 
shorn  of  its  strength — the  play  of 
Hamlet  with  the  part  of  Hamlet 

.  omitted — after  undergoing  some  fur- 
ther amendments,  was  finally  adopt- 
ed, four  days  later :  all  the  delegates 
but  those  from  South  Carolina  voting 
in  its  favor. 

In  1787,  the  last  Continental  Con- 
gress, sitting  in  New  York,  simulta- 
neously with  the  Convention  at  Phi- 
ladelphia which  framed  our  present 
Constitution,  took  further  action  on 
the  subject  of  the  government  of  the 
western  territory,  raising  a  Select 
Committee  thereon,  of  which  Nathan 
Dane,  of  Massachusetts,  was  Chair- 
man. That  committtee  reported, 
July  11,  "  An  Ordinance  for  the 
government  of  the  Territories  of  the 
United    States    northwest   of  the 

2  As  the  American  people  of  our  day  evi- 
dently presume  themselves  much  wiser  than 
their  grandfathers,  especially  in  the  science  of 
government,  the  more  essential  portion  of  this 
celebrated  Ordinance  of  1787  is  hereto  appended, 
as  affording  a  standard  of  comparison  with  the 
latest  improvements  in  the  art  of  Constitution- 
making.    It  reads : 

"  And  for  extending  the  fundamental  princi- 
ples of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  which  form 


. N  CONFLICT. 

Ohio,"  excluding,  by  its  silence,  the 
territories  south  of  that  river,  which 
were  expressly  brought  within  the 
purview  and  operation  of  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son's Ordinance — those  territories 
not  having,  as  yet,  been  ceded  by  the 
States  claiming  them  respectively  as 
their  peculiar  possessions.  Mr.  Dane's 
ordinance  embodies  many  provisions 
originally  drafted  and  reported  by 
Mr.  Jefferson  in  1784,  but  with  some 
modifications.  The  act  concludes 
with  six  unalterable  Articles  of  Per- 
petual Compact  between  the  embryo 
States  respectively  and  the  Union: 
the  last  of  them  in  these  words : 

"  There  shall  he  neither  Slavery  nor  invol- 
untary servitude  in  the  said  Territory,  other- 
wise than  in  punishment  of  crimes,  whereof 
the  parties  shall  he  duly  convicted." 

To  this  was  added,  prior  to  its  pas- 
sage, the  stipulation  for  the  rendition 
of  fugitives  from  labor  or  service, 
which  either  had  just  been,  or  was 
just  about  to  be,  embodied  in  the 
Federal  Constitution,  then  being 
framed  ;  and  in  this  shape  the  entire 
Ordinance  was  adopted,  July  13,  by 
the  unanimous  vote  of  the  States 
then  represented  in  Congress,  inclu- 
ding Georgia  and  the  Carolinas ;  no 
effort  having  been  made  to  strike 
out  the  inhibition  of  Slavery.  Mr. 
Kobert  Yates,  of  New  York,  voted 
alone  in  the  negative  on  the  passage 
of  the  Ordinance,  but  was  overborne 
by  the  vote  of  his  two  colleagues, 
then  present.2 

the  basis  whereon  these  Republics,  their  laws 
and  constitutions,  are  erected ;  to  fix  and  estab- 
lish these  principles  as  the  basis  of  all  laws, 
constitutions,  and  governments,  which  forever 
hereafter  shall  be  formed  in  the  said  Territory ; 
to  provide,  also,  for  the  establishment  of  States 
and. permanent  government  therein,  and  for  their 
admission  to  a  share  in  the  Federal  councils  on 
an  equal  footing  with  the  original  States  at  as 
early  periods  as  may  be  consistent  with  the 
general  interest : 


y. 


THE  CONVENTION  AND  THE  CONSTITUTION. 


The  experiment  of  a  Confedera- 
tion, as  contra-distinguished  from  a 
more  intimate  and  positive  Union, 

"It  is  hereby  ordained  and  declared,  by  the 
authority  aforesaid,  that  the  following  articles 
shall  be  considered  as  articles  of  compact  be- 
tween the  original  States  and  the  people  and 
States  in  the  said  Territory,  and  forever  remain 
unalterable,  unless  by  common  consent,  to  wit : 

"Article  1.  No  person  demeaning  himself  in 
a  peaceable,  orderly  manner,  shall  ever  be  mo- 
lested on  account  of  his  mode  of  worship,  or  reli- 
gious sentiments,  in  the  Territory. 

"Art.  2.  The  inhabitants  of  the  said  Territory 
shall  always  be  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the  right 
of  habeas  corpus,  and  to  the  trial  by  jury ;  of  a  pro- 
portionate representation  of  the  people  in  the 
Legislature,  and  of  judicial  proceedings  according 
to  the  course  of  the  common  law.  All  persons 
shall  be  bailable,  unless  for  capital  offenses,  where 
the  proof  shall  be  evident  or  the  presumption 
great.  All  fines  shall  be  moderat§,  and  no  cruel 
or  unusual  punishment  shall  be  inflicted.  No 
man  shall  be  deprived  of  his  liberty,  or  property, 
but  by  the  judgment  of  his  peers,  or  the  law  of 
the  land;  and,  should  the  public  exigencies  make 
it  necessary  for  the  common  preservation  to  take 
any  person's  property,  or  to  demand  his  par- 
ticular services,  full  compensation  shall  be 
made  for  the  same.  And  in  the  just  preser- 
vation of  rights  and  property,  it  is  understood 
and  declared,  that  no  law  ought  ever  to  be  made, 
or  have  force,  in  the  said  Territory,  that  shall, 
in  any  manner  whatever,  interfere  with,  or  af- 
fect, private  contracts  or  engagements,  bond  fide, 
and  without  fraud,  previously  formed. 

"Art.  3.  General  morality  and  knowledge  be- 
ing necessary  to  good  government  and  the  happi- 
ness of  mankind,  schools  and  the  means  of  educa- 
tion shall  be  forever  encouraged.  The  utmost  good 
faith  shall  always  be  observed  toward  the  In- 
dians ;  their  lands  and  property  shall  never  be 
taken  from  them,  without  their  consent ;  and  in 
their  property,  rights,  and  liberty,  they  shall 
never  be  invaded  or  disturbed,  unless  in  just 
and  lawful  wars,  authorized  by  Congress;  and 
laws,  founded  in  justice  and  humanity,  shall 
from  time  to  time  be  made  for  preventing  wrongs 
being  done  to  them,  and  for  preserving  peace 
and  friendship  with  them. 

"  Art.  4.  The  said  Territory,  and  the  States 
which  may  be  formed  therein,  shall  forever  re- 
main a  part  of  this  confederacy  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  subject  to  the  Articles  of  Confedera- 
tion, and  to  such  alterations  therein  as  shall  be 
constitutionally  made,  and  to  all  acts  and  ordi- 
nances of  the  United  States,  in  Congress  assem- 
bled, conformable  thereto.    The  inhabitants  and 


was  fairly  tried  by  our  fathers.  Its 
only  beneficent  result  was  the  de- 
monstration thereby  afforded  of  its 

settlers  in  the  said  Territory  shall  be- subject  to 
pay  a  part  of  the  Federal  debts,  apportioned  on 
them  by  Congress,  according  to  the  same  com- 
mon rule  and  measure  by  which  apportionments 
shall  be  made  on  the  other  States ;  and  the  taxes 
for  paying  their  proportion  shall  be  laid  and 
levied  by  the  authority  and  direction  of  the 
legislatures  of  the  district,  or  districts,  or  new 
States,  as  in  the  original  States,  within  the  time 
agreed  upon  by  the  United  States,  in  Congress 
assembled.  The  Legislatures  of  those  districts, 
or  States,  shall  never  interfere  with  the  primary 
disposal  of  the  soil  by  the  United  States  in  Con- 
gress assembled,  nor  with  any  regulations  Con- 
gress may  find  necessary  for  securing  the  title 
in  such  soil  to  the  bond  fide  purchasers.  No 
taxes  shall  be  imposed  on  the  lands  and  property 
of  the  United  States ;  and  in  no  case  shall  non- 
resident proprietors  be  taxed  higher  than  resi- 
dents. The  navigable  waters  leading  into  the 
Mississippi  and  Saint  Lawrence,  and  the  convey- 
ing-places  between  the  same,  shall  be  common 
highways,  and  forever  free,  as  well  to  the  inhabit- 
ants of  the  said  Territory  as  to  the  citizens  of 
the  United  States,  and  those  of  any  other  State 
that  may  be  admitted  into  the  Confederacy, 
without  any  tax,  impost,  or  duty,  therefor. 

"Art.  5.  There  shall  be  formed  in  the  said  Ter- 
ritory no  less  than  three,  nor  more  than  five 
States ;  and  the  boundaries  of  the  States,  as  soon 
as  Virginia  shall  alter  her  act  of  cession  and 
consent  to  the  same,  shall  be  fixed  and  estab- 
lished as  follows,  to  wit :  The  western  State  in 
the  said  Territory  shall  be  bounded  by  the  Mis- 
sissippi, the  Ohio,  and  Wabash  rivers;  a  direct 
line  drawn  from  the  Wabash  and  Post  Yincent's 
due  north  to  the  territorial  hue  between  the 
United  States  and  Canada;  and  by  the  said  ter- 
ritorial line  to  the  Lake  of  the  Woods  and  Mis- 
sissippi. The  middle  State  shall  be  bounded  by 
the  said  direct  line,  the  Wabash,  from  Post  Vin- 
cent's to  the  Ohio;  by  the  Ohio;  by  a  direct 
line,  drawn  due  north,  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Great  Miami  to  the  said  territorial  line;  and  by 
the  said  national  line.  The  eastern  State  <sh all  be 
bounded  by  the  last  mentioned  direct  line,  the  Ohio, 
Pennsylvania,  and  the  said  territorial  line.  Pro- 
vided, however,  and  it  is  further  understood  and 
declared,  that  the  boundaries  of  these  three  States 
shall  be  subject  so  far  to  be  altered,  that,  if  Con- 
gress shall  hereafter  find  it  expedient,  they  shall 
have  authority  to  form  one  or  two  States  in  that 
part  of  the  said  Territory  which  lies  north  of  an 
east  and  west  line  drawn  through  the  southerly 
bend  or  extremity  of  Lake  Michigan.  And 


42 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


vital  and  incurable  defects.1  Our 
country  attained  under  it  neither 
dignity,  consideration,  security,  nor 
even  solvency.  The  central  or 
national  authority,  left  dependent 
on  the  concurrent  action  of  the  several 
States  for  the  very  means  of  existence, 
was  exhibited  often  in  the  attitude  of 
a  genteel  beggar,  rather  than  of  a 
sovereign.  Congress  attempted  to 
impose  a  very  moderate  tariff  for  the 
payment  of  interest  on  the  general 
or  foreign  debt,  contracted  in  sup- 
port of  the  Revolutionary  armies, 
but  was  baffled  by  the  Legislature  of 
Rhode  Island — then  a  State  of  rela- 
tively extensive  foreign  commerce — 
which  interposed  its  paralyzing  veto. 
Political  impotence,  commercial  em- 


barrassment, and  general  distress, 
finally  overbore  or  temporarily  silenc- 
ed sectional  jealousies  and  State 
pride,  to  such  an  extent  that  a  Con- 
vention of  delegates  from  a  quorum 
of  the  States,  called  together  rather 
to  amend  than  to  supersede  the 
Articles  of  Confederation,  was  legal- 
ly assembled  at  Philadelphia  in 
1787,  George  Washington,  Benjamin 
Franklin,  Alexander  Hamilton,  James 
Madison,  Edmund  Randolph,  and 
Charles  C.  Pinckney,  being  among 
its  most  eminent  members.  John 
Adams  and  Thomas  Jefferson  were 
absent  as  Embassadors  in  Europe. 
Samuel  Adams,  George  Clinton,  and 
Patrick  Henry  stood  aloof,  watching 
the  movement  with  jealous  appre- 

Virginia  Mr.  Grayson  ay,  ) 

Mr.  R.  H.  Lee  ay,  >-  Ay. 

Mr.  Carrington.. .  .ay,  ) 
North  Caroi^na..  Mr.  Blount  ay,  ). 

Mr.  Hawkins  ay,  )  y' 

South  Carolina... Mr.  Kean  ay,  ). 

Mr.  Huger  ay,  \  y' 

Georgia  Mr.  Few  ay,  )  . 

Mr.  Pierce  ay,  J  *' 

Journal  of  Congress,  vol.  iv.,  1787. 

1  "  It  may  perhaps  be  thought  superfluous  to 
offer  arguments  to  prove  the  utility  of  the  Union 
— a  point,  no  doubt  deeply  engraven  on  the 
hearts  of  the  great  body  of  the  people  in  every 
State,  and  one  which,  it  may  be  imagined,  has 
no  adversaries.  *  *  *  But  the  fact  is  that 
we  already  hear  it  whispered  in  the  private 
circles  of  those  who  oppose  the  new  Constitution, 
that  the  thirteen  States  are  of  too  great  extent 
for  any  general  system,  and  that  we  must  of 
necessity  resort  to  separate  confederacies  of  dis- 
tinct portions  of  the  whole.  This  doctrine  wilL 
in  all  probability,  be  gradually  propagated,  till  it 
has  votaries  enough  to  countenance  its  open 
avowal.  For  nothing  can  be  more  evident  to 
those  who  are  able  to  take  an  enlarged  view  of 
the  subject,  than  the  alternative  of  an  adoption 
of  the  Constitution  or  a  dismemberment  of  the 
Union."— The  Federalist,  N.  Y.  edition  of  1802, 
vol.  i.,  p.  5. 

"  The  melancholy  story  of  the  Federation 
showed  the  stern  necessity  of  a  compulsory 
power  in  the  General  Government  to  execute  the 
duties  confided  to  it ;  and  the  history  of  the 
present  government  itself  has,  on  more  than  one 
occasion,  manifested  that  the  power  of  the  Union 
is  barely  adequate  to  compel  the  execution  of  its 
laws,  when  resisted  even  by  a  single  State." — 
Oliver  Wolcott,  voL  it,  p.  323. 


whenever  any  of  the  said  States  shall  have 
60,000  free  inhabitants  therein,  such  State  shall 
be  admitted,  by  its  delegates,  into  the  Congress 
of  the  United  States,  on  an  equal  footing  with 
the  original  States  in  all  respects  whatever, 
and  shall  be  at  liberty  to  form  a  permanent  con- 
stitution and  State  government;  provided  the 
constitution  and  government  so  to  be  formed 
shall  be  republican,  and  in  conformity  to  the 
principles  contained  in  these  articles.  And  so 
far  as  it  can  be  consistent  with  the  general  inter- 
est of  the  confederacy,  such  admission  shall  be 
allowed  at  an  earlier  period,  and  when  there 
may  be  a  less  number  of  free  inhabitants  in  the 
State  than  60,000. 

"Art.  6.  There  shall  be  neither  Slavery  nor 
involuntary  servitude  in  the  said  Territory, 
otherwise  than  in  punishment  of  crimes,  whereof 
the  party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted;  pro- 
vided always,  that  any  person  escaping  into  the 
same  from  whom  labor  or  service  is  lawfully 
claimed  in  any  one  of  the  original  States,  such 
fugitive  may  be  lawfully  reclaimed,  and  conveyed 
to  the  person  claiming  his  or  her  labor,  or  ser- 
vice, a3  aforesaid." 

On  passing  the  above  Ordinance,  the  Teas  and 
Nays  being  required  by  Mr.  Yates,  they  were 
taken,  with  the  following  result: 


Massachusetts —  Mr.  Holton  ay, 

Mr.  Dane   ay, 

New  York  Mr.  Smith  ay. 

Mr.  Haring  ay, 

Mr.  Yates  no, 

New  Jersey  Mr.  Clarke  ay,  , 

Mr.  Sherman  ay,  f  Ay' 

Delaware  Mr.  Kearnev  ay,  )  . 

Mr.  Mitchell  ay,  J  y' 


7>Uy. 
\  ) 


SLAVERY  IN  TH 


E  CONVENTION. 


43 


hension.  Franklin,  then  over  eighty- 
one  years  of  age,  declined  the  chair 
on  account  of  his  increasing  infirm- 
ities; and,  on  his  motion,  George 
Washington  was  unanimously  elected 
President. 

The  Convention  sat  with  closed 
doors ;  and  no  circumstantial  nor 
adequate  report  of  its  deliberations 
was  made.  The  only  accounts  of 
them  which  have  reached  us  are 
those  of  delegates  who  took  notes  at 
the  time,  or  taxed  their  recollection 
in  after  years,  when  the  matter  had 
attained  an  importance  not  antici- 
pated at  the  time  of  its  occurrence  ; 
and  these  reminiscences  are  not  free 
from  the  suspicion  of  having  been 

2  In  the  debate  of  Wednesday,  August  8,  on 
the  adoption  of  the  report  of  the  Committee, 

"Mr.  Rufus  King  [then  of  Massachusetts, 
afterward  an  eminent  Senator  from  New  York] 
wished  to  know  what  influence  the  vote  just 
passed  was  meant  to  have  on  the  succeeding 
part  of  the  report  concerning  the  admission  of 
slaves  into  the  rule  of  representation.  He  could 
not  reconcile  his  mind  to  the  Article  (Art.  VII. , 
Sect.  3),  if  it  was  to  prevent  objections  to  the 
latter  part.  The  admission  of  slaves  was  a  most 
grating  circumstance  to  his  mind,  because  he 
had  hoped  that  this  concession  would  have  pro- 
duced a  readiness,  which  had  not  been  manifest- 
ed, to  strengthen  the  General  Government,  and 
to  make  a  full  confidence  in  it.  The  report  un- 
der consideration  had,  by  the  tenor  of  it,  put  an 
end  to  all  his  hopes.  In  two  great  points,  the 
hands  of  the  Legislature  were  absolutely  tied. 
The  importation  of  slaves  could  not  be  prohib- 
ited Exports  could  not  be  taxed.  Is  this  rea- 
sonable ?  What  are  the  great  objects  of  the  gen- 
eral system  ?  First,  defense  against  foreign  in- 
vasion ;  second,  against  internal  sedition.  Shall 
all  the  States,  then,  be  bound  to  defend  each, 
and  shall  each  be  at  liberty  to  introduce  a  weak- 
ness which  will  render  defense  more  difficult  ? 
Shall  one  part  of  the  United  States  be  bound  to 
defend  another  part,  and  that  other  part  be  at 
liberty,  not  only  to  increase  its  own  danger,  but 
to  withhold  a  compensation  for  the  burden  ?  If 
slaves  are  to  be  imported,  shall  not  the  exports 
produced  by  their  labor  supply  a  revenue,  the 
better  to  enable  the  General  Government  to  de- 
fend their  masters?  *  *  *  He  never  could  agree 
to  let  them  be  imported  without  limitation,  and 
then  be  represented  in  the  National  Legisla- 
ture. Indeed,  he  could  so  little  persuade  him- 
self of  the  rectitude  of  such  a  practice,  that  he 
was  not  sure  that  he  could,  assent  to  it  under 
any  circumstances. 


colored,  if  not  recast,  in  accordance 
with  the  ambitions  and  ultimate 
political  relations  of  the  recorders. 
The  general  outline,  however,  of  the 
deliberations  and  decisions  of  the 
Convention  are  sufficiently  exhibited 
in  the  Constitution,  and  in  what  we 
know  of  the  various  propositions 
rejected  in  the  course  of  its  forma- 
tion. The  purpose  of  this  work  will 
require  only  a  rapid  summary  of 
what  was  done,  and  what  left  un- 
done, in  relation  to  Human  Slavery. 

A  majority  of  the  framers  of  the 
Constitution,  like  nearly  all  their 
compatriots  of  our  Revolutionary 
era,  were  adverse  to  Slavery.2  Their 
judgments  condemned,  and  their  con- 

"  Mr.  Sherman  [Roger,  of  Connecticut]  re- 
garded the  Slave-Trade  as  iniquitous ;  but,  the 
point  of  representation  having  been  settled  after 
much  difficulty  and  deliberation,  he  did  not  think 
himself  bound  to  make  opposition ;  especially  as 
the  present  article,  as  amended,  did  not  preclude 
any  arrangement  whatever  on  that  point  in  an- 
other place  reported. 

"Mr.  Madison  objected  to  one  for  every  forty 
thousand  inhabitants  as  a  perpetual  rule.  The 
future  increase  of  population,  if  the  Union  should 
be  permanent,  will  render  the  number  of  rerjre- 
sentatives  excessive. 

"Mr.  Sherman  and  Mr.  Madison  moved  to  in- 
sert the  words  '  not  exceeding'  before  the  words 
'one  for  every  forty  thousand  inhabitants,'  which 
was  agreed  to  nem.  con. 

"Mr.  Gouverneur  Morris  moved  to  insert 
'  free'  before  the  word  '  inhabitants.'  Much,  he 
said,  would  depend  on  this  point.  He  never 
could  concur  in  upholding  Domestic  Slavery. 
It  was  a  nefarious  institution.  It  was  the 
curse  of  heaven  on  the  States  where  it  pre- 
vailed. Compare  the  free  regions  of  the  Mid- 
dle States,  where  a  rich  and  noble  cultivation 
marks  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  the  peo- 
ple, with  the  misery  and  poverty  which  over- 
spreads the  barren  wastes  of  Virginia,  Maryland, 
and  the  other  States  having  slaves.  Travel 
through  the  whole  continent,  and  you  behold  the 
prospect  continually  varying  with  the  appearance 
and  disappearance  of  Slavery.  *  *  *  Upon  what 
principle  is  it  that  the  slaves  shall  be  computed 
in  the  representation  ?  Are  they  men  ?  Then 
make  them  citizens,  and  let  them  vote.  Are  they 
property  ?  Why,  then,  is  no  other  property  in- 
cluded ?  The  houses  in  this  city  [Philadelphia] 
are  worth  more  than  all  the  wretched  slaves  that 
cover  the  rice-swamps  of  South  Carolina.  The 
admission  of  slaves  into  the  representation,  when 
fairly  explained,  comes  to  this:  that  the  inhabit- 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


sciences  reprobated  it.  They  would 
evidently  have  preferred  to  pass  over 
the  subject  in  silence,  and  frame  a 
Constitution  wherein  the  existence 
of  human  bondage  was  not  impliedly 
or  constructive^  recognized.  Hence 
it  may  be  noted,  that  those  provisions 
favoring  or  upholding  Slavery,  which 


deform  our  great  charter,  are  not 
original  and  integral  parts  of  the 
fabric,  and,  as  such,  contained  in  the 
original  draft  thereof ;  but  are  un- 
sightly and  abnormal  additions, 
rather  fastened  upon  than  interwoven 
with  the  body  of  the  structure. 
Could  the  majority  have  made  such 


ant  of  Georgia  or  South  Carolina,  who  goes  to 
the  coast  of  Africa,  and,  in  defiance  of  the  most 
sacred  laws  of  humanity,  tears  away  his  fellow- 
creatures  from  their  dearest  connections,  and 
doom3  them  to  the  most  cruel  bondage,  shall 
have  more  votes  in  a  government  instituted  for 
the  protection  of  the  rights  of  mankind  than  the 
citizen  of  Pennsylvania  or  New  Jersey,  who 
views  with  a  laudable  horror  so  nefarious  a  prac- 
tice. He  would  add,  that  Domestic  Slavery  is 
the  most  prominent  feature  in  the  aristocratic 
countenance  of  the  proposed  Constitution.  *  *  * 
Let  it  not  be  said  that  Direct  Taxation  is  to  be 
proportioned  to  Representation.  It  is  idle  to  sup- 
pose that  the  General  Government  can  stretch  its 
hand  directly  into  the  pockets  of  the  people,  scat- 
tered over  so  vast  a  country.  They  can  only  do  it 
through  the  medium  of  exports,  imports,  and  ex- 
cises. For  what,  then,  are  all  the  sacrifices  to  be 
made?  He  would  sooner  submit  himself  to  a  tax, 
paying  for  all  the  negroes  in  the  United  States, 
than  saddle  posterity  with  such  a  Constitution. 

"Mr.  Dayton  [of  New  Jersey]  seconded  the 
motion.  He  did  it,  he  said,  that  his  sentiments 
on  the  subject  might  appear,  whatever  might  be 
the  fate  of  the  amendment. 

"  Mr.  Sherman  did  not  regard  the  admission 
of  negroes  into  the  ratio  of  representation  as  lia- 
ble to  such  insuperable  objections,"  etc.,  etc. 

"Mr.  Pinckney  [C.  C,  of  South  Carolina]  con- 
sidered the  Fisheries  and  the  Western  Frontier 
as  more  burdensome  to  the  United  States  than 
the  slaves.  He  thought  this  could  be  demon- 
strated, if  the  occasion  were  a  proper  one." 

On  the  question  on  the  motion  to  insert 
"free"  before  "inhabitants,"  it  was  disagreed 
to;  New  Jersey  alone  voting  in  the  affirmative. 
— Madison's  Papers,  vol.  iii.,  p.  1261. 

Tuesday,  August  21st: 

"Mr.  Luther  Martin  [of  Maryland]  proposed 
to  vary  Article  VII.,  Section  4,  so  as  to  allow  a 
prohibition  or  tax  on  the  importation  of  slaves. 
In  the  first  place,  as  five  slaves  are  to  be  count- 
ed as  three  freemen  in  the  apportionment  of 
representatives,  such  a  clause  would  leave  an 
encouragement  to  this  traffic.  In  the  second 
place,  slaves  weakened  one  part  of  the  Union, 
which  the  other  parts  were  bound  to  protect. 
The  privilege  of  importing  was  therefore  unrea- 
sonable. And  in  the  third  place,  it  was  incon- 
sistent with  the  principles  of  the  Revolution,  and 
dishonorable  to  the  American  character,  to  have  such 
a  feature  in  the  Constitution. 

"Mr.  Rutledge  [of  South  Carolina]  did  not 
see  how  the  importation  of  slaves  could  be  en- 
couraged by  this  section.    He  was  not  apprehen- 


sive of  insurrections,  and  would  readily  exempt 
the  other  States  from  the  obligation  to  protect  the 
Southern  against  them.  Religion  and  humanity 
had  nothing  to  do  with  this  question.  Interest  alone 
is  the  governing  principle  with  nations,"  etc. 

"Mr.  Ellsworth  [of  Connecticut]  was  for 
leaving  the  clause  as  it  stands,"  etc. 

"Mr.  Pinckney. — South  Carolina  can  never 
receive  the  plan  if  it  prohibits  the  Slave- Trade.  In 
every  proposed  extension  of  the  powers  of  Con- 
gress, that  State  expressly  and  watchfully 
excepted  that  of  meddling  with  the  importation 
of  negroes.  If  the  States  should  be  all  left  at 
liberty  on  this  subject,  South  Carolina  may,  per- 
haps, by  degrees,  do  of  herself  what  is  wished,  as 
Virginia  and  Maryland  have  already  done." 

"Adjourned."— Ibid.,  p.  1388. 

Again:  in  the  debate  of  the  following  day — 
the  consideration  of  Article  VII.,  Section  4,  being 
resumed — Colonel  Mason  [George,  grandfather 
of  James  M.,  late  United  States  Senator,  and  late 
Confederate  emissary  to  England]  gave  utter- 
ance to  the  following  sentiments: 

"This  infernal  traffic  originated  in  the  avarice 
of  British  merchants.  The  British  government 
has  constantly  checked  the  attempts  of  Virginia 
to  put  a  stop  to  it.  The  present  question  con- 
cerned not  the  importing  of  slaves  alone,  but  tiie 
whole  Union.  The  evil  of  having  slaves  was  expe- 
rienced during  the  late  war.  Had  slaves  been  treat- 
ed as  they  might  have  been  by  the  enemy,  they  would 
have  proved  dangerous  instruments  in  their  hands. 
But  their  folly  dealt  by  the  slaves  as  it  did  by 
the  Tories.  *  *  *  Maryland  and  Virginia,  ho 
said,  had  already  prohibited  the  importation  of 
slaves.  North  Carolina  had  done  the  same  in 
substance.  All  this  would  be  vain,  if  South  Car- 
olina and  Georgia  be  at  liberty  to  import.  The 
Western  people  are  already  calling  for  slaves  for 
their  new  lands;  and  will  fill  that  country  with 
slaves,  if  they  can  be  got  through  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia.  Slavery  discourages  the  arts  and 
manufactures.  The  poor  despise  labor  when 
performed  by  slaves.  They  prevent  the  emigra- 
tion of  whites,  who  really  enrich  and  strengthen 
a  country.  They  produce  the  most  pernicious 
effect  on  manners.  Every  master  of  slaves  is 
born  a  petty  tyrant.  They  bring  the  judgment 
of  heaven  on  a  country.  As  nations  can  not  be 
punished  in  the  next  world,  they  must  be  in  this. 
By  an  inevitable  chain  of  causes  and  effects,  Prov- 
idence punishes  national  sins  by  national  calamities. 
*  *  *  He  held  it  essential,  in  every  point  of  view, 
that  the  General  Government  should  have  power 
to  prevent  the  increase  of  Slavery. ' ' — Ibid. ,  p.  1 3 9 0. 


THE   SLAVE  - TRADE  I 


N  THE  CONVENTION. 


45 


a  Constitution  as  they  would  have 
preferred,  Slavery  would  have  found 
no  lodgment  in  it ;  but  already  the 
whip  of  Disunion  was  brandished, 
and  the  fatal  necessity  of  Compro- 
mise made  manifest.  The  Convention 
would  have  at  once  and  forever  pro- 
hibited, so  far  as  our  country  and  her 
people  were  concerned,  the  African 
Slave-Trade  ;  but  South  Carolina  and 
Georgia  were  present,  by  their  dele- 
gates, to  admonish,  and,  if  admoni- 
tion did  not  answer,  to  menace,  that 
this  must  not  be.3  "  No  Slave- 
Trade,  no  Union  !"  Such  was  the 
short  and  sharp  alternative  presented 

3  In  the  debate  of  the  same  day,  "  General 
Pinckney  declared  it  to  be  his  firm  conviction, 
that,  if  himself  and  all  his  colleagues  were  to  sign 
the  Constitution,  and  use  their  personal  influ- 
ence, it  would  be  of  no  avail  toward  obtaining 
the  consent  of  their  constituents.  South  Car- 
olina and  Georgia  can  not  do  without  slaves.  *  * 
He  contended  that  the  importation  of  slaves 
would  be  for  the  interest  of  the  whole  Union. 
The  more  slaves,  the  more  products  to  employ 
the  carrying  trade  ;  the  more  consumption  also ; 
and  the  more  of  this,  the  more  revenue  for  the 
common  treasury.  He  admitted  it  to  be  reason- 
able, that  slaves  should  be  dutied,  like  other  im- 
ports, but  should  consider  a  rejection  of  the  clause 
as  an  exclusion  of  South  Carolina  from  the  Union. 

"Mr.  Baldwin  has  similar  conceptions  in  the 
case  of  Georgia. 

"  Mr.  Wilson  (of  Pennsylvania)  observed,  that, 
if  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  were  thus  dis- 
posed to  get  rid  of  the  importation  of  slaves  in  a 
short  time,  as  had  been  suggested,  they  would 
never  refuse  to  unite,  because  the  importation 
might  be  prohibited.  As  the  section  now 
stands,  all  articles  imported  are  to  be  taxed. 
Slaves  alone  are  exempt.  This  is,  in  fact,  a 
bounty  on  that  article. 

"  Mr.  Dickinson  [of  Delaware]  expressed  his 
sentiments  as  of  a  similar  character.  And 
Messrs.  King  and  Langdon  [of  New  Hampshire] 
were  also  in  favor  of  giving  the  power  to  the 
General  Government. 

"  General  Pinckney  thought  himself  bound 
to  declare  candidly,  that  he  did  not  think  South 
Carolina  would  stop  her  importations  of  slaves  in 
any  short  time ;  but  only  stop  them  occasionally, 
as  she  now  does.  He  moved  to  commit  the 
clause,  that  slaves  might  be  made  liable  to  an 
equal  tax  with  other  imports ;  which  he  thought 
right,  and  which  would  remove  one  difficulty 
that  had  been  started. 

"  Mr.  Rutledge  seconded  the  motion  of  Gen- 
eral Pinckney. 

"Mr.  Gouverneur  Morris  wished  the  whole 


by  the  delegates  from  those  States. 
North  Carolina  was  passive ;  Vir- 
ginia and  her  more  northern  sisters 
more  than  willing  to  prohibit  at  once 
the  farther  importation  of  Slaves ; 
in  fact,  several,  if  not  all,  of  these 
States,  including  Yirginia  and  Mary- 
land, had  already  expressly  forbid- 
den it.  But  the  ultimatum  presented 
by  the  still  slave-hungry  States  of 
the  extreme  South  was  imperative, 
and  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  it 
was  quite  too  easily  conceded.  Hoger 
Sherman,  of  Connecticut,  was  among 
the  first  to  admit  it.  The  conscience 
of  the  North  was  quieted4  by  em- 
subject  to  be  committed,  including  the  clause 
relating  to  taxes  on  exports,  and  the  navigation 
act.  These  things  may  form  a  bargain  among 
the  Northern  and  Southern  States. 

"  Mr.  Butler  [of  South  Carolina]  declared  that 
he  would  never  agree  to  the  power  of  taxing 
exports. 

"  Mr.  Sherman  said  it  was  better  to  let  the 
Southern  States  import  slaves  than  to  part  with 
them,  if  they  made  that  a  sine  qud  non." 

On  the  question  for  committing  the  remain- 
ing part  of  Sections  4  and  5,  of  Article  VII.,  the 
vote  was  7  in  the  affirmative ;  3  in  the  negative ; 
Massachusetts  absent. — Ibid.,  p.  1392. 

4  An  instance  of  this  quieting  influence,  as 
exerted  by  The  Federalist,  a  series  of  letters, 
urging  upon  the  Northern  people  the  adoption 
of  the  new  Constitution,  as  framed  and  present- 
ed to  their  several  legislatures  for  ratification 
by  the  Federal  Convention,  may  be  shown  in 
the  following: 

"  It  were,  doubtless,  to  be  wished  that  the 
power  of  prohibiting  the  importation  of  slaves 
had  not  been  postponed  until  the  year  1808; 
or  rather,  that  it  had  been  suffered  to  have  im- 
mediate operation.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to 
account  either  for  this  restriction  on  the  Gener- 
al Government,  or  for  the  manner  in  which  the 
whole  clause  is  expressed.  It  ought  to  be  con- 
sidered as  a  great  point  gained  in  favor  of  human- 
ity, that  a  period  of  twenty  years  may  terminate 
forever,  within  these  States,  a  traffic  which  has 
so  long  and  so  loudly  upbraided  the  barbarism 
of  modern  policy;  that  within  that  period  it  will 
receive  a  considerable  discouragement  from  the 
Federal  Government,  and  may  be  totally  abol- 
ished by  the  concurrence  of  the  few  States 
which  continue  the  unnatural  traffic,  in  the  pro- 
hibitory example  -which  is  given  by  so  large  a 
majority  of  the  Union.  Happy  would  it  be  for 
the  unfortunate  Africans  if  an  equal  prospect 
lay  before  them  of  being  redeemed  from  the 


46 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


bodying  in  the  Constitution  a  pro- 
viso that  Congress  might  interdict 
the  foreign  Slave-Trade  after  the 
expiration  of  twenty  years: — a  term 
which,  it  was  generally  agreed, 
ought  fully  to  satisfy  the  craving  of 
Carolina  and  Georgia.5  The  modi- 
fied proposition  to  prohibit  the  Slave- 
Trade  now  encountering  no  opposi- 
tion, the  recognition  of  slaves,  as  a 
basis  of  political  power,  presented  a 
grave  and  intricate  problem.  It  was 
one  calculated,  at  least,  to  place  the 
antagonistic  parties  respectively  in 
false  positions.  If  slaves  are  human 
beings,  why  should  they  not  be  repre- 
sented like  other  human  beings — 
that  is,  like  women  and  children,  and 
other  persons,  ignorant,  humble,  and 
powerless,  like  themselves  ?  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  you  consider  them  prop- 
erty— mere  chattels  personal,  why 

oppression  of  their  European  brethren." — The 
Federalist,  vol.  i.,  p.  276. 

b  The  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  (latest  edition 
■ — Art.,  Slavery)  states  that  the  African  Slave- 
Trade  was  abolished  by  Great  Britain,  after 
years  of  ineffectual  struggle  under  the  lead  of 
Granville  Sharp,  Thomas  Clarkson,  Wilberforce, 
etc.,  on  the  25th  of  March,  1807;  and  most  in- 
accurately and  unjustly  adds  : 

"The  great  measure  of  the  British  legislature 
was  imitated,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the 
United  States." 

To  say  nothing  of  acts  prohibiting  the  impor- 
tation of  slaves  by  several  of  our  States,  Vir- 
ginia and  Maryland  inclusive,  prior  to  the  fram- 
ing of  our  Federal  Constitution,  and  the  provi- 
sions incorporated  in  that  instrument  looking  to 
a  complete  suppression  of  the  Slave-Trade  after 
twenty  years,  our  Congress,  on  the  22d  day  of 
March,  1794,  passed  an  act  forbidding  and  pun- 
ishing any  participation  by  our  citizens  in  the 
Slave-Trade  to  foreign  countries,  which  had  long 
been  very  zealously  pursued  and  protected  by 
Great  Britain  as  a  large  and  lucrative  branch  of 
her  foreign  commerce  and  navigation.  In  1800, 
our  Congress  passed  a  further  act,  to  the  same 
effect,  but  more  sweeping  in  its  provisions  and 
severe  in  its  penalties.  On  the  2d  of  March, 
1807 — twenty-three  days  before  the  passage  of 
the  British  act — Congress  passed  one  which 


should  they  be  represented  any  more 
than  ships,  or  houses,  or  cattle? 
Here  is  a  nabob,  who  values  his  favor- 
ite high-bred  horse  at  five  thousand 
dollars,  and  five  of  his  able-bodied 
negroes  at  the  same  amount.  Why 
should  his  five  negroes  count  as  three 
men  in  apportioning  the  repre- 
sentatives in  Congress  among  the 
several  States,  while  the  blooded 
horse  counts  just  nothing  at  all  %  We 
can  only  answer  that  Slavery  and 
Reason  travel  different  roads,  and 
that  he  strives  in  vain  who  labors  to 
make  those  roads  even  seem  parallel. 
The  Convention,  without  much  de- 
bate or  demur,  split  the  difference, 
by  deciding  that  the  basis  alike  of 
Representation  in  Congress,  and  of 
Direct  Taxation,  should  be  the  entire 
free  population  of  each  State,  with 
"three-fifths  of  all  other  persons."6 

prohibits  the  African  Slave-Trade  utterly — to  our 
own  country  as  well  as  to  foreign  lands.  True, 
this  act  did  not  take  effect  till  the  1st  of  Janu- 
ary ensuing,  because  of  the  constitutional  inhi- 
bition aforesaid;  but  we  submit  that  this  doeS 
not  invalidate  our  claim  for  our  country  and  her 
Eevolutionary  Statesmen  of  the  honor  of  having 
pioneered  thus  far  the  advance  of  Justice  and 
Humanity,  to  the  overthrow  of  a  giant  iniquity. 

The  Encyclopaedia  aforesaid,  in  noting  the  fact 
that  the  African  Slave-Trade  was  abolished  by 
Great  Britain  under  the  brief  Whig  ministry  of 
Fox  and  Grenville,  after  such  abolition  had  been 
boldly  urged  for  twenty  years  under  the  all  but 
dictatorial  Tory  rule  of  Pitt,  who  was  professed- 
ly its  friend,  forcibly  and  truly  adds : 

"  The  proud  son  of  Chatham  loved  truth  and 
justice  not  a  little,  but  he  loved  power  and  place 
greatly  more;  and  he  was  resolved  that  Negro 
Emancipation  should  not  lose  him  either  a  shred 
of  political  influence  or  a  beam  of  [royal]  favor." 

The  particular  individual  of  whom  this  is  said 
is  now  some  sixty  years  dead ;  but  the  breed 
was  not  extinct,  in  either  hemisphere,  at  the  date 
of  our  latest  advices. 

e  "  We  subscribe  to  the  doctrine,  might  one  of 
our  Southern  brethren  observe,  that  Representa- 
tion relates  more  immediately  to  persons,  and 
Taxation  more  immediately  to  property ;  and  we 
join  in  the  application  of  this  distinction  to  the 
case  of  our  slaves.    But  we  deny  the  fact,  that 


THE  FUGITIVE  SLAVE  CLAUSE. 


47 


At  length,  when  the  Constitution 
•was  nearly  completed,  Slavery, 
through  its  attorney,  Mr.  Butler,  of 
South  Carolina,  presented  its  little 
Bill  for  extras.  Like  Oliver  Twist,  it 
wanted  'some  more.'  Its  new  de- 
mand was  that  slaves  escaping  from 
one  State  into  another,  might  be  fol- 
lowed and  legally  reclaimed.  This  re- 
quirement, be  it  observed,  was  en- 
tirely outside  of  any  general  and 
obvious  necessity.  ~No  one  could 
pretend  that  there  was  any  thing 
mutual  in  the  obligation  it  sought  to 
impose — that  Massachusetts  or  New 
Hampshire  was  either  anxious  to 
secure  the  privilege  of  reclaiming  her 
fugitive  slaves  who  might  escape  into 
Carolina  or  Georgia,  or  had  any  de- 
sire to  enter  into  reciprocal  engage- 
ments to  this  end.  Nor  could  any 
one.  gravely  insist  that  the  provision 
for  the  mutual  rendition  of  slaves 
was  essential  to  the  completeness  of 
the  Federal  pact.  The  old  Confed- 
eration had  known  nothing  like  it ; 
yet  no  one  asserted  that  the  want  of 
an  inter-State  Fugitive  Slave  law 

slaves  are  considered  merely  as  property,  and  in 
no  respect  whatever  as  persons.  The  true  state 
of  the  case  is,  that  they  partake  of  both  these 
qualities,  being  considered  by  our  laws  in  some 
respects  as  persons,  and  in  other  respects  as 
property.  In  being  compelled  to  labor,  not 
merely  for  himself,  but  for  a  master — in  being 
vendible  by  one  master  to  another  master,  and 
being  subject,  at  all  times,  to  being  restrained 
in  his  liberty  and  chastised  in  his  body  by  the 
capricious  will  of  his  owner,  the  slave  may  ap- 
pear to  be  degraded  from  the  human  rank,  and 
classed  with  that  of  the  irrational  animals, 
which  fall  under  the  legal  denomination  of  prop- 
erty. In  being  protected,  on  the  other  hand, 
in  his  life  and  in  his  limbs,  against  the  violence 
of  all  others,  even  the  master  of  his  labor  and 
his  liberty,  and  in  being  punished  himself  for 
all  violence  committed  against  others,  the  slave 
is  no  less  regarded  by  the  law  as  a  member  of 
society,  not  as  a  part  of  the  irrational  creation — 
as  a  moral  person,  not  a  mere  object  of  prop- 
erty. The  Federal  Constitution,  therefore, 
decides,  with  great  propriety,  on  the  case  of  our 
slaves,  when  it  views  them  in  the  mixed  char- 
acter of  persons  and  property.    This  is,  in  fact, 


was  among  the  necessities  or  griev- 
ances which  had  impelled  the  as- 
sembling of  this  Convention.  But 
the  insertion  of  a  slave-catching 
clause  in  the  Constitution  would  un- 
doubtedly be  regarded  with  favor  by 
the  slaveholding  interest,  and  would 
strongly  tend  to  render  the  new 
frame:work  of  government  more  ac- 
ceptable to  the  extreme  South.  So, 
after  one  or  two  unsuccessful  at- 
tempts, Mr.  Butler  finally  gave  to 
his  proposition  a  shape  in  which  it 
proved  acceptable  to  a  majority  ;  and 
it  was  adopted,  with  slight  apparent 
resistance  or  consideration.7 

In  these  latter  days,  since  the 
radical  injustice  and  iniquity  of  slave- 
holding  have  been  more  profoundly 
realized  and  generally  appreciated, 
many  subtle  and  some  able  attempts 
have  been  made  to  explain  away  this 
most  unfortunate  provision,  for  the 
reason  that  the  Convention  wisely 
and  decorously  excluded  the  terms 
Slave  and  Slavery  from  the  Constitu- 
tion ;  "  because,"  as  Mr.  Madison 
says,  "  they  did  not  choose  to  admit 

their  true  character.  It  is  the  character  be- 
stowed on  them  by  the  laws  under  which  they 
live ;  and  it  will  not  be  disputed  that  these  are 
the  proper  criterion,  because  it  is  only  under  the 
pretext  that  the  laws  have  transformed  negroes 
into  subjects  of  property,  that  a  place  is  denied 
to  them  in  the  computation  of  numbers  ;  and  it 
is  admitted  that,  if  the  laws  were  to  restore  the 
rights  which  have  teen  taken  away,  the  negroes 
would  no  longer  be  refused  an  equal  share  of  repre- 
sentation with  the  other  inhabitants" — The  Feder- 
alist, vol.  ii.,  p.  46. 

7  In  Convention,  Wednesday,  August  29, 
1787.  •  . 

"  Mr.  Butler  moved  to  insert,  after  Article  XV., 
'  if  any  person  bound  to  service  or  labor  in  any 
of  the  United  States  shall  escape  into  another 
State,  he  or  she  shall  not  be  discharged  from 
such  service  or  labor  in  consequence  of  any 
regulations  existing  in  the  State  to  which  they 
escape,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  to  the  person 
justly  claiming  their  service  or  labor' — which, 
after  some  verbal  modification,  was  agreed  to, 
nem.  con." — Madison's  Papers,  vol.  hi.,  p.  145,  6. 


48 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  right  of  property  in  man."8  It 
has  been  argued  that  this  provision 
does  not  contemplate  the  rendition 
of  fugitives  from  Slavery,  but  rather 
of  runaway  apprentices,  persons  who, 
having  entered  into  contracts  for 
their  own  labor,  have  repudiated 
their  engagements,  and  other  such 
Jonahs.  The  records  and  reminis- 
cences of  the  Convention,  however, 
utterly  refute  and  dissipate  these  vain 
and  idle  pretenses.  It  is  sheer  ab- 
surdity to  contend  that  South  Caro- 
lina in  the  Convention  was  absorb- 
ingly intent  on  engrafting  upon  the 
Federal  Constitution  a  provision  for 
the  recapture  of  runaway  appren- 
tices, or  any  thing  of  the  sort.  What 
she  meant  was,  to  extort  from  the 
apprehensions  of  a  majority,  anxious 
for  a  more  perfect  Union,  a  conces- 
sion of  authority  to  hunt  fugitive 
slaves  in  any  part  of  our  broad 
national  area,  and  legally  to  drag 
them  thence  back  into  perpetual 
bondage.  If  the  Convention  did  not 
mean  to  grant  exactly  that,  it  trifled 
with  a  very  grave  subject,  and  stoop- 
ed to  an  unworthy  deception.  How 
much  better  to  meet  the  issue  broadly 
and  manfully,  saying  frankly  to  the 

8  In  the  debate  of  Tuesday,  July  29,  1788, 
in  the  North  Carolina  ratification  convention, 
which  was  organized  at  Hillsborough,  July  21, 
1788: 

"  Mr.  Iredell  begged  leave  to  explain  the 
reason  of  this  clause  (last  clause,  Section  2, 
Article  IV.).  In  some  of  the  Northern  States, 
they  have  emancipated  all  their  slaves.  If  any 
of  our  slaves,  said  he,  go  there  and  remain  there 
a  certain  time,  they  would,  by  the  present  laws, 
be  entitled  to  their  freedom,  so  that  their  mas- 
ters could  not  get  them  again.  This  would  be 
extremely  prejudicial  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Southern  States  ;  and  to  prevent  it,  this  clause 
is  inserted  in  the  Constitution.  Though  the 
word  slave  is  not  mentioned,  this  is  the  meaning 
of  it.  The  Northern  delegates,  owing  to  their 
peculiar  scruples  on  the  subject  of  Slavery, 
did  not  choose  the  word  slave  to  be  men- 
tioned."— Elliot's  Debates,  vol.  iv.,  p.  176. 


slaveholders :  "  This  provision  is 
contrary  to  equity  and  good  con- 
science ;  hence  we  can  not  obey  it. 
To  seize  our  fellow-man  and  thrust 
him  into  an  abhorred  bondage  may 
in  your  eyes  be  innocent,  in  ours  it 
would  be  crime.  If,  then,  you  are 
aggrieved  in  any  case,  by  our  refusal 
or  neglect  to  return  your  fugitives, 
make  out  your  bill  for  their  fair  mar- 
ket value  and  call  upon  us  for  its 
payment.  If  we  refuse  it,  you  will 
then  have  a  real  grievance  to  allege 
— this,  namely:  that  we  have  de- 
prived you  of  what  the  Constitution 
recognizes  as  your  property,  and  have 
failed  to  make  recompense  therefor. 
But  you  surely  can  not  blame  us,  that, 
having  been  enlightened  as  to  the  im- 
moral nature  of  acts  consented  to,  or 
stipulated  for,  by  our  fathers,  we  are 
unable  longer  to  commit  them.  Take 
our  property,  if  you  think  yourselves 
entitled  to  it;  but  allow  us  to  be 
faithful  to  our  convictions  of  duty 
and  the  promptings  of  humanity."9 

General  Charles  C.  Pinckney^  in 
laying  the  Federal  Constitution  be- 
fore the  Convention  of  South  Caro- 
lina, which  assembled  January  15, 
1788,  to  pass  upon  it,  made  a  speech, 

9  Governor  Seward,  in  his  speech  of  March  11, 
1850,  on  Freedom  in  the  Territories,  forcibly 
set  forth  the  true  and  manly  Northern  ground 
on  this  subject,  as  follows  : 

"  The  law  of  nations  disavows  such  com- 
pacts ;  the  law  of  nature,  written  on  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  freemen,  repudiates  them. 
I  know  that  there  are  laws,  of  various  sorts, 
which  regulate  the  conduct  of  men.  There  are 
constitutions  and  statutes,  codes  mercantile  and 
codes  civil ;  but  when  we  are  legislating  for 
States,  especially  when  we  are  founding  States, 
all  these  laws  must  be  brought  to  the  standard 
of  the  law  of  God,  must  be  tried  by  that  stand- 
ard, and  must  stand  or  fall  by  it.  To  conclude 
on  this  point :  We  are  not  slaveholders.  We 
can  not,  in  our  judgment,  be  either  true  Chris- 
tians or  real  freemen,  if  we  impose  on  another 
a  chain  that  we  defy  all  human  power  to  fasten 
on  ourselves." — Seward's  Works,  vol.  i.,  p.  66. 


THE   SOUTHERN  TERRITORIES. 


in  which  he  dwelt  with  reasonable  and 
justifiable  complacency  on  the  advan- 
tages secured  to  Slavery  by  the  Consti- 
tution ;10  and  these,  doubtless,  were 


49 

among  the  considerations  which  se- 
cured its  ratification,  by  that  body,  by 
a  vote  of  149  to  73.  Other  Southern 
States  may  have  been  thus  affected. 


VI. 

SLAYEEY  UNDEK  THE  CONSTITUTION. 


It  has  been  plausibly  argued  that 
the  constitutional  provision  for  the 
surrender  of  fugitive  slaves,  and  the 
inhibition  of  Slavery  in  the  Territo- 
ries simultaneously  embodied  in  the 
Ordinance  of  1787,  were  parts  of  an 
implied,  rather  than  clearly  expressed, 
compact,  whereby  Slavery  in  the  old 
States  was  to  be  protected,  upheld, 
and  guaranteed,  on  condition  that  it 
should  rest  content  within  its  existing 
boundaries.  In  seeming  accordance 
with  this  hypothesis,  the  first  Federal 
Congress,  which  met  at  New  York 
on  the  first  "Wednesday  in  March, 
1789,  proceeded  forthwith  to  adopt 
and  reenact  the  prohibition  of  Slavery 
in  the  Territories,  already  contained 
in  the  Ordinance  of  '87  aforesaid, 
and  to  adapt  that  Ordinance  in  all  re- 
spects to  the  new  state  of  things  cre- 
ated by  the  Federal  Constitution.  No 

10  The  following  is  an  extract  from  General 
Chas.  C.  Pinckney's  speech,  delivered  in  the 
South  Carolina  ratification  convention,  January 
17,  1788  : 

"  I  am  of  the  same  opinion  now  as  I  was 
two  years  ago — that,  while  there  remained  one 
acre  of  swamp  land  uncleared  in  South  Carolina, 
I  would  raise  my  voice  against  restricting  the 
importation  of  negroes.  *  *  *  *  The  Middle 
States  and  Virginia  were  for  an  immediate  and 
total  prohibition.  We  endeavored  to  obviate 
the  objections  which  were  urged  in  the  best 
manner  we  could,  and  assigned  reasons  for  our 
insisting  on  the  importation,  which  there  is  no 
occasion  to  repeat,  as  they  must  occur  to  every 
gentleman  in  the  House :  a  committee  of  the 

4 


voice  was  raised  in  dissent  from  this 
action.  On  the  other  hand,  the  next 
Congress  proceeded  to  enact,  with 
very  little  opposition,  a  stringent  and 
comprehensive  fugitive  slave  law.1 

North  Carolina,  on  the  22d  of  De- 
cember, 1789 — one  month  after  rati- 
fying the  Federal  Constitution — 
passed  an  act  ceding,  on  certain  con- 
ditions, her  western  territory — now 
constituting  the  State  of  Tennessee — 
to  the  Federal  Union.  She  exacted 
and  required  Congress  to  assent  to 
this,  among  other  conditions  : 

"Provided  always,  that  no  regulation 
made,  or  to  be  made,  by  Congress,  shall  tend 
to  emancipate  slaves." 

Georgia,  likewise,  in  ceding  to  the 
Union  (April  2,  1802)  her  outlying 
territories,  now  forming  the  States 
of  Alabama  and  Mississippi,  imposed 
upon  the  Union,  and  required  Con- 
States  was  appointed  in  order  to  accommodate 
this  matter;  and,  after  a  great  deal  of  difficulty, 
it  was  settled,  on  the  footing  of  the  Constitution. 
By  this  settlement,  we  have  secured  an  unlimit- 
ed importation  of  negroes  for  twenty  years. 
Nor  is  it  declared  when  that  importation  shall 
be  stopped ;  it  may  be  continued.  We  have  a 
right  to  recover  our  slaves  in  whatever  part  of 
America  they  may  take  refuge.  In  short,  con- 
sidering all  circumstances,  we  have  made  the 
best  terms  for  the  security  of  this  species  of 
property  it  was  in  our  power  to  make.  We 
would  have  made  better  if  we  could;  but,  on  the 
whole,  I  do  not  think  them  bad'1 — Elliot's  Debates, 
voL  iv.,  p.  285. 

1  For  this  act,  see  Brightley's  Digest,  p.  294 


50 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


gress  to  accede  to,  the  following  con- 
dition : 

"  Fifthly.  That,  the  territory  thus  ceded 
shall  become  a  State,  and  be  admitted  into 
the  Union  as  soon  as  it  shall  contain  sixty 
thousand  inhabitants,  or  at  an  earlier 
period,  if  Congress  shall  think  it  expedient, 
on  the  same  conditions  and  restrictions, 
with  the  same  privileges,  and  in  the  same 
manner,  as  is  provided  in  the  ordinance  of 
Congress  of  the  13th  day  of  July,  1787,  for 
the  government  of  the  western  territory  of 
the  United  States ;  which  ordinance  shall; 
in  all  its  parts,  extend  to  the  territory  con- 
tained in  the  present  act  of  cession,  the  arti- 
cle only  excepted  which  forbids  Slavery." 

Congress  was  thus  precluded,  by 
the  unprecedented  and  peremptory 
conditions  affixed  to  their  respective 
cessions  of  their  western  territory  by 
North  Carolina  and  Georgia,  from 
continuing  and  perfecting  the  Jeffer- 
sonian  policy  of  fundamental  and 
imperative  Slavery  inhibition  in  the 
Federal  Territories.  Had  Mr.  Jef- 
ferson's Ordinance  of  17S4  been 
passed  as  he  reported  it,  this  benefi- 
cent end  would  have  been  secured. 
Accident,  and  the  peculiar  require- 
ments of  the  Articles  of  Confedera- 
tion, prevented  this.  Mr.  Dane's  Or- 
dinance of  1787  contemplated  only 
the  territories  already  ceded  to  the 

s  The  Rev.  Jonathan  Edwards  (son  of  the  fa- 
mous Jonathan  Edwards,  who  was  the  greatest 
theologian,  and  one  of  the  greatest  men  whom 
New  England  has  ever  produced),  preached  a 
sermon  against  the  African  Slave-Trade,  Septem- 
ber 15,  1791,  at  New  Haven,  Connecticut,  then 
a  Slave  State.  Text:  The  Golden  Rule;  Mat- 
thew vii.,  12. 

It  is  so  commonly  urged  that  the  Abolitionists 
condemn  a  relation  whereof  they  are  grossly  igno- 
rant, that  the  following  extract  from  that  ser- 
mon is  of  interest,  as  the  testimony  of  one  living 
amid  Slavery,  and  as  proving  how  essentially 
identical  are  the  objections  urged  to  human  chat- 
telhood  at  all  times,  and  under  whatever  circum- 
stances.   Mr.  Edwards  said : 

"  African  Slavery  is  exceedingly  impolitic,  as 
it  discourages  industry.  Nothing  is  more  essen- 
tial to  the  political  prospect  of  any  State  than 
industry  in  the  citizens.  But,  in  proportion  as 
Slaves  are  multiplied,  every  kind  of  labor  be- 


Confederation,  leaving  those  still  to 
be  ceded  to  be  governed  by  some 
future  act.  The  assumption,  how- 
ever, that  there  was  between  the 
North  and  the  South  an  original  and 
subsisting  compact,  arrangement,  un- 
derstanding, or  whatever  it  may  be 
called,  whereby  so  much  of  the  com- 
mon territories  of  the  Republic  as 
lay  south  of  the  Ohio,  or  of  any  par- 
ticular latitude,  were  to  be  surren- 
dered to  Slavery,  on  the  condition 
that  the  residue  should  be  quit- 
claimed to  free  labor,  is  utterly  un- 
founded and  mistaken.  The  author 
of  the  original  restriction  was  him- 
self a  slaveholder ;  yet  he  contem- 
plated and  provided  for  (as  we  have 
seen)  the  consignment  of  every  acre 
of  those  territories,  north  as  well  as 
south  of  the  Ohio,  and  down  to  the 
southernmost  limit  of  our  domain,  to 
Free  Labor  evermore.  A  majority 
of  the  States  which  sustained  that 
proposition  were  then  slaveholding, 
and  had  taken  no  decided  steps 
toward  Emancipation.  Yet  they 
none  the  less  regarded  Slavery  as  an 
evil  and  a  blunder,2  to  be  endured, 

comes  ignominious;  and.  in  fact,  in  those  of  the 
United  States  in  which  slaves  are  the  most  nu- 
merous, gentlemen  and  ladies  of  any  fashion 
disdain  to  employ  themselves  in  business,  which 
in  other  States  is  consistent  with  the  dignity  of 
the  first  families  and  the  first  offices.  In  a 
country  filled  with  negro  slaves,  labor  belongs 
to  them  only,  and  a  white  man  is  despised  in 
proportion  as  he  applies  to  it.  Now,  how  de- 
structive of  industry  in  all  of  the  lowest  and  mid- 
dle class  of  citizens  such  a  situation,  and  the 
prevalence  of  such  ideas  will  be,  you  can  easily 
conceive.  The  consequence  is  that  some  will 
nearly  starve,  others  will  betake  themselves  to 
the  most  dishonest  practices  to  obtain  a  mean3 
of  living.  As  Slavery  produces  an  indolence  in 
the  white  people,  so  it  produces  all  those  vices 
which  are  naturally  connected  with  it,  such  as 
intemperance,  lewdness,  and  prodigality.  These 
vices  enfeeble  both  the  body  and  the  mind,  and 
unfit  men  for  any  vigorous  exertions  and  em- 
ployments, either  external  or  mental.  And 
those  who  are  unfit  for  such  exertions  are 
already  very  degenerate ;  degenerate,  not  only  in 


VIEWS   OF  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  PATRIOTS. 


51 


perhaps,  for  a  season  where  already 
established,  rather  than  to  invoke 
greater  mischiefs  and  perils  by  its  too 
sudden  and  violent  extirpation  than 
were  likely  to  flow  from  its  more 
patient  and  gradual  extinction.  But 
to  plant  Slavery  on  virgin  soil — to 
consecrate  vast  and  yet  vacant  terri- 
tories to  its  extension  and  perpetua- 
tion— to  conquer  and  annex  still 
further  domains  expressly  to  increase 
its  security  and  enlarge  its  power — 
are  guilty  dreams  which  never  trou- 
bled the  repose  of  the  great  body  of 
our  Revolutionary  sages  and  patriots. 
Enlightened  by  their  own  experience 

a  moral,  but  a  natural  sense.  They  are  con- 
temptible too,  and  will  soon  be  despised,  even 
by  their  negroes  themselves. 

"Slavery  tends  to  lewdness,  not  only  as  it 
produces  indolence,  but  as  it  affords  abundant 
opportunity  for  that  wickedness,  without  either 
the  danger  or  difficulty  of  an  attack  on  the  vir- 
tue of  a  woman  of  chastity,  or  the  danger  of  a 
connection  with  one  of  ill  fame.  A  planter,  with 
his  hundred  wenches  about  him,  is,  in  some  re- 
spects at  least,  like  the  Sultan  in  his  seraglio :  and 
we  learn  too  frequently  the  influence  and  effect 
of  such  a  situation,  not  only  from  common  fame, 
but  from  the  multitude  of  mulattoes  in  countries 
where  slaves  are  very  numerous. 

"  Slavery  has  a  most  direct  tendency  to  haugh- 
tiness also,  and  a  domineering  spirit  and  conduct 
in  the  proprietors  of  slaves,  and  in  their  children, 
and  in  all  who  have  control  of  them.  A  man 
who  has  been  brought  up  in  domineering  over 
negroes  can  scarcely  avoid  contracting  such  a 
habit  of  haughtiness  and  domination  as  will  ex- 
press itself  in  his  general  treatment  of  mankind, 
whether  in  his  private  capacity,  or  any  office, 
civil  or  military,  with  which  he  may  be  vested. 
Despotism  in  economics  naturally  leads  to  des- 
potism in  politics,  and  domestic  Slavery  in  a  free 
government  is  a  perfect  solecism  in  human 
affairs. 

"  How  baneful  all  these  tendencies  and  effects 
of  Slavery  must  be  to  the  public  good,  and  espe- 
cially to  the  public  good  of  such  a  free  country 
as  ours,  I  need  not  inform  you." — Sermons,  1775- 
99,  p.  10. 

3  The  opinion  of  the  Father  of  his  Country 
respecting  the  "peculiar  institution"  of  the 
South  may  be  perceived  from  the  following  ex- 
tracts. In  a  letter  to  Lafayette,  bearing  date 
April  5,  1783,  he  says: 

"The  scheme,  my  dear  Marquis,  which  you 
propose  as  a  precedent  to  encourage  the  emanci- 
pation of  the  black  people  in. this  country  from 
that  state  of  bondage  in  which  they  are  lyjd,  is 


as  to  the  evils  and  dangers  of  arbi- 
trary, despotic,  irresponsible  power, 
they  were  too  upright  and  too  logic- 
al to  seek  to  fasten  for  all  time  on  a 
helpless  and  inoffensive  race  chains 
far  heavier  and  more  galling  than 
those  they  had  just  shaken  off.  Most 
of  them  held  slaves,  but  held  them 
under  protest  against  the  anomaly 
presented  to  the  world  by  republican 
bondage,  and  in  the  confident  hope 
that  the  day  would  soon  dawn  that 
would  rid  themselves  of  the  burden 
and  their  country  of  the  curse  and 
shame'  of  human  chattelhood.3  Had 
they  been  asked  to  unite  in  any  of 

a  striking  evidence  of  the  benevolence  of  your 
heart.  I  shall  be  happy  to  join  you  in  so  laud- 
able a  work ;  but  will  defer  going  into  a  detail 
of  the  business  until  I  have  the  pleasure  of  see- 
ing you." — Sparks's  Washington,  vol.  viii.,  p  414. 

Again,  in  a  letter  to  the  same,  of  May  10, 
1786: 

"  The  benevolence  of  your  heart,  my  dear  Mar- 
quis, is  so  conspicuous  upon  all  occasions,  that  I 
never  wonder  at  any  fresh  proofs  of  it;  but  your 
late  purchase  of  an  estate  in  the  colony  of  Cay- 
enne, with  a  view  to  emancipate  the  slaves  on 
it,  is  a  generous  and  noble  proof  of  your  human- 
ity. Would  to  God  a  like  spirit  might  diffuse 
itself  in  the  minds  of  the  people  of  this  country  I 
But  I  despair  of  seeing  it.  Some  petitions  were 
presented  to  the  Assembly  at  its  last  session,  for 
the  Abolition  of  Slavery,  but  they  could  scarcely 
obtain  a  reading." — Ibid.,  vol.  ix.,  p.  163. 

In  a  remarkable  and  very  interesting  letter 
written  by  Lafayette  in  the  prison  of  Magdeburg, 
he  said : 

"  I  know  not  what  disposition  has  been  made 
of  my  plantation  at  Cayenne ;  but  I  hope  Madam 
De  Lafayette  will  take  care  that  the  negroes 
who  cultivate  it  shall  preserve  their  liberty." 

The  following  language  is  also  Lafayette's,  in 
a  letter  to  Hamilton,  from  Paris,  April  13,  1785  : 

"  In  one  of  your  New  York  Gazettes,  I  find 
an  association  against  the  Slavery  of  the  negroes, 
which  seems  to  me  worded  in  such  a  way  as  to 
give  no  offense  to  the  moderate  men  in  the 
Southern  States.  As  I  have  ever  been  partial  to 
my  brethren  of  that  color,  I  wish,  if  you  are  one 
in  the  society,  you  would  move,  in  your  own 
name,  for  my  being  admitted  on  the  list." — Works 
of  Alex.  Hamilton,  K  Y.,  1851,  vol.  i.,  p.  423. 

John  Adams,  in  a  letter  to  Robert  J.  Evans, 
June  8,  1819,  expresses  himself  as  follows: 
"I  respect  the  sentiments  and  motives  which 


52 


T  II E  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  projects  of  the  Sam  Houstons, 
William  Walkers,  Quitmans,  and 
Slidells  of  our  day,  they  would  have 
retorted  as  indignantly  as  the  aston- 
ished Syrian  to  the  Hebrew  prophet 
— "Is  thy  servant  a  dog,  that  he 
should  do  this  thing  ?"  Oh  that  they 
had  but  known  and  realized  that  the 
wrong  which  to-day  is  barely  tole- 
rated for  the  moment,  is  to-morrow 
cherished,  and  the  next  day  sustain- 
ed, eulogized,  and  propagated ! 

When  Ohio  was  made  a  State,  in 
1803,  the  residue  of  the  North- West 
Territory  became  Indiana  Territory, 
with  William  Henry  Harrison — 
since  President  of  the  United  States 
— as  Governor.  Its  earlier  settle- 
ments were  mainly  on  the  banks  of 
the  Ohio  and  of  its  northern  tributa- 
ries, and  were  principally  by  emi- 
grants from  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and 
other  Slave  States.  These  emigrants, 
realizing  an  urgent  need  of  labor,  and 
being  accustomed  to  supply  that  need 
by  the  employment  of  slaves,  almost 
unanimously  memorialized  Congress, 
through  a  Convention  a>>embled  in 
1802,  and  presided  over  by  their 
Governor,  for  a  temporary  suspension 
of  the  sixth  article  of  the  Ordinance 
of  '87,  whereby  Slavery  was  expressly 
prohibited.  Their  memorial  was  re- 
ferred by  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives to  a  Select  Committee  of  three, 
two  of  them  from  the  Slave  States, 

have  prompted  you  to  engage  in  your  present 
occupation  so  much,  that  I  feel  an  esteem  and 
affection  for  your  person,  as  I  do  a  veneration 
for  your  assumed  signature  of  Benjamin  Rush. 
The  turpitude,  the  inhumanity,  the  cruelty,  and 
the  infamy  of  the  African  commerce,  have  been 
so  impressively  represented  to  the  public  by  the 
highest  powers  of  eloquence,  that  nothing  that  I 
could  say  would  increase  the  just  odium  in  which 
it  is,  and  ought  to  be,  held.  Every  measure  of 
prudence,  therefore,  ought  to  be  assumed  for  Vie 
eventual   total  extirpation  of  Slavery  from  tJie 


with  the  since  famous  John  Randolph 
of  Roanoke,  then  a  young  member,  as 
its  chairman.  On  the  2d  of  March, 
1803,  Mr.  Randolph  made  a  unani 
mous  report  from  this  Committee, 
recommending  a  denial  of  the  prayer 
of  the  petitioners,  for  these  reasons  : 

"  The  rapid  population  of  the  State  of 
Ohio  sufficiently  evinces,  in  the  opinion  of 
your  Committee,  that  the  labor  of  slaves  is 
not  necessary  to  promote  the  growth  and 
settlement  of  colonies  in  that  region ;  that 
this  labor — demonstrably  the  dearest  of  any 
— can  only  be  employed  in  the  cultivation 
of  products  more  valuable  than  any  known 
to  that  quarter  of  the  United  States ;  that 
the  Committee  deem  it  highly  dangerous  and 
inexpedient  to  impair  a  provision  wisely 
calculated  to  promote  the  happiness  and 
prosperity  of  the  North- Western  Country, 
and  to  give  strength  and  security  to  that  ex- 
tensive frontier.  In  the  salutary  operation 
of  this  sagacious  and  benevolent  restraint,  it 
is  believed  that  the  inhabitants  of  Indiana 
will,  at  no  very  distant  day,  find  ample 
remuneration  for  a  temporary  privation  of 
labor,  and  of  emigration/' 

The  session  terminated  the  next 
day ;  and  the  subject  was,  the  next 
winter,  referred  to  a  new  committee, 
whereof  Caesar  Rodney,  of  Delaware, 
was  chairman.  This  committee  re- 
ported in  favor  "  of  a  qualified  sus- 
pension, for  a  limited  time,"  of  the 
inhibition  aforesaid.  But  Congress 
took  no  action  on  the  report. 

The  people  of  Indiana  Territory 
persisted  in  their  seemingly  unani- 
mous supplication  to  be  allowed,  for 
a  limited  period,  the  use  of  Slave 
Labor  ;  and  Mr.  Garnett,  of  Virginia, 
on  the  14th  of  February,  1806,  made 

United  States.  *  *  *  I  have,  through  my 
whole  life,  held  the  practice  of  Slavery  in  such 
abhorrence,  that  I  have  never  owned  a  negro  or 
any  other  slave,  though  I  have  lived  for  many 
years  in  times  when  the  practice  was  not  dis- 
graceful— when  the  best  men  in  my  vicinity 
thought  it  not  inconsistent  with  their  character ; 
and  when  it  has  cost  me  thousands  of  dollars 
for  the  labor  and  subsistence  of  free  men,  which 
I  might  have  saved  by  the  purchase  of  negroes, 
at  times  when  they  were  very  cheap." — Works 
of  John  Adams,  Boston,  1856,  voLx.,  p.  386. 


THE  COUNTER- 


REVOLUTION. 


53 


another  report  from  a  Select  Com- 
mittee in  favor  of  granting  their  re- 
quest. But  Congress  never  took  this 
report  into  consideration.  At  the  next 
session,  a  fresh  letter  from  Governor 
Harrison,  inclosing  resolves  of  the 
Legislative  Council  and  House  of 
Representatives  in  favor  of  suspend- 
ing temporarily  the  inhibition  of 
Slavery,  was  received,  and  referred 
(January  21,  1807)  to  a  Select  Com- 
mittee, whereof  Mr.  B.  Parke,  Dele- 
gate from  said  Territory,  was  made 
chairman.  This  Committee,  com- 
posed mainly  of  members  from 
Slave  States,  made  (February  12th)  a 
third  report  in  favor  of  the  petition- 
ers ;  but  Congress  never  acted  upon 
the  subject. 

At  the  next  session,  the  matter  was 
brought  before  the  Senate,  on  the  appa- 
rently unanimous  prayer  of  Governor 
Harrison  and  his  Legislature  for  per- 
mission temporarily  to  employ  slaves  ; 
but  there  was  now,  for  the  first  time, 
a  remonstrance  of  citizens  of  the 
Territory  against  the  measure.  The 
Senate  referred  the  subject  to  a 
Select  Committee  of  three,  whereof  Mr. 
Jesse  Franklin,  of  N.  C,  was  chair- 
man ;  and  Mr.  Franklin,  on  the  13th 
of  November,  1807,  reported  briefly 
against  the  petition,  closing  as  fol- 
lows : 

"  Your  Committee,  after  duly  considering 
the  matter,  respectfully  submit  the  following 
resolution : 

"  Resolved,  That  it  is  not  expedient  at  this 
time  to  suspend  the  sixth  article  of  compact 
for  the  government  of  the  Territory  of  the 
United  States  North- West  of  the  river 
Ohio." 

And  here  the  long  and  fruitless 
struggle  to  fasten  Slavery  upon  the 
vast  Territory  now  forming  the  States 
of  Indiana,  Illinois,  Michigan,  and 


Wisconsin,  appears  to  have  ended. 
By  this  time,  emigration  from  the 
Free  States  into  that  Territory  had 
begun.  But  it  is  probable  that,  at 
any  time  prior  to  1818-20,  a  majority 
of  the  white  settlers  actually  resident 
in  that  Territory  would  have  voted  in 
favor  of  the  introduction  of  slaves. 


For  a  counter-revolution  had  been 
silently  proceeding  for  some  years 
previous,  and  had  almost  eradicated 
the  lessons  and  the  principles  of  the 
Revolution  from  the  hearts  of  the 
South,  saving,  of  course,  those  por- 
tions wherein  they  seem  to  have 
never  been  learned.  The  bases  of  this 
revolution  are  the  acquisition  of 
Louisiana  and  the  invention  of  the 
Cotton  Gin;4  events  for  which  Thomas 
Jefferson  and  Eli  Whitney — neither 
of  them  pro-slavery — are  primarily 
responsible.  The  acquisition  of  Lou- 
isiana, though  second  in  occurrence 
and  in  importance,  first  attracted  and 
fixed  the  attention  of  mankind,  and 
shall,  therefore,  be  first  considered. 

The  river  Mississippi  was  first  dis- 
covered in  1541,  by  the  Spanish 
adventurer  De  Soto,  in  the  course  of 
his  three  or  four  years'  fantastic 
wanderings  and  fightings  throughout 
the  region  which  now  constitutes  the 
Gulf  States  of  our  Union,  in  quest  of 
the  fabled  Eldorado,  or  Land  of  Gold. 
He  left  Spain  in  1538,  at  the  head  of 
six  hundred  ambitious  and  enthusias- 
tic followers,  all  eager  and  sanguine 
as  himself  in  their  quest  of  the  foun- 
tain of  perpetual  youth  and  life.  He 
died  of  a  malignant  fever  on  the  bank 
of  the  Mississippi,  in  the  spring  or 
early  summer  of  1542  ;  and  his  body, 


*  This  word  is  merely  a  corruption  of  engine. 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


to  conceal  his  death  from  the  sur- 
rounding hostile  savages,  was  sunk  by 
his  surviving  followers  in  the  deep 
current  of  that  mighty  stream.  Of 
the  entire  expedition,  less  than  half, 
an  enfeebled  and  wretched  remnant, 
finally  reached  the  coast  of  Mexico, 
in  the  summer  of  1543,  glad  to  have 
escaped  with  their  bare  lives  from  the 
inhospitable  swamps  and  savages  they 
had  so  recklessly  encountered.  It 
does  not  appear  that  any  of  them, 
nor  even  De  Soto  himself,  had  formed 
any  adequate  conception  of  the  im- 
portance of  their  discovery,  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  river,  or  of  the  ex- 
tent and  fertility  of  the  regions 
drained  by  its  tributaries  ;  since  more 
than  a  century  was  allowed  to  tran- 
spire before  the  Mississippi  was  re- 
visited by  civilized  men.  And  its 
next  discoverers  were  not  Spaniards, 
but  Frenchmen;  although  Spain  had 
long  possessed  and  colonized  Florida 
and  Mexico  on  either  side  of  its 
mouth.  But  the  French — now  firmly 
established  in  Canada,  and  penetrat- 
ing by  their  traders  and  voyageura 
the  wild  region  stretching  westward 
and  south-westward  from  that  Colony 
— obtained  from  the  savages  some 
account  of  this  river  about  the  year 
1660  ;  and  in  1673,  Marquette  and 
Joliet,  proceeding  westward  from 
Montreal,  through  the  Great  Lakes, 
reached  the  Mississippi  above  its 
junction  with  the  Missouri,  and 
descended  it  to  within  three  days' 
journey  of  its  mouth.  In  16S2,  La 
Salle  descended  it  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  and  took  formal  possession 
of  the  region  in  the  name  of  his  king 
and  country.  A  fort  was  erected  on 
its  banks  by  Iberville,  about  the  year 
1699  ;  and  in  1703,  a  settlement  was 
made  at  St.  Peters,  on  the  Yazoo. 


New  Orleans  was  first  chosen  as  the 
site  of  a  city  in  1717,  laid  out  in 
1718,  when  the  levees  which  protect 
it  from  the  annual  inundations  of  the 
river  were  immediately  commenced, 
and  steadily  prosecuted  to  completion, 
ten  years  afterward.  The  colony  of 
Louisiana  (so  named  after  Louis  XIV.) 
remained  a  French  possession  until 
1762,  when  it  was  ceded  to  Spain. 
New  Orleans  gradually  increased  in 
trade  and  population,  but  the  colony 
outside  of  that  city  was  of  slight  im- 
portance under  its  Spanish  rulers, 
who  did  little  to  develop  its  resour- 
ces, and  were  not  popular  with  its 
mainly  French  inhabitants.  In  1 802, 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  then  First  Con- 
sul, induced  the  feeble  and  decaying 
Bourbons  of  Spain,  then  in  close  alli- 
ance with  revolutionary  France,  to 
retrocede  to  her  Louisiana,  almost 
without  consideration ;  and  the  French 
flag  once  more  waved  over  delighted 
New  Orleans. 

In  the  United  States,  however,  the 
transfer  was  regarded  with  regret  and 
apprehension.  Our  settlers  beyond 
the  Alleghanies,  who  must  export 
their  surplus  products  through  tho 
lower  Mississippi,  or  see  them  perish 
useless  and  valueless  on  their  hands, 
had  been  for  fifteen  years  in  a  state 
of  chronic  and  by  no  means  voiceless 
dissatisfaction  with  the  alleged  jeal- 
ous hostility  and  obstructive  regula- 
tions of  the  Spanish  rulers  of  that 
essential  outlet.  Threats  were  freely 
uttered  that  they  would  soon  descend 
the  river  and  clear  its  lower  banks 
of  the  Dons  and  drones  who  seemed 
to  burrow  there  only  as  an  impedi- 
ment and  a  nuisance.  The  Span- 
iards were  charged  with  fomenting 
intrigues  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee, 
which  had  for  their  object  the  aliena- 


LOUISIANA  CEDED  TO  PRANCE 


55 


tion  of  tlie  entire  valley  of  the  Ohio 
from  the  Union ;  and  certain  discon- 
tented or  desperate  spirits  were 
pointed  at  and  named  by  their  neigh- 
bors as  having  sold  themselves  for 
money  to  the  Spanish  governor  at 
New  Orleans,  agreeing  to  lend  all 
their  energies  to  the  promotion  of  his 
absurd  scheme.  So  long  as  Spain 
held  the  gateway  of  the  Mississippi, 
it  seemed  that  no  other  sway  there 
could  be  more  unpopular  or  odious 
with  our  Western  pioneers. 

But  a  6  sober  second  thought '  was 
evinced  from  the  moment  that  her 
flag  had  been  supplanted  by  that  of 
republican  France.  It  was  instinc- 
tively and  universally  felt  that  even 
the  growls  and  threats,  in  which  our 
people  so  freely  indulged  so  long  as 
the  effete  and  despised  Spaniard  was 
their  object,  would  no  longer  be  politic 
nor  safe.  Directly  after  the  general 
pacification  of  Europe,  in  1802,  by  the 
treaty  of  Amiens,  a  powerful  French 
expedition  had  sailed  for  the  West 
Indies ;  and,  though  its  ostensible  and 
real  destination  was  Hayti,  the  appre- 
hension was  here  general  and  reason- 
able that  it  would  ultimately,  if  not 
immediately,  be  debarked  on  the 
banks  of  the  Mississippi.  The  privi- 
leges of  navigation  and  of  deposit, 

5  Upon  learning  of  this  important  transfer, 
Mr.  Jefferson  (April  18,  1802)  wrote  to  Mr. 
Livingston,  our  Minister  at  Paris,  as  follows : 

"The  cession  of  Louisiana  and  the  Floridas 
by  Spain  to  France,  works  most  sorely  on  the 
United  States.  On  this  subject,  the  Secretary 
of  State  has  written  to  you  fully,  yet  I  cannot 
forbear  recurring  to  it  personally,  so  deep  is  the 
impression  it  makes  on  my  mind.  It  completely 
reverses  all  the  political  relations  of  the  United 
States,  and  will  form  a  new  epoch  in  our  politi- 
cal course.  Of  all  nations  of  any  consideration, 
France  is  the  one  which  hitherto  has  offered  the 
fewest  points  on  which  we  could  have  any  con- 
flict of  rights,  and  the  most  points  of  a  commu- 
nion of  interests.  From  these  causes,  we  have 
ever  looked  to  her  as  our  natural  friend,  as  one 


which  had  seemed  so  niggardly  when 
conceded  by  the  weakness  of  Spain, 
were  now  rather  contracted  than  en- 
larged, and  were  likely  to  be  with- 
drawn altogether.  We  had  freely  con- 
temned and  denounced  the  stupidity 
and  blindness  of  King  Log,  but  became 
suddenly  grave  and  silent  on  the  un- 
expected advent  of  King  Stork. 

Mr.  Jefferson,  who  had  recently 
been  called  to  the  Presidency,  and 
who  mainly  did  the  deeper  thinking 
of  the  young  and  vigorous  party 
which  now  ruled  the  country,  re- 
garded the  change  with  alarm  from 
still  another  aspect.  Popular  sym- 
pathy with  and  admiration  for  repub- 
lican France,  with  a  corresponding 
aversion  to  and  hatred  of  aristocratic 
England,  were  among  the  most  po- 
tent influences  which  had  combined 
to  overthrow  the  Federalists  here  and 
bring  the  Republicans  into  power. 
But  all  this  was  now  morally  certain 
to  be  reversed.  France,  planting 
herself,  as  it  were,  at  our  back  door, 
there  erecting  fortifications,  and  jeal- 
ously scrutinizing,  if  not  positively 
arresting,  every  one  who  should  un- 
dertake to  pass  in  or  out,  became  in- 
evitably and  predominantly  the  ob- 
ject of  American  distrust  and  hostili- 
ty.5   And  now  the  great  advantage 

with  which  we  could  never  have  an  occasion  of 
difference.  Her  growth,  therefore,  we  viewed 
as  our  own — her  misfortunes  ours.  There  is  on 
the  globe  one  single  spot,  the  possessor  of  which 
is  our  natural  and  habitual  enemy.  It  is  New 
Orleans,  through  which  the  produce  of  three- 
eighths  of  our  territory  must  pass  to  market; 
and,  from  its  fertility,  it  will  ere  long  yield  more 
than  half  of  our  whole  produce,  and  contain 
more  than  half  of  our  inhabitants.  France, 
placing  herself  in  that  door,  assumes  to  us  the 
attitude  of  defiance.  Spain  might  have  retain- 
ed it  quietly  for  years.  Her  pacific  dispositions, 
her  feeble  state,  would  induce  her  to  increase 
our  facilities  there,  so  that  her  possession  of  the 
place  would  be  hardly  felt  by  us,  and  it  would 
not,  perhaps,  be  very  long  before  some  circum- 
stances might  arise,  which  might  make  the  cession. 


56 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


hitherto  accruing  to  the  Republican 
or  Democratic  party  from  our  rela- 
tions with  Europe,  and  our  sympa- 
thies with  one  or  the  other  of  the 
parties  which  divided  her,  would  be 
transferred  at  once  to  the  Federalists, 
and  probably  doubled  or  quadrupled 
in  intensity  and  efficiency.  The  vigi- 
lant and  far-seeing  Jefferson,  always 
a  patriot,  and  always  intensely  a  par- 
tisan, perceived  the  peril  at  once  to 
his  country  and  his  party,  and  re- 
solved by  a  bold  stroke  to  avert  it. 
He  determined  that  Louisiana  should 
be  ours,  and  perceived,  in  the  gather- 
ing storm  of  war,  destined  so  soon  to 
sweep  away  the  fragile  frost-work  of 
the  recent  and  unreal  peace,  a  means 
of  bending  the  astute  and  selfish  Na- 
poleon to  his  will.  Louisiana,  so  re- 
cently and  easily  reacquired  by 
France,  must  become  a  peril  and  a 
burden  to  her  upon  the  outbreak  of 
fresh  hostilities  with  a  power  so  su- 
perior in  maritime  strength  as  Great 
Britain.  Tamely  to  surrender  it, 
would  be  damaging,  if  not  disgrace- 
ful ;  to  hold  it,  would  cost  a  fleet  and 
an  army,  and  the  transfer  of  this  fleet 
and  army  to  a  point  so  distant  as  the 
Mexican  Gulf  was  at  best  a  hazardous 
enterprise.  France  badly  needed 
money ;  we  needed,  or  at  least  covet- 

of  it  to  us  the  price  of  something  of  more  worth 
to  her.  Not  so  can  it  ever  be  in  the  hands  of 
France.  The  impetuosity  of  her  temper,  the  en- 
ergy and  restlessness  of  her  character,  placed 
in  a  point  of  eternal  friction  with  us,  and  our 
character,  which,  though  quiet  and  loving  peace 
and  the  pursuit  of  wealth,  is  high-minded,  de- 
spising wealth  in  competition  with  insult  or  in- 
jury, enterprising  and  energetic  as  any  nation  on 
earth ;  these  circumstances  render  it  impossible 
that  France  and  the  United  States  can  continue 
long  friends,  when  they  meet  in  so  irritable  a 
position.  They,  as  well  as  we,  must  be  blind  if 
they  do  not  see  this ;  and  we  must  be  very  im- 
provident if  we  do  not  begin  to  make  arrange- 
ments on  that  hypothesis.  The  day  that  France 
takes  possession  of  New  Orleans  fixes  the  sen- 
tence which  is  to  restrain  her  forever  within  her 
low-water  mark.    It  seals  the  union  of  two  na- 


ed,  Louisiana:  and,  where  the  rulers 
on  either  side  are  men  so  capable  and 
clear-sighted  as  Bonaparte  and  Jef- 
ferson, an  arrangement  mutually  ad- 
vantageous is  not  likely  to  fail. 
After  some  skillful  diplomatic  fenc- 
ing— Mr.  Jefferson  talking  as  if  the 
island  of  Orleans  and  the  Floridas 
were  all  that  we  greatly  cared  for, 
when  he  meant  from  the  first  to  have 
the  whole — and  after  some  natural 
higgling  about  the  price,  the  bargain 
was  struck  on  the  30th  of  April, 
1803.  The  hungry  treasury  of 
France  was  richer  by  twelve  millions 
of  dollars ;  four  millions  mora  were 
paid  by  our  government  to  our  own 
citizens,  in  satisfaction  of  their  right- 
eous claims  against  France  for  spolia- 
tions and  other  damages ;  and  the 
United  States  became  the  unques- 
tioned owner  and  possessor  of  the  en- 
tire Yalley  of  the  Mississippi ;  acquir- 
ing by  this  bloodless  purchase  an  area 
of  virgin  soil,  subject  to  the  Indians' 
rights  of  inheritance  and  occupancy, 
worth  many  times  its  entire  cost. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  this  pur- 
chase was  made  in  the  interest  of 
Slavery,  or  with  any  reference  to  the 
perpetuation  of  its  existence  or  the 
increase  of  its  power.  But  this  does 
not  at  all  impinge  on  the  fact  that 

tions,  who,  in  conjunction,  can  maintain  exclusive 
possession  of  the  ocean.  From  that  moment, 
we  must  marry  ourselves  to  the  British  fleet  and 
nation.  We  must  turn  all  our  attention  to  a 
maritime  force,  for  which  our  resources  place  us 
on  very  high  ground :  and,  having  formed  and 
connected  together  a  power  which  may  render 
re-enforcement  of  her  settlements  here  impossible 
to  France,  make  the  first  cannon  which  shall  be 
fired  in  Europe  the  signal  for  tearing  up  any 
settlement  she  may  have  made,  and  for  holding 
the  two  continents  of  America  in  sequestration 
for  the  common  purpose  of  the  united  British 
and  American  nations.  This  is  not  a  state  of 
things  we  seek  or  desire.  It  is  one  which  this 
measure,  if  adopted  by  France,  forces  on  us,  as 
necessarily  as  any  other  cause,  by  the  laws  of 
nature,  brings  on  its  necessary  effect" — Jeffer- 
son's Works,  vol.  iv..  p.  431. 


SLAVERY  1ST  LOUISIANA  — COTTON. 


57 


Slavery  in  our  Union  did  secure  by 
this  acquisition  a  vast  extension  of  its 
power  and  influence.  Louisiana 
came  to  us  a  slaveholding  territory ; 
had  been  such,  whether  under  French 
or  Spanish  rule,  for  generations. 
Though  its  population  was  sparse,  it 
was  nevertheless  widely  dispersed 
along  the  Mississippi  and  its  lower 
tributaries,  there  being  quite  consid- 
erable settlements  at  and  in  the  vicin- 
ity of  St.  Louis.  Slavery  had  thus 
already  achieved  a  lodgment  and  a 
firm  foothold  in  this  vast,  inviting 
domain.  Possession  is  notoriously 
nine  points  of  the  law ;  but  in  this 
case  the  tenth  wTas  not  wanting. 
The  white  inhabitants  were  habit- 
uated to  slaveholding,  liked  it,  and 
indolently  believed  it  to  be  condu- 
cive to  their  importance,  their  wealth, 
and  their  comfort.  Of  the  swarm  of 
emigrants  and  adventurers  certain  to 
pour  in  upon  them  as  a  consequence 
of  our  acquisition,  a  large  majority 
would  naturally  come  from  the  States 
nearest  them,  that  is,  from  the  pre- 
ponderantly and  inveterately  Slave 
States;  while  the  Northern  adven- 
turers, hying  with  alacrity  to  such  a 
tempting  field  for  speculation  and  ex- 
periment, were  pretty  sure  to  inter- 
pose no  fanatical  objection  to  a 
social  condition  unanimously  pro- 
nounced so  pleasant  and  profitable 
by  all  who  were  permitted  to  speak 
at  all  on  the  subject.  Moreover, 
the  treaty  of  cession  had  expressly 
stipulated  that  the  inhabitants  of 
Louisiana  "  should  be  incorporated 
into  the  Union  of  the  United  States, 
and  admitted,  as  soon  as  possible,  ac- 
cording to  the  principles  of  the  Feder- 
al Constitution,  to  the  enjoyment  of 
all  the  rights,  advantages,  and  immu- 
nities of  citizens  of  the  United  States. 


And,  in  the  mean  time,  they  should 
be  maintained  and  protected  in  the 
free  enjoyment  of  their  liberty,  prop- 
erty, and  the  religion  which  they 
professed."  A  just — no,  even  a  liter- 
al construction  of  this  provision, 
giving  to  the  word  "  inhabitants"  its 
natural  and  full  signification — might 
have  secured  liberty,  with  the  enjoy- 
ment of  all  the  "rights,  advantages, 
and  immunities  of  citizens  of  the 
United  States,"  to  the  colored  as  well 
as  the  white  Louisianians  of  that  day. 
But  it  is  hardly  supposable  that  this 
wTas  really  intended  by  the  treacher- 
ous murderer  of  Toussaint,  just  sig- 
nally baffled  in  his  formidable  at- 
tempt to  reenslave  the  freedmen  of 
Playti.  It  is  very  certain  that  this 
construction  was  never  put  in  prac- 
tice, but  that  those  who  had  been 
slaves  under  Spanish  and  French 
rule  in  Louisiana  remained  so  under 
the  flag  of  our  country,  dying  in 
bondage  unless  specially  emanci- 
pated, and  leaving  their  children  the 
sole  inheritance  of  their  sad  condi- 
tion ;  and  that  slaveholders,  whether 
in  fact  or  in  purpose  only,  eagerly 
hastened  to  our  new  purchase  and 
rapidly  covered  its  most  inviting  lo- 
calities with  cotton-fields  and  slave- 
huts.  The  day  that  saw  Louisiana 
transferred  to  our  Union  is  one  of 
woeful  memory  to  the  enslaved  chil- 
dren of  unhappy  Africa. 

The  plant  known  as  Cotton, 
whence  the  fiber  of  that  name  is 
mainly  obtained,  appears  to  be  indi- 
genous in  most  tropical  and  semi- 
tropical  countries,  having  been  found 
growing  wild  by  Columbus  in  St. 
Domingo,  and  by  later  explorers 
throughout  the  region  of  the  low- 
er Mississippi  and  its  tributaries. 


58  THE  AMERICA 

Cortes  found  it  in  use  by  the  half- 
civilized  Mexicans ;  and  it  has  been 
rudely  fabricated  in  Africa  from  time 
immemorial.  India,  however,  is  the 
earliest  known  seat  of  the  cotton 
manufacture,  and  here  it  long' ago 
attained  the  highest  perfection  possi- 
ble prior  to  the  application  of  steam, 
with  complicated  machinery,  to  its 
various  processes ;  and  hence  it  ap- 
pears to  have  gradually  extended 
westward  through  Persia  and  Arabia, 
until  it  attracted  the  attention  of 
the  Greeks,  and  was  noticed  by 
Herodotus  about  450  B.  C,  as  the 
product  of  an  Indian  tree,  and  the 
staple  of  an  extensive  manufacture. 
Later  Greek  accounts  confirm  the 
impression  that  the  tree  or  shrub 
variety  was  cultivated  in  India  pre- 
viously to  the  plant  or  annual  now  by 
far  the  more  commonly  grown.  The 
Romans  began  to  use  cotton  fabrics 
before  the  time  of  Julius  Caesar,  and 
the  cotton-plant  was  grown  in  Sicily 
and  along  the  northern  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean  so  early  as  the  tenth 
century.  The  culture,  however,  does 
not  appear  to  have  ever  attained  a 
great  importance  in  any  portion  of 
the  world  regarded  by  the  Greeks 
and  Romans  as  civilized,  prior  to  its 
recent  establishment  in  Egypt,  in 
obedience  to  the  despotic  will  of 
Ibrahim  Pacha. 

In  the  British  colonies  now  com- 
posing this  country,  the  experiment 
of  cotton-planting  was  tried  so  early 
as  1621 ;  and  in  1666  the  growth  of 
the  cotton-plant  is  on  record.  The 
cultivation  slowly  and  fitfully  ex- 
panded throughout  the  following 
century,  extending  northward  to  the 
eastern  shore  of  Maryland  and  the 
southernmost  point  of  New  Jersey — 
where,  however,  the  plant  was  grown 


N  CONFLICT. 

more  for  ornament  than  use.  It  is 
stated  that  "  seven  bags  of  cotton- 
wool" were  among  the  exports  of 
Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1748,  and  that 
trifling  shipments  from  that  port 
were  likewise  made  in  1754  and  1757. 
In  1784,  it  is  recorded  that  eight 
bags,  shipped  to  England,  were 
seized  at  the  custom-house  as  fraudu- 
lently entered  :  "  cotton  not  being  a 
production  of  the  United  States." 
The  export  of  1790,  as  returned,  was 
eighty-one  bags  ;  and  the  entire  cotton 
crop  of  the  United  States  at  that 
time  was  probably  less  than  the  pro- 
duct of  some  single  plantation  in  our 
day. 

For,  though  the  plant  grew  lux- 
uriantly and  produced  abundantly 
throughout  tide-water  Virginia  and 
all  that  portion  of  our  country  lying 
southward  and  south-westward  of 
Richmond,  yet  the  enormous  labor 
required  to  separate  the  seed  from  the 
tiny  handful  of  fibres  wherein  it  was 
imbedded,  precluded  its  extensive  and 
profitable  cultivation.  It  was  calcu- 
ted  that  the  perfect  separation  of  one 
pound  of  fibre  from  the  seed  was  an 
average  day's  work  ;  and  this  fact  pre- 
sented a  formidable  barrier  to  the 
production  of  the  staple  in  any  but  a 
region  like  India,  where  labor  can 
be  hired  for  a  price  below  the  cost 
of  subsisting  slaves,  however  wretch- 
edly, in  this  country.  It  seemed  that 
the  limit  of  American  cotton  culti- 
vation had  been  fully  reached,  when 
an  event  occurred  which  speedily  rev- 
olutionized the  industry  of  our  slave- 
holding  States  and  the  commerce  and 
manufactures  of  the  world. 

Eli  Whitney,  a  native  of  West- 
borough,  Worcester  County,  Massa- 
chusetts, born  December  8, 1765,  was 


THE  YOUTH  OP 


ELI  WHITNEY. 


59 


descended  on  both  sides  from  ances- 
tors of  English  stock,  who  dated  their 
migration  from  the  old  country  nearly 
back  to  the  memorable  voyage  of  the 
Mayflower.  They  were  generally  farm- 
ers, and,  like  most  farmers  of  those 
days,  in  very  moderate  circumstances. 
Eli's  father,  poor,  industrious,  and  in- 
genious, had  a  workshop  wherein  he 
devoted  the  inclement  season  to  the 
making  of  wheels  and  of  chairs.  Here 
the  son  early  developed  a  remarka- 
ble ingenuity  and  mechanical  skill; 
establishing,  when  only  fifteen  years 
of  age,  the  manufacture  by  hand  of 
wrought  nails,  for  which  there  was, 
in  those  later  years  of  our  Revolution- 
ary struggle,  a  demand  at  high  prices. 
Though  he  had  had  no  instruction  in 
nail-making,  and  his  few  implements 
were  of  the  rudest  description,  he 
pursued  the  business  through  two 
winters  with  profit  to  his  father,  de- 
voting the  summers,  as  before  and 
afterward,  to  the  labors  of  the  farm. 
After  the  close  of  the  war,  his  nails 
being  no  longer  in  demand,  he  en- 
gaged in  the  manufacture  of  the  pins 
then  in  fashion  for  fastening  ladies' 
bonnets,  and  nearly  monopolized  the 
market  through  the  excellence  of  his 
product.  Walking-canes  also  were 
among  his  winter  manufactures,  and 
were  esteemed  peculiarly  well  made 
and  handsome.  Meantime,  he  con- 
tinued the  devotion  of  his  summers 
to  the  labors  of  the  farm,  attending 
the  common  school  of  his  district 
through  its  winter  session,  and  being 
therein  noted  for  devotion  to,  and 
eminent  skill  in,  arithmetic.  At  four- 
teen, he  was  looked  upon  by  his 
neighbors  as  a  very  remarkable,  en- 
ergetic, and  intelligent  youth.  At 
nineteen,  he  resolved  to  obtain  a  lib- 
eral education ;  but  it  was  not  until 


he  had  reached  the  mature  age  of 
twenty-three  that  he  was  enabled  to 
enter  college.  By  turns  laboring 
with  his  hands  and  teaching  school, 
he  obtained  the  means  of  prosecuting 
his  studies  in  Yale,  which  he  entered 
in  May,  1789.  He  borrowed  some 
money  to  aid  him  in  his  progress, 
giving  his  note  therefor,  and  paying 
it  so  soon  as  he  could.  On  the  de- 
cease of  his  father  some  years  after- 
ward, he  took  an  active  part  in 
settling  the  estate,  but  relinquished 
his  portion  to  his  co-heirs.  It  is 
scarcely  probable  that  the  amount 
he  thus  sacrificed  was  large,  but  the 
generous  spirit  he  evinced  is  not 
thereby  obscured. 

While  in  college,  his  natural  supe- 
riority in  mechanism  and  proclivity 
to  invention  were  frequently  mani- 
fested. On  one  occasion,  a  tutor 
regretted  to  his  pupils  that  he  could 
not  exhibit  a  desired  philosophical 
experiment,  because  the  apparatus 
was  out  of  order,  and  could  only  be 
repaired  in  Europe.  Young  Whitney 
thereupon  proposed  to  undertake  the 
repair,  and  made  it  to  perfect  satis- 
faction. At  another  time,  he  asked 
permission  to  use  at  intervals  the 
tools  of  a  carpenter  who  worked 
near  his  boarding-place ;  but  the  care- 
ful mechanic  declined  to  trust  them 
in  the  hands  of  a  student,  unless 
the  gentleman  with  whom  Mr.  W. 
boarded  would  become  responsible 
for  their  safe  return.  The  guarantee 
was  given,  and  Mr.  Whitney  took  the 
tools  in  hand;  when  the  carpenter, 
surprised  at  his  dexterity,  exclaimed : 
"  There  was  one  good  mechanic 
spoiled  when  you  went  to  college." 

Mr.  Whitney  graduated  in  the  fall 
of  1792,  and  directly  engaged  with  a 
Mr.  B.,  from  Georgia,  to  proceed  to 


60 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


that  State  and  reside  in  his  employer's 
family  as  a  private  teacher.  On  his 
way  thither,  he  had  as  a  traveling 
companion  Mrs.  Greene,  widow  of  the 
eminent  Revolutionary  general,  Na- 
thaniel Greene,  who  was  returning 
with  her  children  to  Savannah,  after 
spending  the  summer  at  the  JSTorth. 
His  health  being  infirm  on  his  arri- 
val at  Savannah,  Mrs.  Greene  kindly 
invited  him  to  the  hospitalities  of  her 
residence  until  he  should  become  fully 
restored.  Short  of  money  and  in  a 
land  of  strangers,  he  was  now  coolly 
informed  by  his  employer  that  his 
services  were  not  required,  he  (B.) 
having  employed  another  teacher  in 
his  stead !  Mrs.  Greene  hereupon 
urged  him  to  make  her  house  his 
home  so  long  as  that  should  be  de- 
sirable, and  pursue  under  her  roof 
the  study  of  the  law,  which  he  then 
contemplated.  He  gratefully  accept- 
ed the  offer,  and  commenced  the 
study  accordingly. 

Mrs.  Greene  happened  to  be  en- 
gaged in  embroidering  on  a  peculiar 
frame  known  as  a  tambour.  It  was 
badly  constructed,  so  that  it  injured 
the  fabric  while  it  impeded  its  pro- 
duction. Mr.  Whitney  eagerly  vol- 
unteered to  make  her  a  better,  and 
did  so  on  a  plan  wholly  new,  to  her 
great  delight  and  that  of  her  chil- 
dren. 

A  large  party  of  Georgians,  from 
Augusta  and  the  plantations  above, 
soon  after  paid  Mrs.  G.  a  visit,  sev- 
eral of  them  being  officers  who  had 
served  under  her  husband  in  the  Rev- 
olutionary war.  Among  the  topics 
discussed  by  them  around  her  fireside 
was  the  depressed  state  of  Agricul- 
ture, and  the  impossibility  of  profit- 
ably extending  the  culture  of  the 
green-seed  Cotton,  because  of  the 


trouble  and  expense  incurred  in  sep- 
arating the  seed  from  the  fiber.  These 
representations  impelled  Mrs.  Greene 
to  say :  "  Gentlemen,  apply  to  my 
young  friend,  Mr.  Whitney — he  can 
make  any  thing."  She  thereupon  took 
them  into  an  adjacent  room,  where 
she  showed  them  her  tambour-frame 
and  several  ingenious  toys  which  Mr. 
W.  had  made  for  the  gratification  of 
her  children.  She  then  introduced 
them  to  Whitney  himself,  extolling 
his  genius  and  commending  him  to 
their  confidence  and  friendship.  In 
the  conversation  which  ensued,  he 
observed  that  he  had  never  seen  cot- 
ton nor  cotton-seed  in  his  life. 

Mr.  Whitney  promised  nothing  and 
gave  little  encouragement,  but  went 
to  work.  ~No  cotton  in  the  seed  be- 
ing at  hand,  he  went  to  Savannah 
and  searched  there  among  ware- 
houses and  boats  until  he  found  a 
small  parcel.  This  he  carried  home 
and  secluded  with  himself  in  a  base- 
ment room,  where  he  set  himself  at 
work  to  devise  and  construct  the  im- 
plement required.  Tools  being  few 
and  rude,  he  was  constrained  to  make 
better — drawing  his  own  wire,  be- 
cause none  could,  at  that  time,  be 
bought  in  the  city  of  Savannah.  Mrs. 
Greene  and  her  next  friend,  Mr.  Mil- 
ler, whom  she  soon  after  married, 
were  the  only  persons  beside  himself 
who  were  allowed  the  entree  of  his 
workshop — in  fact,  the  only  ones  who 
clearly  knew  what  he  was  about.  His 
mysterious  hammering  and  tinkering 
in  that  solitary  cell  were  subjects  of 
infinite  curiosity,  marvel,  and  ridi- 
cule among  the  younger  members  of 
the  family.  But  he  did  not  interfere 
with  their  merriment,  nor  allow  them 
to  interfere  with  his  enterprise  ;  and, 
before  the  close  of  the  winter,  his 


INFANCY  OF  THE  COTTON-GIN. 


61 


machine  was  so  nearly  perfected  that 
its  success  was  no  longer  doubtful. 

Mrs.  Greene,  too  eager  to  realize 
and  enjoy  her  friend's  triumph,  in 
view  of  the  existing  stagnation  of 
Georgian  industry,  invited  an  assem- 
blage at  her  house  of  leading  gentle- 
men from  various  parts  of  the  State, 
and,  on  the  first  day  after  their  meet- 
ing, conducted  them  to  a  temporary 
building,  erected  for  the  machine,  in 
which  they  saw,  with  astonishment 
and  delight,  that  one  man  with 
Whitney's  invention  could  separate 
more  cotton  from  the  seed  in  a  single 
day  than  he  could  without  it  by  the 
labor  of  months. 

Mr.  Phineas  Miller,  a  native  of 
Connecticut  and  a  graduate  of  Yale,' 
who  had  come  to  Georgia  as  the 
teacher  of  General  Greene's  children, 
and  who,  about  this  time,  became 
the  husband  of  his  widow,  now  pro- 
posed a  partnership  with  Mr.  Whit- 
ney, by  which  he  engaged  to  furnish 
funds  to  perfect  the  invention,  secure 
the  requisite  patents,  and  manufac- 
ture the  needed  machines ;  the  part- 
ners to  share  equally  all  profits  and 
emoluments  thence  resulting.  Their 
contract  bears  date  May  27,  1793; 
and  the  firm  of  Miller  &  Whitney 
immediately  commenced  what  they 
had  good  reason  to  expect  would 
prove  a  most  extensive  and  highly 
lucrative  business.  Mr.  Whitney 
thereupon  repaired  to  Connecticut, 
there  to  perfect  his  invention,  secure 
his  patent,  and  manufacture  machines 
for  the  Southern  market. 

But  his  just  and  sanguine  hopes 
were  destined  to  signal  and  bitter 
disappointment.  His  invention  was 
too  valuable  to  be  peacefully  enjoyed ; 
or,  rather,  it  was  the  seeming  and 
urgent  interest  of  too  many  to  rob 


him  of  the  just  reward  of  his  achieve- 
ment. He  ought  not  to  have  ex- 
pected  that  those  who  lived  idly  and 
luxuriously  by  stealing  the  wife  from 
her  husband,  and  the  child  from  its 
mother,  would  hesitate  to  steal,  also, 
the  fruit  of  his  brain-work,  in  order 
to  render  thereby  the  original  theft 
ten-fold  more  advantageous  than  it 
otherwise  could  be.  Reports  of  the 
nature  and  value  of  his  invention 
were  widely  and  rapidly  circulated, 
creating  intense  excitement.  Multi- 
tudes- hastened  from  all  quarters  to 
see  his  original  machine;  but,  no 
patent  having  yet  been  secured,  it 
was  deemed  unsafe  to  gratify  their 
curiosity;  so  they  broke  open  the 
building  by  night,  and  carried  off  the 
wonderful  prize.  Before  he  could 
complete  his  model  and  secure  his 
patent,  a  number  of  imitations  had 
been  made  and  set  to  work,  deviating 
in  some  respects  from  the  original,  in 
the  hope  of  thus  evading  all  penalty. 
Before  Whitney  had  been  three  days 
on  his  northward  trip,  a  letter  from 
his  partner  followed  on  his  track, 
which  said : 

"  It  will  be  necessary  to  have  a  considera- 
ble number  of  gins  made,  to  be  in  readiness 
to  send  out  as  soon  as  the  patent  is  obtained, 
in  order  to  satisfy  the  absolute  demands, 
and  make  people's  heads  easy  on  the  subject; 
for  I  am  informed  of  two  other  claimants 
for  the  honor  of  the  invention  of  the  cotton 
gins,  in  addition  to  those  we  knew  before." 

Messrs.  Miller  and  Whitney's 
plan  of  operations  was  essentially 
vicious.  They  proposed  to  construct 
and  retain  the  ownership  of  all  the 
machines  that  might  be  needed,  set- 
ting one  up  in  each  cotton-growing 
neighborhood,  and  ginning  all  the 
staple  for  every  third  pound  of  the 
product.  Even  at  this  rate,  the 
invention  would  have  been  one  of 


62 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


enormous  benefit  to  the  planters — 
cotton  being  then  worth  from  twenty- 
five  to  thirty-three  cents  per  pound. 
But  no  single  manufactory  could  turn 
out  the  gins  so  fast  as  wanted,  and 
planters  who  might  readily  have  con- 
sented to  the  terms  of  the  patentees, 
had  the  machines  been  furnished  so 
fast  as  required,  could  hardly  be  ex- 
pected to  acquiesce  so  readily  in  the 
necessity  of  doing  without  machines 
altogether  because  the  patentees  could 
not,  though  others  could,  supply  them. 
And  then  the  manufacture  of  ma- 
chines, to  be  constructed  and  worked 
by  the  patentees  alone,  involved  a  very 
large  outlay  of  money,  which  must 
mainly  be  obtained  by  borrowing.  Mil- 
ler's means  being  soon  exhausted,  their 
first  loan  of  two  thousand  dollars  was 
made  on  the  comparatively  favorable 
condition  of  five  per  cent,  premium, 
in  addition  to  lawful  interest.  But 
they  were  soon  borrowing  at  twenty 
per  cent,  per  month.  Then  there 
was  sickness ;  Mr.  Whitney  having 
a  severe  and  tedious  attack  in  1794 ; 
after  which  the  scarlet  fever  raged  in 
New  Haven,  disabling  many  of  his 
workmen  ;  and  soon  the  lawsuits, 
into  which  they  were  driven  in  de- 
fense of  their  patent,  began  to  devour 
all  the  money  they  could  make  or 
borrow.  In  1795,  Whitney  had 
another  attack  of  sickness ;  and,  on 
his  return  to  New  Haven,  from  three 
weeks  of  suffering  in  New  York, 
learned  that  his  manufactory,  with 
all  his  machines  and  papers,  had  just 
been  consumed  by  fire,  whereby  he 
found  himself  suddenly  reduced  to 
utter  bankruptcy.  Next  came  a  re- 
port from  England  that  the  British 
manufacturers  condemned  and  re- 
jected the  cotton  cleaned  by  his  ma- 
chines, on  the  ground  that  the  staple 


was  greatly  injured  by  the  ginning 
process!  And  now  no  one  would 
touch  the  ginned  cotton  ;  and  block- 
heads were  found  to  insist  that  the 
roller-gin  —  a  preposterous  rival  to 
Whitney's,  whereby  the  seed  was 
crushed  in  the  fibre,  instead  of  being 
separated  from  it — was  actually  a 
better  machine  than  Whitney's  !  In 
the  depths  of  their  distress  and  in- 
solvency, Miller  wrote  (April  27, 
1796)  from  Georgia  to  Whitney,  urg- 
ing him  to  hasten  to  London,  there 
to  counteract  the  stupid  prejudice 
which  had  been  excited  against 
ginned  cotton  ;  adding  : 

"Our  fortune,  our  fate,  depends  on  it>. 
The  process  of  patent  ginning  is  now  quite 
at  a  stand.  I  hear  nothing  of  it  except  the 
condolence  of  a  few  real  friends,  who  ex- 
press their  regret  that  so  promising  an  in- 
vention has  entirely  failed." 

Whitney  endeavored  to  obey  this 
injunction,  but  could  nowhere  obtain 
the  necessary  funds ;  though  he  had 
several  times  fixed  the  day  of  his  de- 
parture, and  on  one  occasion  had 
actually  engaged  his  passage,  and 
taken  leave  of  some  of  his  friends. 
October  7,  1797,  Mr.  Whitney  wrote 
to  an  intimate  friend  a  letter,  where- 
from  the  following  is  an  extract : 

"  The  extreme  embarrassments  which 
have  been  for  a  long  time  accumulating 
upon  me  are  now  become  so  great  that  it 
will  be  impossible  for  me  to  struggle  against 
them  many  days  longer.  It  has  required 
my  utmost  exertions  to  exist,  without  ma- 
king the  least  progress  in  our  business.  I 
have  labored  hard  against  the  strong  current 
of  disappointment,  which  has  been  threaten- 
ing to  carry  us  down  the  cataract;  but  I 
have  labored  with  a  shattered  oar,  and 
struggled  in  vain,  unless  some  speedy  relief 
is  obtained.  I  am  now  quite  far  enough 
advanced  in  life  to  think  seriously  of  marry- 
ing. I  have  ever  looked  forward  with  plea- 
sure to  an  alliance  with  an  amiable  and  vir- 
tuous companion,  as  a  source  from  whence 
I  have  expected  one  day  to  derive  the  great- 
est happiness.  But  the  accomplishment  of 
my  tour  to  Europe,  and  the  acquisition  of 


WHITNEY  AND   HIS  COTTON-GIN. 


63 


something  which  I  can  call  my  own,  appear 
to  be  absolutely  necessary,  before  it  will  be 
♦  admissible  for  me  even  to  think  of  family 
engagements.  Probably  a  year  and  a  half, 
at  least,  will  be  required  to  perform  that 
tour,  after  it  is  entered  upon.  Life  is  but 
short,  at  best,  and  six  or  seven  years  out  of 
the  midst  of  it  is,  to  him  who  makes  it,  an 
immense  sacrifice.  My  most  unremitted  at- 
tention has  been  devoted  to  our  business.  I 
have  sacrificed  to  it  other  objects,  from 
which,  before  this  time,  'I  might  certainly 
have  gained  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  dol- 
lars. My  whole  prospects  have  been  em- 
barked in  it,  with  the  expectation  that  I 
should,  before  this  time,  have  realized  some- 
thing from  it." 

At  length  the  ridiculous  prejudice 
against  cotton  cleaned  by  Whitney's 
gin  gradually  and  slowly  gave  way, 
and  the  value  of  the  invention  began 
to  be  perceived  and  acknowledged. 
But  Miller  &  Whitney's  first  suit 
against  infringers  now  came  to  trial, 
before  a  Georgia  jury  ;  and,  in  spite 
of  the  judge's  charge  directly  in  the 
plaintiffs'  favor,  a  verdict  was  given 
for  the  defendant — a  verdict  from 
which  there  was  no  appeal.  When 
the  second  suit  was  ready  for  trial  at 
Savannah,  no  judge  appeared,  and,  of 
course,  no  court  was  held.  Mean- 
time, the  South  fairly  swarmed  with 
pirates  on  the  invention,  of  all  kinds 
and  degrees.  In  April,  1799,  Miller 
writes  to  Whitney  as  follows : 

"  The  prospect  of  making  anything  by 
ginning  in  this  State  is  at  an  end.  Surrep- 
titious gins  are  erected  in  every  part  of  the 
country  ;  and  the  jurymen  at  Augusta  have 
come  to  an  understanding  among  themselves 
that  they  will  never  give  a  cause  in  our 
favor,  let  the  merits  of  the  case  be  as  they 
may." 

It  would  not  be  surprising  if  the 
firm  would  now  have  gladly  relin- 
quished the  working  of  their  ma- 
chines, and  confined  themselves  to 
the  sale  of  patent  rights.  But  few 
would  buy  what  they  could  safely 
steal,  and  those  few  gave  notes  which 


they  generally  took  care  not  to  pay. 
If  sued,  juries  would  often  return  a 
verdict  of  no  consideration,  or  a  trial 
would  be  staved  off  until  collection 
was  barred  by  the  statute  of  limita- 
tion, which  outlawed  a  debt  that  had 
existed  through  a  period  of  four 
years.  On  one  occasion,  the  agent 
of  the  patentees,  who  was  dispatched 
on  a  collecting  tour  through  the 
State  of  Georgia,  was  unable  to  ob- 
tain money  enough  to  pay  his  ex- 
penses, and  was  compelled  to  draw 
on  his  employers  for  nearly  the  full 
amount. 

Finally,  in  1801,  this  agent  wrote 
to  his  principals  that,  though  the 
planters  of  South  Carolina  would  not 
pay  their  notes,  many  of  them  sug- 
gested a  purchase  of  the  right  of  the 
patentees  for  that  State  by  its  Legis- 
lature ;  and  he  urged  Mr.  Whitney 
to  come  to  Columbia,  and  try  to 
make  an  arrangement  on  this  basis. 
Whitney  did  so,  taking  some  letters 
and  testimonials  from  the  new  Presi- 
dent, Jefferson,  and  his  Secretary  of 
State,  Madison,  which  were  doubt- 
less of  service  to  him  in  his  negotia- 
tions. His  memorial  having  been 
duly  submitted  to  the  Legislature, 
proposing  to  sell  the  patent  right  for 
South  Carolina  for  one  hundred 
thousand  dollars,  the  Legislature  de- 
bated it,  and  finally  offered  for  it 
fifty  thousand  —  twenty  thousand 
down,  and  ten  thousand  per  annum 
for  three  years.  Whitney,  in  a  letter 
written  the  day  after  the  passage  of 
the  act,  says : 

"  The  use  of  the  machine  here  is  ama- 
zingly extensive,  and  the  value  of  it  beyond 
all  calculation.  It  may,  without  exaggera- 
tion, be  said  to  have  raised  the  value  of 
seven-eighths  of  all  the  three  Southern 
States  from  fifty  to  one  hundred  per  cent. 
We  get  but  a  song  for  it  in  comparison  with 


64 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  worth  of  the  thing ;  but  it  is  secvring 
something.  It  will  enable  Miller  &  Whit- 
ney to  pay  all  their  debts,  and  divide  some- 
thing between  them.  It  establishes  a  pre- 
cedent which  will  be  valuable  as  it  respects 
our  collections  in  other  States,  and  I  think 
there  is  now  a  fair  prospect  that  I  shall  in 
the  event  realize  property  enough  to  render 
me  comfortable,  and,  in  some  measure,  inde- 
pendent." 

He  was  mistaken.   The  next  Lesris- 

o 

lature  of  South  Carolina  nullified  the 
contract,  suspended  payment  on  the 
thirty  thousand  still  due,  and  insti- 
tuted a  suit  for  the  recovery  of  the 
twenty  thousand  that  had  been 
already  paid !  The  pretenses  on 
which  this  remarkable  course  was 
taken  are  more  fully  set  forth  in  the 
action  of  the  Legislature  of  Georgia 
in  1803,  based  on  a  Message  from 
the  governor,  urging  the  inexpediency 
of  granting  any  thing  to  Miller  & 
Whitney.  The  Committee  to  whom 
this  matter  was  referred,  made  a 
report,  in  which  they — 

"  cordially  agreed  with  the  governor  in  his 
observations,  that  monopolies  are  at  all 
times  odious,  particularly  in  free  govern- 
ments, and  that  some  remedy  ought  to  be 
applied  to  the  wound  which  the  Cotton-Gin 
monopoly  has  given,  and  will  otherwise 
continue  to  give,  to  the  culture  and  cleaning 
of  that  precious  and  increasing  staple.  They 
have  examined  the  Rev.  James  Hutch- 
inson, who  declares  that  Edward  Lyon,  at 
least  twelve  months  before  Miller  &  Whit- 
ney's machine  was  brought  into  view,  had 
in  possession  a  saw  or  cotton-gin,  in  minia- 
ture, of  the  same  construction ;  and  it  fur- 
ther appears  to  them,  from  the  information 
of  Doctor  Cortes  Pedro  Dampiere,  an  old 
and  respectable  citizen  of  Columbia  county, 
that  a  machine  of  a  construction  similar  to 
that  of  Miller  &  Whitney,  was  used  in  Swit- 
zerland at  least  forty  years  ago,/<?r  the  pur- 
pose of  picking  rags  to  make  lint  and  papery 

This  astonishing  Committee  closed 
their  report  with  the  following  reso- 
lution : 

"  Besofoed,  That  the  Senators  and  Repre- 
sentatives of  this  State  in  Congress  be,  and 
they  hereby  are,  instructed  to  use  their 
utmost  endeavors  to  obtain  a  modification 


of  the  act,  entitled,  '  An  act  to  extend  the 
privileges  of  obtaining  Patents  for  useful 
discoveries  and  inventions,  to  certain  per- 
sons therein  mentioned,  and  to  enlarge  and 
define  the  penalties  for  violating  the  rights 
of  patentees,'  so  as  to  prevent  the  operation 
of  it  to  the  injury  of  that  most  valuable  sta- 
ple, cotton,  and  the  cramping  of  genius  in 
improvements  on  Miller  <fe  Whitney's  patent 
Gin,  as  well  as  to  limit  the  price  of  obtain- 
ing a  right  of  using  it,  the  price  at  present 
being  unbounded,  and  the  planter  and  poor 
artificer  altogether  at  the  mercy  of  the  pa- 
tentees, who  may  raise  the  price  to  any  sum 
they  please. 

"  And,  in  case  the  said  Senators  and  Re- 
presentatives of  this  State  shall  find  such 
modification  impracticable,  that  they  do 
then  use  their  best  endeavors  to  induce  Con- 
gress, from  the  example  of  other  nations,  to 
make  compensation  to  Miller  &  Whitney  for 
their  discovery,  take  up  the  patent  right, 
and  release  the  Southern  States  from  so 
burthensome  a  grievance." 

North  Carolina,  to  her  honor  be  it 
recorded,  in  December,  1802,  nego- 
tiated an  arrangement  with  Mr. 
Whitney,  whereby  the  legislature 
laid  a  tax  of  two  shillings  and  six- 
pence upon  every  saw  employed  in 
ginning  cotton,  to  be  continued  for 
five  years,  which  sum  was  to  be  col- 
lected by  the  sheriffs  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  public  taxes ;  and, 
after  deducting  the  expenses  of  collec- 
tion, the  avails  were  faithfully  paid 
over  to  the  patentee.  The  old 
North  State  was  not  extensively  en- 
gaged in  cotton-growing,  and  the 
pecuniary  avails  of  this  action  were 
;  probably  not  large  ;  but  the  arrange- 
I  ment  seems  to  have  been  a  fair  one, 
and  it  was  never  repudiated.  South 
Carolina,  it  should  in  justice  be  said, 
through  her  legislature  of  180-1, 
receded  from  her  repudiation,  and 
fulfilled  her  original  contract. 

Mr.  Miller,  the  partner  of  Whit- 
ney, died,  poor  and  embarrassed,  on 
the  7th  of  December,  1803.  At  the 
term  of  the  United  States  District 
Court  for  Georgia,  held  at  Savannah 


YALUE  OF  THE  COTTON-GIN. 


65 


in  December,  1807,  Mr.  Whitney 
obtained  a  verdict  against  the  pirates 
on  his  invention ;  his  patent  being 
now  in  the  last  year  of  its  existence. 
Judge  Johnson,  in  entering  judg- 
ment for  the  plaintiff,  said  : 

M  "With  regard  to  the  utility  of  this  discov- 
ery, the  court  would  deem  it  a  waste  of 
time  to  dwell  long  upon  this  topic.  Is  there 
a  man  who  hears  us,  who  has  not  expe- 
rienced its  utility  ?  The  whole  interior  of 
the  Southern  States  was  languishing,  and 
its  inhabitants  emigrating  for  want  of  some 
object  to  engage  their  attention,  and  employ 
their  industry,  when  the  invention  of  this 
machine  at  once  opened  views  to  them 
which  set  the  whole  country  in  active  mo- 
tion. From  childhood  to  age,  it  has  pre- 
sented to  us  a  lucrative  employment.  Indi- 
viduals who  were  depressed  with  poverty, 
and  sunk  in  idleness,  have  suddenly  risen  to 
wealth  and  respectability.  Our  debts  have 
been  paid  off.  Our  capitals  have  increased, 
and  our  lands  trebled  themselves  in  value. 
"We  cannot  express  the  weight  of  the  obliga- 
tion which  the  country  owes  to  this  inven- 
tion. The  extent  of  it  cannot  now  be  seen. 
Some  faint  presentiment  may  be  formed 
from  the  reflection  that  Cotton  is  rapidly 
supplanting  Wool,  Flax,  Silk,  and  even  Furs, 
in  manufactures,  and  may  one  day  profita- 
bly supply  the  use  of  specie  in  our  East 
India  trade.  Our  sister  States  also  partici- 
pate in  the  benefits  of  this  invention  ;  for, 
beside  affording  the  raw  material  for  their 
manufacturers,  the  bulkiness  and  quantity 
of  the  article  afford  a  valuable  employment 
for  their  shipping." 

Mr.  Whitney's  patent  expired  in 
1808,  leaving  him  a  poorer  man, 
doubtless,  than  though  he  had  never 
listened  to  the  suggestions  of  his 
friend  Mrs.  Greene,  and  undertaken 
the  invention  of  a  machine,  by  means 
of  which  the  annual  production  of 
cotton  in  the  Southern  States  has 
been  augmented  from  some  five  or 
ten  thousand  bales  in  1793  to  over 
five  millions  of  hales,  or  one  million 
tons,  in  1859 ;  this  amount  being  at 
least  three-fourths  in  weight,  and 
seven- eighths  in  value,  of  all  the  cot- 
ton produced  on  the  globe.  To  say 
that  this  invention  was  worth  one 
5 


thousand  millions  of  dollars  to  the 
Slave  States  of  this  country,  is  to 
place  a  very  moderate  estimate  on 
its  value.  Mr.  Whitney  petitioned 
Congress,  in  1812,  for  a  renewal  of 
his  patent,  setting  forth  the  costly 
and  embarrassing  struggles  he  had 
been  forced  to  make  in  defense  of  his 
right,  and  observing  that  he  had  been 
unable  to  obtain  any  decision  on  the 
merits  of  his  claim  until  he  had  been 
eleven  years  in  the  law,  and  until 
thirteen  of  the  fourteen  years'  life- 
time of  his  patent  had  expired.  But 
the  immense  value  of  his  invention 
stood  directly  in  the  way  of  any  such 
acknowledgment  of  its  merits  and 
his  righteous  claims  as  the  renewal 
he  sought  would  have  involved. 
Some  liberal  members  from  the  cot- 
ton-growing region  favored  his  peti- 
tion, but  a  majority  of  the  Southrona 
fiercely  opposed  it,  and  it  was  lost. 

Mr.  Whitney,  in  the  course  of  a 
correspondence  with  Robert  Fulton, 
inventor  of  the  first  successful  steam- 
boat, remarks : 

"  The  difficulties  with  which  I  have  had  to 
contend  have  originated,  principally,  in  the 
want  of  a  disposition  in  mankind  to  do  jus- 
tice. My  invention  was  new  and  distinct 
from  every  other :  it  stood  alone.  It  was  not 
interwoven  with  anything  before  known; 
and  it  can  seldom  happen  that  an  invention 
or  improvement  is  so  strongly  marked,  and 
can  be  so  clearly  and  specifically  identified ; 
and  I  have  always  believed  that  I  should 
have  had  no  difficulty  in  causing  my  rights 
to  be  respected,  if  it  had  been  less  valuable, 
and  been  used  only  by  a  small  portion  of  the 
community.  But  the  use  of  this  machine 
being  immensely  profitable  to  almost  every 
planter  in  the  cotton  districts,  all  were  in- 
terested in  trespassing  upon  the  patent  right, 
and  each  kept  the  other  in  countenance. 
Demagogues  made  themselves  popular  by 
misrepresentation  and  unfounded  clamors, 
both  against  the  right  and  the  law  made  for 
its  protection.  Hence  there  arose  associa- 
tions and  combinations  to  oppose  both.  At 
one  time,  but  few  men  in  Georgia  dared  to 
come  into  court  and  testify  to  the  most  aim- 


66 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


pie  facts  within  their  knowledge,  relative  to 
the  use  of  the  machine.  In  one  instance,  I 
had  great  difficulty  in  proving  that  the  ma- 
chine had  been  med  in  Georgia,  although,  at 
the  same  moment,  there  were  three  separate 
sets  of  this  machinery  in  motion  within  fifty 
yards  of  the  building  in  which  the  court  sat, 
and  all  so  near  that  the  rattling  of  the  wheels 
was  distinctly  heard  on  the  steps  of  the  court- 
house." 

In  1793,  Mr.  Whitney,  despair- 
ing of  ever  achieving  a  competence 
from  the  proceeds  of  his  cotton- 
gin,  engaged  in  the  manufacture 
of  arms,  near  New  Haven ;  and  his 
rare  capacity  for  this  or  any  similar 
undertaking,  joined  with  his  invin- 
cible perseverance  and  energy,  was 
finally  rewarded  with  success.  He 
was  a  most  indefatigable  worker; 
one  of  the  first  in  his  manufactory  in 
the  morning,  and  the  last  to  leave  it 
at  night  ;  able  to  make  any  imple- 
ment or  machine  he  required,  or  to 
invent  a  new  one  when  that  might  be 
needed ;  and  he  ultimately  achieved 
a  competency.  He  made  great  im- 
provements in  the  manufacture  of  fire- 
arms— improvements  that  have  since 
been  continued  and  perfected,  until 
the  American  rifled  musket  of  our 
day,  made  at  the  National  Armory  in 
Springfield,  Massachusetts,  is  doubt- 
less the  most  effective  and  perfect 
weapon  known  to  mankind.  In  1817, 
Mr.  Whitney,  now  fifty-two  years  old, 
found  himself  fully  relieved  from  pe- 
cuniary embarrassments  and  the  har- 
assing anxieties  resulting  therefrom. 


He  was  now  married  to  Miss  Henrietta 
F.  Edwards,  daughter  of  the  Hon. 
Pierpont  Edwards,  United  States  Dis- 
trict Judge  for  Connecticut ;  and  four 
children,  a  son  and  three  daughters, 
were  born  to  him  in  the  next  five 
years.  In  September,  1822,  he  was 
attacked  by  a  dangerous  and  painful 
disease,  which,  with  alternations  of 
terrible  suffering  and  comparative 
ease,  preyed  upon  him  until  January 
8, 1826,  when  he  died,  not  quite  sixty 
years  of  age.6 


The  African  Slave-Trade,  so  far  as 
it  had  any  legal  or  tolerated  exist- 
ence, was  peremptorily  closed,  as  we 
have  seen,  on  the  1st  day  of  January, 
1808.  This  was  the  period  from 
which,  according  to  the  fond  antici- 
pations of  optimists  and  quietists, 
Slavery  in  our  country  should  have 
commenced  its  decadence,  and  thence 
gone  steadily  and  surely  forward  to  its 
ultimate  and  early  extinction.  And 
these  sanguine  hopes  were  measura- 
bly justified  by  the  teachings  of  his- 
tory. In  all  former  ages,  in  all  other 
countries,  Slavery,  so  long  as  it  ex- 
isted and  flourished,  was  kept  alive 
by  a  constant  or  frequent  enslave- 
ment of  captives,  or  by  importations  of 
bondmen.  Whenever  that  enslave- 
ment, that  importation,  ceased,  Sla- 
very began  to  decline.  The  grati- 
tude of  masters  to  faithful,  devoted 
servants,  who  had  nursed  them  in  ill- 


■  The  inventor  of  the  cotton-gin  is  not  deemed 
worthy  of  even  the  slightest  distinct  biograph- 
ical notice  in  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica.  The 
only,  and  not  very  accurate,  allusion  to  him 
that  I  have  been  able  to  find  in  that  immense 
work,  is  as  follows: 

"  The  Upland  Cotton  is  a  different  species 
from  the  Sea  Island,  and  is  separated  with  such 
difficulty  from  the  seed,  that  the  expense  of 
clpaning  the  wool  must  have  put  a  stop  to  its 
further  cultivation,  had  not  a  machine,  by  which 


the  operation  of  cleaning  is  easily  and  success- 
fully accomplished,  been  invented.  This  ma- 
chine was  invented  in  1795,  by  Mr.  Eli  Whitney, 
of  Massachusetts.  There  are  two  qualities  of 
this  cotton,  the  one  termed  Upland  Georgia, 
grown  in  the  States  of  Georgia  and  South  Car- 
olina, and  tlje  other  of  superior  quality,  raised 
upon  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  and  dis- 
tinguished in  the  market  by  the  name  of  New 
Orleans  cotton,"  &c,  &c. — Encyclopaedia  Britan- 
nica, Eighth  (fast)  Edition,  voL  vii.,  p.  447  . 
Truly,  the  world  knows  little  of  its  greatest  men. 


THE    RENAISSANCE    OF  SLAVERY. 


67 


ness,  or  adhered  to  them  in  times  of 
peril  or  calamity,  or  who  had  simply 
given  the  best  years  of  their  lives  to 
the  enlargement  of  their  wealth,  had 
been  effectual  in  reducing,  by  manu- 
mission, the  aggregate  number  of 
slaves  much  faster  than  it  was  in- 
creased by  the  preponderance  of 
births  over  deaths.  The  chances  of 
war,  of  invasion,  and  still  more  of 
insurrection  and  civil  convulsion,  had 
operated  from  time  to  time  still  fur- 
ther to  reduce  the  number  of  slaves. 
Even  the  licentious  and  immoral  con- 
nections between  masters  and  their 
bondwomen,  so  inseparable  from  the 
existence  of  Slavery,  tended  strongly 
toward  a  like  result ;  since  it  was  sel- 
dom or  never  reputable,  save  in  slave- 
holding  America — if  even  there — for 
a  master  to  send  his  own  children  to 
the  auction-block  and  consign  them 
to  eternal  bondage  among  strangers.7 
Quite  often,  the  slave-mother,  as  well 
as  her  child  or  children,  owed  her 
emancipation  to  the  affection,  the  re- 
morse, or  the  shame,  of  her  master 
and  paramour.  So  long  as  slaves 
were  mainlv  foreigners  and  barbari- 
ans,  often  public  enemies,  of  fierce, 
strange  aspect  and  unintelligible 
speech,  there  would  naturally  be  lit- 
tle sympathy  betwixt  them  and  their 


masters ;  but  when  children  who  had 
grown  up  together — sprung,  indeed, 
from  different  castes,  but  still  mem- 
bers of  the  same  household — familiar 
from  infancy,  and  to  some  extent 
playmates,  came  to  hold  the  relation, 
respectively,  of  master  and  slave,  it 
was  inevitable  that  kindly  feelings 
should  frequently  be  reciprocated  be- 
tween them,  leading  often  to  devotion 
on  the  one  hand  and  emancipation  on 
the  other.  It  was  not  without  rea- 
son, therefore,  that  the  founders  of 
our  Republic  and  the  framers  of  our 
Constitution  supposed  they  had  pro- 
vided for  the  gradual  but  certain  dis- 
appearance of  Slavery,  by  limiting  its 
area  on  the  one  hand,  and  providing 
for  an  early  inhibition  of  the  Slave- 
Trade  on  the  other. 

But  the  unexpected  results  of  the 
purchase  of  Louisiana  and  the  inven- 
tion of  the  Cotton-Gin  were  such  as 
to  set  at  naught  all  these  calcula- 
tions. The  former  opened  to  slave- 
holding  settlement  and  culture  a  vast 
domain  of  the  richest  soil  on  earth,  in 
a  region  peculiarly  adapted  to  the 
now  rapidly  and  profitably  expand- 
ing production  of  Cotton ;  for  'Whit- 
ney's invention  had  rendered  this  sta- 
ple far  more  remunerative  to  its  pro- 
ducer than  any  rival  which  the  South 


7  "That  the  practice  of  buying  and  selling 
servants,  thus  early  begun  amongst  the  pa- 
triarchs, descended  to  their  posterity,  is  known 
to  every  attentive  reader  of  the  Bible.  It  was 
expressly  authorized  by  the  Jewish  law,  in 
which  were  many  directions  how  such  servants 
were  to  be  treated.  They  were  to  be  bought 
only  of  the  heathen;  for,  if  an  Israelite  grew 
poor  and  sold  himself,  either  to  discharge  a  debt 
or  to  procure  the  means  of  subsistence,  he  was 
to  be  treated,  not  as  a  slave,  but  as  a  hired  ser- 
vant and  restored  to  freedom  at  the  year  of 
Jubilee.  Unlimited  as  the  power  thus  given 
to  the  Hebrews  over  their  bondservants  of 
heathen  extraction  appears  to  have  been,  they 
were  strictly  prohibited  from  acquiring  such 
property  by  any  other  means  than  fair  purchase. 
4  He  that  stealeth  a  man  and  selleth  him.'  said  j 


their  great  Lawgiver,  1  shall  surely  be  put  to 
death.'  " — Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  voL  xx.,  p. 
319. 

The  above  passage  seems  scarcely  just  to  the 
Law  given  by  Moses.  The  true  object  and 
purpose  of  that  Law,  so  far  as  bondage  is  con- 
cerned, was  rather  a  mitigation  of  the  harsher 
features  of  an  existing  institution  than  the 
creation  of  a  new  one.  Moses,  1  for  the  hard- 
ness of  your  hearts,'  says  Jesus,  allowed  or 
tolerated  some  things  which  1  from  the  beginning 
were  not  so.'  How  any  one  can  quote  the  Law 
of  Moses  as  a  warrant  for  Slavery,  yet  not  admit 
it  as  a  justification  of  free-and-easy  Divorce,  is 
not  apparent. 


68 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


had  ever,  or  has  ever  yet,  attempted 
to  grow ;  while  the  nearly  simultane- 
ous inventions  of  Hargreaves,  Ark- 
wright,  and  others,8  whereby  steam 
was  applied  to  the  propulsion  of 
machinery  admirably  adapted  to  the 
fabrication  of  Cotton,  secured  the 
cultivators  against  all  reasonable  ap- 
prehension of  a  permanently  glut- 
ted market.  As  the  production  was 
doubled,  and  even  quadrupled,  every 
few  years,  it  would  sometimes  seem 
that  the  demand  had  been  exceed- 
ed ;  and  two  or  three  great  commer- 
cial convulsions  gave  warning  that 
even  the  capacity  of  the  world's 
steadily  expanding  markets  could  be 
over-estimated  and  surpassed  by  the 
producers  of  Cotton  and  its  various 
fabrics.  But  two  years  at  most  suf- 
ficed to  clear  otf  the  surplus  and  en- 
large this  steadily  growing  demand 
up  to  the  full  measure  of  the  mo- 
mentarily checked  production.  The 
five  millions  of  bales,  produced  by  the 
United  States  in  1859-60,  were  sold 
as  readily  and  quickly  as  the  one 
million  bales  produced  in  1830-31, 
and  at  considerably  higher  prices  per 
pound. 

But  the  relatively  frigid  climate 
and  superficially  exhausted  soil  of 
Maryland,  Virginia,  and  North  Car- 
olina— wherein  the  greater  number 
of  slaves  were  originally  held — were 
poorly,  or  not  at  all,  adapted  to  the 
production  of  cotton,  whereof  slave- 
labor  early  claimed,  and  succeeded 
in  substantially  maintaining,  a  mo- 
nopoly.    No  other  out-door  work 

8  Jame3  Hargreaves  had  invented  the  Spin- 
ning-Jenny in  1764;  this  was  supplanted  by  the 
invention  by  Sir  Richard  Arkv.-right,  in  1768, 
of  a  superior  machine  for  spinning  cotton  thread. 
James  Watt  patented  his  Steam  Engine  in  1769, 
and  his  improvement,  whereby  a  rotary  motion 
was  produced,  in  1782;  and  its  first  application 


afforded  such  constant  and  nearly 
uniform  employment  for  this  descrip- 
tion of  labor.  Throughout  the  greater 
part  of  the  South-West,  plowing  for 
the  cotton-crop  may  be  commenced 
in  January;  to  be  followed  directly 
by  planting;  this  by  weeding;  and 
hardly  has  the  cultivation  of  the  crop 
been  completed  when  the  picking  of 
the  more  advanced  bolls  may  be  com^ 
menced;  and  this,  with  ginning,  often 
employs  the  whole  force  of  the  plan- 
tation nearly  or  quite  up  to  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Christmas  holidays. 
These  being  over,  the  preparation  of 
the  fields  for  plowing  is  again  com- 
menced ;  so  that  there  is  no  season 
when  the  hands  need  stand  idle ;  and, 
though  long  spring  and  summer  rains, 
impeding  tillage  while  impelling  the 
growth  of  weeds  and  of  grass,  some- 
times induce  weeks  of  necessary  hur- 
ry and  unusual  effort,  there  is  abso- 
lutely no  day  of  the  year  wherein 
the  experienced  planter  or  competent 
overseer  cannot  find  full  employment 
for  his  hands  in  some  detail  of  the 
cultivation  of  Cotton. 

The  forest-covered  and  unhealthy, 
but  facile  and  marvelously  fertile, 
South-West  hungered  for  slaves,  as 
we  have  seen  evinced  in  the  case 
of  Indiana  Territory.  Impoverished, 
but  salubrious  and  corn-growing  Ma- 
ryland, Virginia,  etc.,  were  ready  to 
supply  them.  Enterprising,  adven- 
turous whites,  avaricious  men  from 
the  North  and  from  Europe,  but  still 
more  from  the  older  Slave  States, 
hied  to  the  South-West,  in  hot  pur- 

to  cotton-spinning  occurred  in  1787,  but  it  was 
many  years  in  winning  its  way  into  general  use. 
John  Fitch's  first  success  in  steam  navigation 
was  achieved  in  1786.  Fulton's  patents  were 
granted  in  1809-11,  and  claimed  the  simple 
means  of  adapting  paddle-wheels  to  the  axle 
of  the  crank  of  Watt's  engine. 


THE    NEGRO-TRADERS    AS  POLITICIANS. 


69 


suit  of  wealth  by  means  of  cotton- 
planting  and  subsidiary  callings ;  and 
each  became  a  purchaser  of  slaves  to 
the  full  extent  of  his  means.  To  clear 
more  land  and  grow  more  cotton, 
wherewith  to  buy  more  negroes,  was 
the  general  and  absorbing  aspiration 
— the  more  negroes  to  be  employed 
in  clearing  still  more  land  and  grow- 
ing still  more  cotton.  Under  this 
dispensation,  the  price  of  slaves  ne- 
cessarily and  rapidly  advanced,  until 
it  was  roughly  computed  that  each 
average  field-hand  was  worth  so  many 
hundred  dollars  as  cotton  commanded 
cents  per  pound :  That  is,  when  cot- 
ton was  worth  ten  cents  per  pound, 
field-hands  were  worth  a  thousand 
dollars  each;  with  cotton  at  twelve 
cents,  they  were  worth  twelve  hun- 
dred; and  when  it  rose,  as  it  some- 
times did  even  in  later  days,  to  fifteen 
cents  per  pound  for  a  fair  article  of 
middling  Orleans,  a  stout  negro,  from 
seventeen  to  thirty  years  old,  with  no 
particular  skill  but  that  necessarily 
acquired  in  the  rude  experience  of 
farm  labor  anywhere,  would  often 
bring  fifteen  hundred  dollars  on  a 
New  Orleans  auction-block.  Hence 
the  business  of  negro-trading,  or  the 
systematic  buying  of  slaves  to  sell 
again,  though  never  quite  reputable, 
and,  down  to  the  last  thirty  or  forty 
years,  very  generally  regarded  with 
abhorrence — became  a  highly  impor- 
tant and  influential,  as  well  as  gain- 
ful, occupation.  The  negro-trader, 
often  picking  up  bargains  at  execu- 
tors' or  assignees'  sales  in  the  older 
States,  or  when  a  sudden  shift  must 
be  made  to  save  a  merchant  from 
bankruptcy  or  a  farm  from  the  sher- 
iff, controlled  large  sums  of  money, 
often  in  good  part  his  Own.  He  was 
the  Providence  to  whom  indolent,  dis- 


sipated, easy-going  Virginians  looked 
for  extrication,  at  the  last  gasp,  from 
their  constantly  recurring  pecuniary 
embarrassments ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  a  majority  of  the  South- West- 
ern planters  were  eager  to  buy  of  him 
at  large  prices,  provided  he  would 
sell  on  one  or  two  years'  credit.  He 
patronized  hotels  and  railroads;  he 
often  chartered  vessels  for  the  trans- 
portation of  his  human  merchandise ; 
he  was  necessarily  shrewd,  keen,  and 
intelligent,  and  frequently  acquired, 
or  at  least  wielded,  so  much  wealth 
and  influence  as  to  become  almost 
respectable.  Quite  usually,  he  was 
an  active  politician,  almost  uniformly 
of  the  most  ultra  Pro-Slavery  type, 
and  naturally  attached  to  the  Demo- 
cratic party.  Traveling  extensively 
and  almost  constantly,  his  informa- 
tion and  volubility  rendered  him 
mail  and  telegraph,  newspaper  and 
stump  orator,  to  those  comparatively 
ignorant  and  secluded  planters  whom 
he  visited  twice  or  more  per  year,  as 
buyer  or  seller,  or  collector  of  his 
dues  for  slaves  already  sold;  while 
his  power  as  profitable  customer  on 
the  one  hand,  or  lenient  creditor  on 
the  other,  was  by  no  means  inconsid- 
erable. It  was  this  power,  in  con- 
nection with  that  of  the  strongly 
sympathizing  and  closely  affiliated 
class  of  gamblers  and  blacklegs,  by 
which  Yan  Buren's  renomination  for 
the  Presidency  was  defeated  in  the 
Baltimore  Convention  of  1844,  and 
the  Democratic  party  committed, 
through  the  nomination  of  Polk  and 
its  accessories,  to  the  policy  of  an- 
nexing Texas,  thus  securing  a  fresh 
and  boundless  expansion  to  Slavery. 
When  that  Annexation  was  suddenly, 
and  to  most  unexpectedly,  achieved, 
at  the  close  of  John  Tyler's  adminis- 


70 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


tration,  relays  of  horses,  prearranged 
in  the  absence  of  telegraphs,  con- 
veyed from  the  deeply  interested  ne- 
gro-traders, who  were  watching  the 
doings  of  Congress  at  the  national 
metropolis,  to  their  confederates  and 
agents  in  the  slave-selling  districts 
of  the  neighboring  States,  the  joy- 
ful tidings  which  insured  an  ad- 
vance of  twelve  to  fifteen  per  cent, 
in  the  market  value  of  human  flesh, 
and  enabled  the  exclusive  possessors 
of  the  intelligence  to  make  it  the 
basis  of  extensive  and  lucrative  spec- 
ulations. 

Slave-breeding  for  gain,  deliber- 
ately purposed  and  systematically 
pursued,  appears  to  be  among  the 
latest  devices  and  illustrations  of 
human  depravity.  Neither  Cowper, 
nor  Wesley,  nor  Jonathan  Edwards, 
nor  Granville  Sharp,  nor  Clarkson, 
nor  any  of  the  philanthropists  or 
divines  who,  in  the  last  century,  bore 
fearless  and  emphatic  testimony  to 
the  flagrant  iniquity  of  slave-making, 
slave-holding,  and  slave-selling,  seem 
to  have  had  any  clear  conception  of 
it.  For  the  infant  slave  of  past  ages 
was  rather  an  incumbrance  and  a 
burden  than  a  valued  addition  to  his 
master's  stock.  To  raise  him,  how- 
ever roughly,  must  cost  all  lie  would 
ultimately  be  worth.  That  it  was 
cheaper  to  buy  slaves  than  to  rear 
them,  was  quite  generally  regarded  as 
self-evident.    But  the  suppression  of 

9  Mr.  Edward  Yates,  a  zealous  and  active  friend 
of  the  Union  cause,  in  "A  letter  to  the  Women 
of  England,  on  Slavery  in  the  Southern  States 
of  America,"  founded  on  personal  observation 
in  1855,  gives  revolting  instances  of  the  brutal 
handling  of  delicate  and  beautiful  women,  appa- 
rently white,  by  slave-dealers  and  their  cus- 
tomers, in  Southern  sale-rooms.    He  adds  : 

"  At  Richmond  and  New  Orleans,  I  was  pres- 
ent at  slave-auctions,  and  did  not  see  one  instance 


the  African  Slave- Trade,  coinciding 
with  the  rapid  settlement  of  the 
Louisiana  purchase  and  the  triumph 
of  the  Cotton-Gin,  wrought  here  an 
entire  transformation.  When  field- 
hands  brought  from  ten  to  fifteen 
hundred  dollars,  and  young  negroes 
were  held  at  about  ten  dollars  per 
pound,  the  newly  born  infant,  if  well- 
formed,  healthy,  and  likely  to  live, 
was  deemed  an  addition  to  his  mas- 
ter's wealth  of  not  less  than  one  hun- 
dred dollars,  even  in  Virginia  or 
Maryland.  It  had  now  become  the 
interest  of  the  master  to  increase  the 
number  of  births  in  his  slave-cabins ; 
and  few  evinced  scruples  as  to  the 
means  whereby  this  result  was  at- 
tained. The  chastity  of  female  slaves 
was  never  esteemed  of  much  account, 
even  where  they  were  white ;  and, 
now  that  it  had  become  an  impedi- 
ment to  the  increase  of  their  masters' 
wealth,  it  was  wholly  disregarded. 
~No  slave-girl,  however  young,  was 
valued  lower  for  having  become  a 
mother,  without  waiting  to  be  first 
made  a  wife  ;  nor  were  many  masters 
likely  to  rebuke  this  as  a  fault,  or 
brand  it  as  a  shame.  Women  were 
publicly  advertised  by  sellers  as  ex- 
traordinary breeders,  and  commanded 
a  higher  price  on  that  account.' 
Wives,  sold  into  separation  from 
their  husbands,  were  imperatively 
required  to  accept  new  partners,  in 
order  that  the  fruitfulness  of  the 

of  a  married  pair  being  sold  together,  but,  without 
exception,  so  far  as  I  was  able  to  learn  from  the 
negroes  sold  by  the  auctioneers,  every  grown-up 
man  left  a  wife  and  every  grown-up  woman  a  hus- 
band. *  *  *  I  saw  Mr.  Pulliam  (of  Rich- 
mond) sell,  to  different  buyers,  two  daughters 
away  from  their  mother,  who  was  also  to  be  sold. 
This  unfortunate  woman  was  a  quadroon ;  and 
I  shall  not  soon  forget  the  large  tears  that  started 
to  her  eyes  as  she  saw  her  two  children  sold 
away  from  her." 
Testimony  like  this  is  abundant. 


SLATE-BREEDING  — 


COLONIZATION. 


71 


plantation   might  not   suffer.  We 
need  not  dwell  on  this  new  phase  of 
Slavery,  its  revolting  features,  and 
still  more  revolting  consequences. 
The  simple  and  notorious  fact  that 
clergymen,   marrying   slaves,  were 
accustomed  to  require  of  them  fidel- 
ity in  their  marital  relation,  until 
separated  by  death,  or  by  inexorable 
necessity,  suffices  of  itself  to  stamp 
the    social    condition  thus  photo- 
graphed with  the  indignant  reproba- 
tion of  mankind.    And  when  we  add 
that  slave-girls  were  not  only  daily 
sold  on  the  auction-blocks  of  New 
Orleans,  and  constantly  advertised  in 
her  journals,  as  very  nearly  white, 
well-educated,  and  possessed  of  the 
rarest  personal  attractions,  and  that 
they  commanded  double  and  treble 
prices  on  this  account,  we  leave  noth- 
ing to  be  added  to  complete  the  out- 
lines of  a  system  of  legalized  and 
priest-sanctioned  iniquity,  more  gi- 
gantic and  infernal  than  heathenism 
and  barbarism  ever  devised.    For  the 
Circassian    beauty,   whose  charms 
seek  and  find  a  market  at  Constanti- 
nople, is  sent  thither  by  her  parents, 
and  is  herself  a  willing  party  to  the 
speculation.     She  hopefully  bids  a 
last  adieu  to  the  home  of  her  infancy, 
to  find  another  in  the  harem  of  some 
wealthy  and  powerful  Turk,  where 
she  will  achieve  the  life  of  luxury 
and  idleness  she  covets.    But  the 
American-born  woman,  consigned  by 
the  laws  of  her  country  and  the  fiat 
of  her  owner  to  the  absolute  posses- 
sion of  whomsoever  bids  most  for 
her,  neither  consents  to  the  transfer, 
nor  is  at  all  consulted  as  to  the  per- 
son to  whom  she  is  helplessly  con- 
signed.   The  Circassian  knows  that 
her  children  will  be  free  and  honored. 
The  American  is  keenly  aware  that 


hers  must  share  her  own  bitter  and 
hopeless  degradation.  It  wTas  long  ago 
observed  that  American  Slavery,  with 
its  habitual  and  life-long  separations 
of  husband  from  wife,  f>f  parent  from 
child,  its  exile  of  perhaps  the  larger 
portion  of  its  victims  from  the  hum- 
ble but  cherished  homes  of  their 
childhood  to  the  strange  and  repul- 
sive swamps  and  forests  of  the  far 
South-West,  is  harsher  and  viler  than 
any  other  system  of  bondage  on 
which  the  sun  ever  shone.  And 
when' we  add  that  it  has  been  care- 
fully computed  that  the  State  of  Vir- 
ginia, since  the  date  of  the  purchase 
of  Louisiana,  had  received  more 
money  for  her  own  flesh  and  blood, 
regularly  sold  and  exported,  than  her 
soil  and  all  that  was  upon  it  would 
have  sold  for  on  the  day  when  she 
seceded  from  the  Union,  we  need 
adduce  no  more  of  the  million  facts 
Avhich  unite  to  prove  every  wrong  a 
blunder  as  well  as  a  crime — that  God 
has  implanted  in  every  evil  the  seeds 
of  its  overthrow  and  ultimate  de- 
struction. 


The  conflicting  currents  of  Ameri- 
can thought  and  action  with  regard 
to  Slavery — that  which  was  cherished 
by  the  Revolutionary  patriots,  and 
gradually  died  with  them,  and  that 
by  which  the  former  was  impercepti- 
bly supplanted — are  strikingly  exhib- 
ited in  the  history  and  progress  of 
the  movement  for  African  Coloniza- 
tion. Its  originator  was  the  Rev. 
Samuel  Hopkins,  D.  D.,  who  was 
settled  as  a  clergyman  at  Newport, 
R.  I.,  in  1770,  and  found  that  thriv- 
ing sea-port  a  focus  of  Slavery  and 
the  Slave-Trade,  upon  both  of  which 
he  soon  commenced  an  active  and 
determined  war.    The  idea  of  coun- 


72 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


teracting,  and  ultimately  suppressing, 
the  Slave-Trade,  through  a  system- 
atic colonization  of  the  western  coast 
of  Africa  with  emancipated  blacks 
from  America,  was  matured  and  sug- 
gested by  him  to  others,  even  before 
the  outbreak  of  the  Revolutionary 
war ;  and  its  realization,  interrupted 
by  that  struggle,  was  resumed  by  him 
directly  after  it  had  been  closed. 
This  was  anterior  to  the  British  set- 
tlement of  Sierra  Leone,  and  preceded 
the  appearance  of  Clarkson's  prize 
essay,  commanding  public  attention 
to  the  horrors  of  the  Slave-Trade. 
Among  Dr.  Hopkins's  European  cor- 
respondents were  Granville  Sharp 
and  Zachary  Macaulay,  who  were 
among  the  earliest  and  least  com- 
promising of  British  abolitionists. 
Through  his  influence  and  efforts, 
three  colored  youth  were  educated 
in  New  England,  toward  the  close  of 
the  last  century,  with  express  refer- 
ence to  missionary  labor  in  Africa  in 
connection  with  the  Colonization 
movement.  Two  of  these  ultimately, 
though  at  a  mature  age,  migrated  to 
Liberia,  where  they  died  soon  after. 
Thirty-eight  American  blacks  emi- 
grated to  Sierra  Leone  in  1815, 
under  the  auspices  and  in  the  vessel 
of  one  of  their  own  number.  The 
initial  organization  of  the  American 
Colonization  Society  took  place  at 
Princeton,  JST.  J.,  in  the  autumn  of 
IS  16  ;  and  that  Society  was  formally 
organized  at  Washington,  by  the 
choice  of  officers,  on  the  1st  of  Janu- 
ary, 1817.  Its  first  attempt  at  prac- 
tical colonization  was  made  in  1820 
on  Sherbro  Island,  which  proved  an 
unfortunate  location  ;  its  present  po- 
sition on  the  main  land,  at  Cape 
Mesurado,  was  purchased  December 
15,  1821,  and  some  colonists  landed 


on  it  early  in  the  following  year. 
About  one  thousand  emigrants  were 
dispatched  thither  in  the  course  of 
the  following  seven  years,  including 
a  small  church  of  colored  persons 
which  migrated  from  Boston  in  1826. 
The  additional  number  dispatched 
during  the  succeeding  thirty  years 
was  not  far  from  eight  thousand. 
The  city  founded  by  the  original 
emigrants  received  the  name  of  Mon- 
rovia, and  in  1847  the  colony  declared 
itself  an  independent  republic  under 
the  name  of  Liberia.  That  republic 
still  exists,  enjoying  a  moderate  and 
equable  prosperity,  in  spite  of  its  un- 
healthiness  for  whites,  and  for  all  but 
duly  acclimated  blacks,  on  account 
of  its  tropical  and  humid  location. 

But  the  Colonization  movement, 
though  bountifully  lauded  and  glori- 
fied by  the  eminent  in  Church  and 
State,  and  though  the  Society  num- 
bered among  its  Presidents  Bushrod 
Washington,  Charles  Carroll,  James 
Madison,  and  Henry  Clay,  has  not 
achieved  a  decided  success,  and  for 
the  last  twenty  years  has  steadily 
and  stubbornly  declined  in  import- 
ance and  consideration.  It  has 
ceased  to  command  or  deserve  the 
sympathy  of  abolitionists,  without 
achieving  the  hearty  confidence, 
though  it  has  been  blessed  or  cursed 
with  the  abundant  verbal  commend- 
ations, of  their  antagonists.  It  was 
soon  discovered  that,  while  it  was 
presented  to  the  former  class  as  a  safe 
and  unobjectionable  device  for  miti- 
gating the  evils,  while  gradually  un- 
dermining the  existence,  of  human 
bondage  in  our  country,  it  was,  at 
the  same  time,  commended  to  the 
favor  and  patronage  of  slaveholders 
as  a  means  of  relieving  the  South  of 
its  dangerous  free-negro  element,  and 


EMANCIPATIO 

j  thus  augmenting  the  security  and 
insuring  the  perpetuity  of  their  be- 
loved institution.  '  Moreover,  as  the 
enhanced  and  constantly  increasing 
i  market  value  of  slaves  obstructed  and 
diminished  manumissions  with  a  view 
to  colonization,  the  class  of  subjects 
for  deportation  to  Africa  steadily 
fell  off  in  numbers,  and  in  the  quality 
of  those  composing  it.    When,  at 
last,  the  South,  under  the  lead  of  Mr. 
Calhoun,  quite  generally  adopted  the 
|  novel  and  extraordinary  doctrine  of 
the  essential  righteousness  and  signal 
j  beneficence  of  Slavery — when  the  re- 
lation of  life-long  servitude  and  utter 
subjugation  to  the  will  of  a  master 
was  declared  the  true,  natural,  and 
most  enviable  condition  of  the  la- 
1  boring  class  anywhere — the  condition 
j  most  conducive  to  their  happiness,10 
I  moral  culture,  and  social  well-being — 
the  idea  of  liberating  individuals  or 
;i  families  from  this  subjugation,  and 
|  sending  them  from  peaceful,  plenti- 
I  ful,  and  prosperous  America  to  be- 
j  nighted,  barbarous,  and  inhospitable 
Africa,  became,  in  this  view,  a  trans- 
I  parent  absurdity.    No  disciple  of 
I  Calhoun  could  be  a  logical,  con- 
I  sistent  colonizationist,  any  more  than 

10  »  What  disposition  God,  in  His  providence, 
!   will  eventually  make  of  these  blacks,  cannot  be 
j  foretold ;  but  it  is  our  duty  to  provide  for  our 
own  happiness  and  theirs  as  long  as  we  can.  In 
j  dealing  with  this  question,  it  will  not  do  to  be 
I  guided  by  abstract  notions  of  liberty  and  slavery. 
We  can  only  judge  the  future  by  the  past ;  and, 
as  experience  proves  that  the  negro  is  better  off 
in  slavery  at  the  South  than  in  freedom  else- 
I  where,  it  is  the  part  of  philanthropy  to  keep  him 
|  here,  as  we  keep  our  children  in  subjection  for 
{  their  own  good." — De  Bow's  Review,  vol.  ii.,  p. 
310. 

Mr.  Chestnut  of  S.  C,  in  a  long  pro-slavery 
,  speech  in  the  U.  S.  Senate,  April  9,  18G0,  pre- 
;  sented  his  views  of  the  inherent  excellence  of 
I  human  bondage,  as  regards  the  slaves  them- 
j  selves,  as  follows: 

"But  you  say,  '  I  leave  out  of  the  considera- 
tion the  happiness  of  the  race  enslaved.'  By  no 
means.   It  is  an  important  element  of  the  moral 


N  DISCARDED.  73 

a  follower  of  Garrison  and  "Wendell 
Phillips.  The  constantly  and  widely 
diverging  currents  of  American  opin- 
ion soon  left  the  Colonization  move- 
ment hopelessly  stranded.  The 
teachings  of  the  new  Southern  school 
tended  palpably  toward  the  extirpa- 
tion from  the  South  of  the  free-negro 
anomaly,  through  reenslavement 
rather  than  exile.  Legislative  efforts 
to  decree  a  general  sale  of  free 
negroes  into  absolute  slavery  were 
made  in  several  States,  barely  defeat- 
ed in  two  or  three,  and  fully  success- 
ful in  one.  Arkansas,  in  1858-9, 
enacted  the  enslavement  of  all  free 
colored  persons  within  her  limits, 
who  should  not  remove  beyond  them 
before  the  ensuing  4th  of  July,  and 
this  atrocious  edict  was  actually  en- 
forced by  her  authorities.  The  ne- 
groes generally  escaped  ;  but,  if  any 
remained,  they  did  so  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  first  sheriff*  who  could 
lay  hands  on  them  would  hurry  them 
to  the  auction-block,  and  sell  them 
to  the  highest  bidder.  And  this  was 
but  a  foretaste  of  the  fate  to  which 
the  new  Southern  dogma  was  morally 
certain,  in  a  few  years,  to  consign  the 
whole  free  colored  population  of  the 

argument.  *  *  *  In  the  general  march  of  human 
progress,  there  is  no  one  interest  of  humanity 
which  has  advanced  more  rapidly  than  the  insti- 
tution of  African  Slavery  as  it  is  in  the  Southern 
States.  It  has  stood  the  test  of  every  trial.  Its 
mission  is  to  subdue  the  unbroken  regions  of  the 
warm  and  fertile  South,  and  its  end  is  the  hap- 
piness and  civilization  of  the  human  race,  includ- 
ing the  race  of  the  slave,  in  all  respects." 

Said  Mr.  Jas.  M.  Mason,  of  Va.,  in  the  debate 
of  the  following  day : 

"  As  to  the  slave  population,  I  agree  with  the 
Senator  from  South  Carolina  ,  if  a  problem,  it 
has  worked  itself  out;  the  thing  is  settled  here, 
so  far  as  the  South  is  concerned,  or  the  opinions 
and  purposes  of  the  South,  or  their  ability  to 
make  their  opinions  and  purposes  good.  It  will 
become,  as  it  has  already  begun  to  be,  the  estab- 
lished policy  of  the  South  to  have  no  more  eman- 
cipation. Let  them  continue  in  bondage  as  they 
now  exist,  as  the  best  condition  of  both  races." 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


U 

Slave  States,  had  not  those  States 
been  precipitated  into  their  great 
Rebellion.    Individuals  would  have 


resisted  and  protested,  but  only  to 
be  overborne  by  inexorable  logic,  and 
even  more  inexorable  majorities. 


VII. 

THE  MISSOURI  STRUGGLE. 


When  the  State  of  Louisiana,  pre- 
viously known  as  the  Territory  of 
Orleans,  was  admitted  into  the  Un- 
ion,1 the  remainder  of  the  Louisiana 
purchase,  which  had  formerly  borne 
the  designation  of  Louisiana  Terri- 
tory, was  renamed  the  Territory  of 
Missouri.  The  people  of  a  portion 
of  this  Territory,  stretching  west- 
ward from  the  Mississippi  on  both 
sides  of  the  river  Missouri,  peti- 
tioned Congress  for  admission  into 
the  Union  as  the  State  of  Missouri ; 
and  their  memorials2  were  referred 
by  the  House  to  a  Select  Committee, 
whereof  Mr.  Scott,  their  delegate, 
was  chairman.  This  Committee  re- 
ported3 a  bill  in  accordance  with  their 
prayer,  which  was  read  twice  and 
committed ;  but  no  further  action  was 
taken  thereon  during  that  session. 

The  same  Congress  reconvened  for 
its  second  session  on  the  16th  of  the 
following  November,  and  the  House 
resolved  itself  into  a  Committee  of 
the  whole,4  and  in  due  time  took  up 
the  Missouri  bill  aforesaid,  which  was 
considered  throughout  that  sitting 
and  that  of  the  next  day  but  one, 
during  which  several  amendments 
were  adopted,  the  most  important 
of  which,  moved  by  General  James 
Tallmadge,  of  Dutchess  County,  New 
York,  was  as  follows : 

1  April  8,  1812. 

2  On  the  16th  of  March,  1818.    s  April  3d. 
4  February  13,  1819. 


"And  provided,  That  the  introduction  of 
Slavery,  or  involuntary  servitude,  be  prohib- 
ited, except  for  the  punishment  of  crimes, 
whereof  the  party  has  been  duly  convicted ; 
and  that  all  children  born  within  the  said 
State,  after  the  admission  thereof  into  the 
Union,  shall  be  declared  free  at  the  age  of 
twenty-five  years." 

On  the  rising  of  the  Committee, 
the  Yeas  and  Nays  were  demanded 
in  the .  House  on  the  question  of 
agreeing  to  this  amendment;  when 
a  division  was  called,  and  so  much 
of  it  as  precedes  and  includes  the 
word  "  convicted"  was  adopted  by 
87  Yeas — all  from  the  substantially 
Free  States6  except  one  of  the  two 
members  from  Delaware  —  to  76 
Nays,  whereof  ten  were  from  Free 
States — Massachusetts  (then  includ- 
ing Maine)  supplying  three  of  them, 
New  York  three,  with  one  each  from 
New  Jersey,  New  Hampshire,  Ohio, 
and  Illinois.  The  residue  of  the 
amendment  was  likewise  sustained, 
by  the  close  vote  of  82  Yeas  to  78 
Nays.  The  bill  thus  amended  was 
ordered  to  a  third  reading  by  98 
Yeas  to  56  Nays,  and  the  next  day 
was  passed  and  sent  to  the  Senate, 
where  the  restriction  aforesaid  was 
stricken  out  by  a  vote  of  22  to  16, 
and  the  bill  thus  amended  passed 
without  a  division,  on  the  last  day 
but  one  of  the  session.  Being  now 
returned  to  the  House,  General  Tall- 

6  New  Vork  and  New  Jersey  still  held  a  few 
slaves,  but  the  former  had  decreed  their  man- 
umission. 


THE  MISSOUR 

madge  moved  its  indefinite  post- 
ponement, which  was  defeated — 
Yeas  69,  Nays  74.  But  the  question 
next  presented,  of  concurrence  in  the 
Senate's  amendment  aforesaid,  was 
decided  in  the  negative — Yeas  76, 
Nays  78 ;  and  the  bill  returned  to 
the  Senate  accordingly.  The  Sen- 
ate insisted  on  its  amendment  with- 
out a  division ;  and,  on  the  return  of 
the  bill  to  the  House,  Mr.  John  W. 
Taylor,6  of  New  York,  moved  that 
the  House  adhere  to  its  disagree- 
ment ;  which  prevailed — Yeas  78, 
Nays  66.  And  so  the  bill  failed  for 
that  session. 

A  bill,  organizing  so  much  of  the 
Territory  of  Missouri  as  was  not  in- 
cluded within  the  borders  of  the  pro- 
posed State  of  that  name,  to  be 
known  as  the  Territory  of  Arkansas, 
was  considered  at  this  session,  and 
Mr.  Taylor,  of  New  York,  moved 
the  application  thereto  of  the  restric- 
tion aforesaid.  So  much  of  it  as 
required  that  all  slaves  born  within 
the  Territory  after  the  passage  of 
this  act  should  be  free  at  twenty-five 
years  of  age,  was  carried,7  by  75  Yeas 
to  72  Nays,  and  the  residue  defeated 
by  70  Yeas  to  71  Nays.  Next  day, 
however,  the  adopted  clause  was  re- 
considered and  stricken  out,  and  the 
bill  ultimately  passed  without  any 
reference  to  Slavery.  Arkansas  be- 
came in  consequence  a  Slave  Terri- 
tory, and  ultimately  a  Slave  State. 

A  new  Congress  convened  Decem- 
ber 6,  1819 ;  and  Mr.  Scott8  moved 
a  reference  to  a  Select  Committee 
of  the  memorials  from  Missouri,  in- 
cluding that  of  her  Territorial  Legis- 
lature, asking  admission  into  the 
Union.  This  motion  prevailed,  and 
Mr.  Speaker  Clay  appointed  as  such 

*  Some  years  afterward,  Speaker  of  the  House. 


I   STRUGGLE.  75 

Committee  three  members  from  Slave 
States,  beside  Mr.  Scott,  who  was 
chairman,  with  but  one  from  a  Free 
State.  In  the  Senate,  the  legislative 
memorial  aforesaid  was  referred  to 
the  Judiciary  Committee,  consisting 
of  three  members  from  Slave  States 
with  but  two  from  Free  States. 

Upon  the  conflict  which  ensued, 
the  Slave  Power  entered  with  very 
great  incidental  advantages.  The 
President,  Mr.  Monroe,  though  he 
took  no  conspicuous  part  in  the 
strife,  was  well  known  to  favor  that 
side,  as  did  a  majority  of  his  Cabi- 
net, so  that  the  patronage  of  the 
Government  and  the  hopes  of  aspir- 
ants to  its  favor  were  powerful  make- 
weights against  the  policy  of  Restric- 
tion. The  two  ex-Presidents  of  the 
dominant  party,  Messrs.  Jefferson 
and  Madison,  still  survived,  and  gave 
their  powerful  influence  openly  in 
accordance  with  their  Southern  sym- 
pathies rather  than  their  Anti-Slavery 
convictions.  Mr.  Clay,  the  popular 
and  potent  Speaker  of  the  House, 
though  likewise  Anti-Slavery  in  prin- 
ciple, was  a  zealous  and  most  effi- 
cient adversary  of  Restriction.  The 
natural  fears  of  a  destruction,  or  at 
least  a  temporary  prostration,  of  the 
Republican  ascendency,  through  the 
reformation  of  parties  on  what  were 
called  geographical  lines,  also  tended 
strongly  to  defeat  the  proposed  inhi- 
bition of  Slavery.  The  North,  it  had 
by  this  time  come  to  be  understood, 
if  beaten  in  such  a  struggle,  would 
quietly  submit;  while  the  South,  it 
was  very  clearly  intimated  and  gen- 
erally believed,  would  shiver  all  party 
bands,  and  perhaps  even  the  Union 
itself,  rather  than  submit  to  a  defeat 
on  this  issue. 

T  February  nth.  8  December  8th. 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


76 

Moreover,  the  shape  and  manner 
in  which  the  question  was  presented 
were  exceedingly  favorable  to  the 
Southern  side.  Its  advocates,  in  ac- 
cordance with  their  general  policy  of 
defending  and  promoting  Slavery  in 
the  abused  name  of  Liberty,  fought 
their  battle  under  the  flag  of  State 
Sovereignty,  State  Equality,  etc.  The 
Bight  of  the  People  to  form  and 
modify  their  institutions  in  accord- 
ance with  their  own  judgment,  in- 
terest, feelings,  or  convictions,  was 
the  burden  of  their  strain.  Said  Mr. 
"William  Pinkney,9  of  Maryland, 
their  most  pretentious  and  ornate,  if 
not  their  ablest  champion  : 

"  Slavery,  we  are  told  in  many  a  pamphlet, 
memorial,  and  speech,  with  which  the  press 
has  lately  groaned,  is  a  foul  blot  on  our  oth- 
erwise immaculate  reputation.  Let  this  be 
conceded— yet  you  are  no  nearer  than  be- 
fore to  the  conclusion  that  you  possess  power 
which  may  deal  with  other  objects  as  effectu- 
ally as  with  this.  Slavery,  we  are  further 
told,  with  some  pomp  of  metaphor,  is  a  can- 
ker at  the  root  of  all  that  is  excellent  in  this 
republican  empire,  a  pestilent  disease  that 
is  snatching  the  youthful  bloom  from  its 
cheek,  prostrating  its  honor  and  withering 
its  strength.  Be  it  so — yet,  if  you  have 
power  to  medicine  to  it  in  the  way  pro- 
posed, and  in  virtue  of  the  diploma  which 
you  claim,  you  also  have  the  power,  in  the 
distribution  of  your  political  alexiph armies, 
to  present  the  deadliest  drugs  to  every  Ter- 
ritory that  would  become  a  State,  and  bid  it 
drink  or  remain  a  colony  forever.  Slavery, 
we  are  also  told,  is  now  'rolling  onward 
with  a  rapid  tide  toward  the  boundless  re- 
gions of  the  West,'  threatening  to  doom 
them  to  sterility  and  sorrow,  unless  some 


9  Speech  in  the  U.  S.  Senate,  February  15, 
1820. 

10  In  the  debate  of  Monday,  Feb.  15,  1819, 
Mr.  P.  P.  Barbour,  of  Va.,  said: 

"  The  effect  of  the  proposed  amendment  is  to 
prohibit  the  further  introduction  of  slaves  into 
the  new  State  of  Missouri,  and  to  emancipate,  at 
the  age  of  twenty-five  years,  the  children  of  all 
those  slaves  who  are  now  within  its  limits.  The 
first  objection,  said  he,  which  meets  us  at  the 
very  threshold  of  the  discussion,  is  this :  that  we 
have  no  constitutional  right  to  enact  the  pro- 
posed provision.  Our  power,  in  relation  to  this 
subject,  is  derived  from  the  first  clause  of  the 
third  section  of  the  fourth  article  of  the  Consti- 


potent  voice  can  say  to  it,  Thus  far  shalt 
thou  go  and  no  farther.  Slavery  engenders 
pride  and  indolence  in  him  who  commands, 
and  inflicts  intellectual  and  moral  degrada- 
tion on  him  who  serves.  Slavery,  in  fine,  is 
unchristian  and  abominable.  Sir,  I  shall 
not  stop  to  deny  that  Slavery  is  all  this  and 
more;  but  I  shall  not  think  myself  the  less 
authorized  to  deny  that  it  is  for  you  to  stay 
the  course  of  this  dark  torrent,  by  opposing 
to  it  a  mound  raised  up  by  the  labors  of  this 
portentous  discretion  on  the  domain  of  oth- 
ers ;  a  mound  which  you  cannot  erect  but 
through  the  instrumentality  of  a  trespass  of 
no  ordinary  kind — not  the  comparatively  in- 
nocent trespass  that  beats  down  a  few  blades 
of  grass,  which  the  first  kind  sun  or  the  next 
refreshing  shower  may  cause  to  spring  again 
— but  that  which  levels  with  the  ground  the 
lordljest  trees  of  the  forest,  and  claims  im- 
mortality for  the  destruction  which  it  in- 
flicts." 

Throughout  the  discussion,  the  ar- 
gument that  Missouri,  by  the  adop- 
tion of  this  amendment,  would  be 
subject  to  unprecedented,  invidious, 
and  degrading  exactions — that  she 
would  be  brought  into  the  Union 
not  as  the  equal,  but  as  the  subject 
of  her  elder  sisters — that  the  power 
thus  exercised  involved  the  assertion 
of  unlimited  and  utterly  irresponsi- 
ble authority  to  shape  and  mold  the 
institutions  of  every  new  State — was 
pressed  with  eminent  subtlety,  perti- 
nacity, and  vigor.  The  right  to  pro- 
hibit Slavery  in  any  or  all  of  the 
Territories,  denied  by  none,  was  ex- 
pressly admitted  by  Mr.  Philip  P. 
Barbour,10  of  Virginia.  But  this 
admission,  however  generally  made, 

tution,  which  is  in  these  words:  'New  States 
may  be  admitted  by  the  Congress  into  this  Union.' 
Now,  Sir,  although  by  the  next  succeeding  clause 
of  the  same  section,  1  Congress  has  the  power 
to  make  all  needful  rules  and  regulations  respect- 
ing the  Territory  of  the  United  States;'  and 
although,  therefore,  whilst  the  proposed  State 
continued  a  part  of  our  Territory,  upon  the 
footing  of  a  Territorial  government,  it  would 
have  been  competent  for  us,  under  the  power 
expressly  given  to  make  needful  rules  and  reg- 
ulations— to  have  established  the  principle  now 
proposed ;  yet  the  question  assumes  a  totally  dif- 
ferent aspect  when  that  principle  is  intended  to 
apply  to  a  State." — Benton's  Abridgment.  N.  Y., 
1858.,  roL  vl,  p.  341. 


JOHN  W.  TAYLOR   FOR  RESTRICTION 


77 


did  not  gain  a  single  Southern  vote 
for  the  policy  of  Restriction  when 
the  bill  to  organize  Arkansas  Terri- 
tory was  under  consideration ;  where- 
on Mr.  Walker,  of  North  Carolina, 
in  opposing  that  policy,  gravely,  and 
without  the  least  suspicion  of  irony, 
observed:  "Let  it  not  be  forgotten 
that  we  are  legislating  in  a  free 
country,  and  for  a  free  people." 
But  the  champions  of  Restriction, 
though  less  agile  and  skillful  of  fence 
than  their  opponents,  were  by  no 
means  worsted  in  the  argument. 
Here  is  a  specimen  of  their  logic, 
from  the  speech  of  John  "W.  Taylor 

"  Gentlemen  have  said  the  amendment  is 
in  violation  of  the  treaty,  because  it  impairs 
the  property  of  a  master  in  his  slave.  Is  it 
then  pretended  that,  notwithstanding  the 
declaration  in  our  bill  of  rights  k  that  all 
men  are  created  equal,'  one  individual  can 
have  a  vested  property,  not  only  in  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  his  fellow-man,  but  also  in 
generations  not  yet  called  into  existence? 
Can  it  be  believed  that  the  supreme  legisla- 
ture has  no  power  to  provide  rules  and  regu- 
lations for  meliorating  the  condition  of  fu- 
ture ages  ?  And  this,  too,  when  the  Consti- 
tution itself  has  vested  in  Congress  fall 
sovereignty,  by  authorizing  the  enactment 
of  whatever  law  it  may  deem  conducive  to 
the  welfare  of  the  country  ?  The  sovereign- 
ty of  Congress  in  relation  to  the  States  is 
limited  by  specific  grants,  but  in  regard  to 
the  Territories  it  is  unlimited.  Missouri 
was  purchased  with  our  money  ;  and,  until 
incorporated  into  the  family  of  States,  it  may 
be  sold  for  money.  Can  it,  then,  be  main- 
tained that,  though  we  have  the  power  to 
dispose  of  the  whole  Territory,  we  have  no 
right  to  provide  against  the  further  increase 
of  Slavery  within  its  limits  ?  That,  although 
we  may  change  the  political  relations  of  its 
free  citizens  by  transferring  their  country  to 
a  foreign  power,  we  cannot  provide  for  the 
gradual  abolition  of  Slavery  within  its  limits, 
nor  establish  those  civil  regulations  which 
naturally  flow  from  self-evident  truth  ?  No, 
Sir ;  it  cannot :  the  practice  of  nations,  and 
the  common  sense  of  mankind  have  long 
since  decided  these  questions. 

"Having  proved,  as  I  apprehend,  our 
right  to  legislate  in  the  manner  proposed,  I 
proceed  to  illustrate  the  propriety  of  exer- 


cising it.  And  here  I  might  rest  satisfied 
with  reminding  my  opponents  of  their  own 
declarations  on  the  subject  of  Slavery.  How 
often  and  how  eloquently  have  they  deplored 
its  existence  among  them  !  What  willing- 
ness, nay,  what  solicitude,  have  they  not 
manifested  to  be  relieved  from  this  burden ! 
How  have  they  wept  over  the  unfortunate 
policy  which  first  introduced  slaves  into 
this  country!  How  have  they  disclaimed 
the  guilt  and  shame  of  that  original  sin,  and 
thrown  it  back  upon  their  ancestors !  I 
have  with  pleasure  heard  these  avowals  of 
regret,  and  confided  in  their  sincerity ;  I 
have  hoped  to  see  its  effects  in  the  advance- 
ment of  the  cause  of  Humanity.  Gentlemen 
have  now  an  opportunity  of  putting  their 
principles  into  practice.  If  they  have  tried 
Slavery  and  found  it  a  curse — if  they  desire 
to  dissipate  the  gloom  with  which  it  covers 
their  land — I  call  upon  them  to  exclude  it 
from  the  Territory  in  question ;  plant  not  its 
seeds  in  this  uncorrupt  soil ;  let  not  our 
children,  looking  back  to  the  proceedings  of 
this  day,  say  of  them,  as  they  have  been 
constrained  to  speak  of  their  fathers,  '  We 
wish  their  decision  had  been  different ;  we 
regret  the  existence  of  this  unfortunate  popu- 
lation among  us ;  but  we  found  them  here  ; 
we  know  not  what  to  do  with  them ;  it  is 
our  misfortune ;  we  must  bear  it  with  pa- 
tience.' 

"  History  will  record  the  decision  of  thi3 
day  as  exerting  its  influence  for  centuries  to 
come  over  the  population  of  half  our  conti- 
nent. If  we  reject  the  amendment,  and  suf- 
fer this  evil,  now  easily  eradicated,  to  strike 
its  roots  so  deep  into  the  soil  that  it  can 
never  be  removed,  shall  we  not  furnish  some 
apology  for  doubting  our  sincerity  when  we 
deplore  its  existence  ?  Shall  we  not  expose 
ourselves  to  the  same  kind  of  censure  wThich 
was  pronounced  by  the  Saviour  of  mankind 
on  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  builded 
the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  garnished 
the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous,  and  said,  if 
they  had  lived  in  the  days  of  their  fathers, 
they  would  not  have  been  partakers  with 
them  in  the  blood  of  the  prophets,  while 
they  manifested  a  spirit  which  clearly 
proved  them  the  legitimate  descendants  of 
those  who  killed  the  prophets,  and  thus 
filled  up  the  measure  of  their  fathers'  ini- 
quities ?" 

The  Legislatures  of  New  York, 
~Ngw  Jersey,  and  Pennsylvania  unani- 
mously adopted  and  transmitted  re- 
solves in  favor  of  the  proposed  Re- 
striction :   and  like  resolves  were 


11  February  15,  1819. 


78 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


adopted  by  the  Legislature  of  the 
Slave  State  of  Delaware.  A  frank 
and  forcible  memorial  from  inhabit- 
ants of  Boston  and  its  vicinity, 
drafted  by  Daniel  Webster,12  and 
6igned  by  the  principal  citizens  of  all 
parties,  asserted  the  complete  author- 
ity of  Congress  over  the  subject,  and 
demanded  Eestriction  on  those 
grounds  of  expediency,  morality,  and 
justice,  wTith  which  thoughtful  read- 
ers are  by  this  time  abundantly  fa- 
miliar. The  following  extract  from 
this  memorial  is  eminently  worthy 
of  its  author : 

"  Your  memorialists  were  not  without  the 
hope  that  the  time  had  at  length  arrived 
when  the  inconvenience  and  danger  of  this 
description  of  population  had  become  appa- 
rent in  all  parts  of  this  country  and  in  all 
parts  of  the  civilized  world.  It  might  have 
been  hoped  that  the  new  States  themselves 
would  have  had  such  a  view  of  their  own 
permanent  interests  and  prosperity  as  would 
have  led  them  to  prohibit  its  extension  and 
increase.  The  wonderful  growth  and  pros- 
perity of  the  States  north  of  the  Ohio  are 
unquestionably  to  be  ascribed,  in  a  great 
measure,  to  .the  consequences  of  the  Ordi- 
nance of  1787;  and  few,  indeed,  are  the 
occasions  in  the  history  of  nations,  in  which 
so  much  can  be  done,  by  a  single  act,  for  the 
benefit  of  future  generations,  as  was  done 
by  that  Ordinance,  and  as  may  now  be  done 
by  the  Congress  of  the  United  States.  "We 
appeal  to  the  justice  and  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  National  Councils  to  prevent  the  further 
progress  of  a  great  and  serious  evil.  We 
appeal  to  those  who  look  forward  to  the 
remote  consequences  of  their  measures,  and 
who  cannot  balance  a  temporary  or  trifling 
inconvenience,  if  there  were  such,  against  a 
permanent,  growing,  and  desolating  evil.  "We 
cannot  forbear  to  remind  the  two  Houses  of 
Congress  that  the  early  and  decisive  mea- 
sures adopted  by  the  American  Government 
for  the  abolition  of  the  Slave-Trade,  are 
among  the  proudest  memorials  of  our 
nation's  glory.  That  Slavery  was  ever 
tolerated  in  the  Kepublic  is,  as  yet,  to  be 
attributed  to  the  policy  of  another  Govern- 
ment. No  imputation,  thus  far,  rests  on  any 
portion  of  the  American  Confederacy.  The 
Missouri  Territory  is  a  new  country.  If  its 
extensive  and  fertile  fields  shall  be  opened 


as  a  market  for  slaves,  the  Government  will! 
seem  to  become  a  party  to  a  traffic  which,! 
in  so  many  acts,  through  so  many  years,  it 
has  denounced  as  impolitic,  unchristian, 
inhuman.  To  enact  laws  to  punish  the  traf- 
fic, and  at  the  same  time  to  tempt  cupidity! 
and  avarice  by  the  allurements  of  an  insatia- 
ble market,  is  inconsistent  and  irreconcilable. 
Government,  by  such  a  course,  would  only 
defeat  its  own  purposes,  and  render  nuga- 
tory its  own  measures.  Nor  can  the  laws, 
derive  support  from  the  manners  of  the  peo- 
ple, if  the  power  of  moral  sentiment  be 
weakened  by  enjoying,  under  the  permission 
of  Government,  great  facilities  to  commit 
offenses.  The  laws  of  the  United  States 
have  denounced  heavy  penalties  against  the 
traffic  in  slaves,  because  such  traffic  is 
deemed  unjust  and  inhuman.  We  appeal  to 
the  spirit  of  these  laws.  We  appeal  to 
this  justice  and  humanity.  We  ask  whether 
they  ought  not  to  operate,  on  the  present 
occasion,  with  all  their  force  ?  We  have  a> 
strong  feeling  of  the  injustice  of  any  tolera- 
tion of  Slavery.  Circumstances  have  entailed 
it  on  a  portion  of  our  community,  which 
cannot  be  immediately  relieved  of  it  without 
consequences  more  injurious  than  the  suffer- 
ing of  the  evil.  But  to  permit  it  in  a  new 
country,  where,  as  yet,  no  habits  are  formed 
which  render  it  indispensable,  what  is  it, 
but  to  encourage  that  rapacity,  and  fraud, 
and  violence,  against  which  we  have  so  long 
pointed  the  denunciations  of  our  penal  code? ' 
What  is  it,  but  to  tarnish  the  proud  fame  of 
the  country?  What  is  it,  but  to  throw  sus-' 
picion  on  its  good  faith,  and  to  render  ques- 
tionable all  its  professions  of  regard  for  the 
rights  of  Humanity  and  the  liberties  of  man- 
kind? 

"As  inhabitants  of  a  free  country — as 
citizens  of  a  great  and  rising  Republic — as 
members  of  a  Christian  community — as  liv- 
ing in  a  liberal  and  enlightened  age,  and  as 
feeling  ourselves  called  upon,  by  the  dictates 
of  religion  and  humanity,  we  have  presumed 
to  offer  our  sentiments  to  Congress  on  this 
question,  with  a  solicitude  for  the  event  far  be- 
yond what  a  common  occasion  could  inspire." 

The  House  Committee,  of  course, 
reported  the  bill  without  restriction, 
and  it  came  up  as  a  special  order.13 
Mr.  Taylor  moved  its  postponement 
for  a  week,  which  was  voted  down — 
Yeas  87 ;  JSays  88.  It  was  consider- 
ed in  Committee  the  next  day,14  as 
also  on  the  28th,  and  30th,  and  thence 


12  Then  a  recent  emigrant  to  Massachusetts 
from  the  neighboring  State  of  New  Hampshire. 


13  January  24,  1820. 

14  Missouri  impatiently  awaited  admission. 


THE  MISSOURI 


COMPROMISE. 


79 


debated  daily,  until  the  19th  of  Feb- 
ruary, when  a  bill  came  down  from 
the  Senate  uto  admit  the  State  of 
Maine  into  the  Union,"  with  a  rider, 
authorizing  the  people  of  Missouri  to 
form  a  State  Constitution,  etc. — the 
connection  being  intended  to  force 
the  Missouri  measure  through  the 
House  upon  the  strength  of  the  other 
proposition. 

The  Maine  bill  had  passed  the 
House  weeks  before,  without  serious 
opposition.  Reaching  the  Senate,  it 
was  sent  to  its  Judiciary  Committee, 
which  appended  to  it  the  provision 
for  organizing  Missouri.  An  attempt 
to  shake  this  off  was  defeated  by  25 
Nays  to  18  Yeas,  and  the  bill  re- 
turned to  the  House  accordingly. 
The  House  refused  to  concur  by  the 
decisive  vote  of  93  to  72 — only  four 
members  from  the  Free  States  voting 
in  the  minority.  The  House  further 
disagreed,  by  the  strong  vote  of  102 
to  68,  to  the  Senate's  amendment 
striking  the  Restriction  out  of  the 
Missouri  bill.  Hereupon,  what  is 
known  in  history  as  the  Missouri 
Compromise  was  concocted.  It  was 
the  work,  not  of  the  advocates,  but 
of  the  opponents,  of  Slavery  Restric- 
tion, intended  solely  to  win  votes 
enough  from  the  majority  in  the 
House  to  secure  the  admission  of 
Missouri  as  a  Slave  State.  It  was 
first  proposed  in  the  Senate  by  Mr. 
Thomas,  of  Illinois — a  uniform  oppo- 
nent of  Restriction  on  Missouri — and 
introduced  by  him14  in  this  shape  : 

"  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  in  all 
that  Territory  ceded  by  France  to  the  United 
States,  under  the  name  of  Louisiana,  which 
lies  north  of  thirty-six  degrees  thirty  min- 
utes north  latitude,  excepting  only  such 
part  tliereof  as  is  included  within  the  limits 

14  February  17,  1820.    15  March  2,  1820. 

14  The  names  of  the  fourteen  members  from 


of  the  State  contemplated  by  this  act,  Slave- 
ry and  involuntary  servitude,  otherwise  than 
in  the  punishment  of  crime,  whereof  the 
party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted,  shall 
be  and  is  hereby  forever  prohibited.  Pro- 
vided always,  That  any  person  escaping  into 
the  same,  from  whom  labor  or  service  is 
lawfully  claimed  in  any  State  or  Territory 
of  the  United  States,  such  fugitive  may  be 
lawfully  reclaimed  and  conveyed  to  the  per- 
son claiming  his  or  her  labor  or  service  as 
aforesaid." 

The  Senate  adopted  this  proposi- 
tion by  34  Yeas  to  10  Nays,  and 
passed  the  Missouri  bill,  thus  amend- 
ed, by  24  Yeas  to  20  Nays — the  mi- 
nority embracing  both  advocates  and 
opponents  of  Restriction.  The  House 
at  first  rejected  Mr.  Thomas's  amend- 
ment by  the  overwhelming  vote  of 
159  Yeas  to  18  Nays.  The  Senate 
refused  to  recede  from  its  amend- 
ments, and  the  House  decisively  in- 
sisted on  its  disagreement  to  them  ; 
whereupon  the  Senate  asked  a  con- 
ference, and  the  House  granted  it 
without  a  division.  The  Committee 
of  Conference  was  framed  so  as  to 
give  the  anti-Restrictionists  a  decid- 
ed preponderance  ;  and  John  Holmes, 
of  Massachusetts,  reported15  from  said 
Committee,  that  the  Senate  should 
give  up  its  combination  of  Missouri 
with  Maine ;  that  the  House  should 
abandon  its  attempt  to  restrict  Slave- 
ry in  Missouri ;  and  that  both  Houses 
should  concur  in  passing  the  bill  to 
admit  Missouri  as  a  State,  with  Mr. 
Thomas's  restriction  or  proviso,  exclud- 
ing Slavery  from  all  Territory  North 
and  West  of  the  new  State.  Four- 
teen members,  in  all,  from  the  Free 
States18  voted  to  adopt  this  Com- 
promise, with  76  from  the  Slave 
States,  making  90  in  all ;  while  87 
members  from  the  Free  States,  and 
none  from  the  Slave  States,  voted 

the  Free  States,  thus  voting  with  the  Anti-Re- 
strictionists, are  as  follows : 


80  THE  AMERICA 

against  the  Compromise.  jSo  the  bill 
passed  both  Houses,  as  did  that  for 
the  admission  of  Maine  on  the  same 
day. 

This  virtually  ended  the  Missouri 
struggle;17  though,  at  the  next  Ses- 
sion, when  Missouri  presented  herself 
for  admission  as  a  State,  with  a  Con- 
stitution denying  to  her  Legislature 
any  power  to  emancipate  slaves  or  to 
prevent  their  immigration,  and  re- 
quiring said  Legislature  to  pass  laws 
to  prevent  the  immigration  of  free 
negroes  or  mulattoes  at  any  time  or 
under  any  circumstances,  the  North- 
ern members  for  the  moment  revolt- 
ed. They  keenly  felt  that  this  was 
not  the  "  liberty"  and  "  equality" 
which  had  been  so  stoutly  demanded 
and  eulogized  by  the  opponents  of 
Slavery  Restriction ;  and  they  further 
objected  that  this  arbitrary  and  irre- 
vocable prohibition  of  free  colored 
immigration  was  in  palpable  viola- 
tion of  that  clause  of  the  Federal 
Constitution  which  guarantees  to  the 
citizens  of  each  State  the  rights  of 

Massachusetts. — Mark  Langdon  Hill,  John 
Holmes,  Jonathan  Mason,  Henry  Shaw — 4. 

Rhode  Island. — Samuel  Eddy — 1. 

Connecticut. — Samuel  A.  Foot,  James  Ste- 
phens— 2. 

New  York. — Henry  Meigs,  Henry  R.  Storrs  2. 

New  Jersey. — Joseph  Bloomfield,  Charles 
Kinsey,  Bernard  Smith— 3. 

Pennsylvania. — Henry  Baldwin,  David  Ful- 
lerton — 2. 

17  Some  idea  of  the  state  of  feeling  in  Missouri, 
as  well  as  of  that  in  some  of  the  original  States, 
at  this  period  of  the  Missouri  struggle,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  following  extract : 

"  Imprudence — or  worse. — The  St  Louis  En- 
quirer, intimating  that  the  Restrictionists  intend 
to  renew  their  designs  at  the  next  session  of 
Congress,  says — Missouri  will  then  appear  'as 
a  sovereign  State,  according  to  the  law  of  Con- 
gress, and  not  as  a  Territorial  orphan;'  that 
her  people  will,  in  that  case,  'give  fresh  proof 
to  the  world  that  they  know  their  rights,  and 
are  able  to  defend  them.'    What  signifies  such 


N  CONFLICT. 

citizens  in  every  State.  Her  admis- 
sion Was  at  first  voted  down  in  the 
House  by  93  Nays  to  79  Yeas;  but, 
finally,  a  fresh  Compromise,  concoct- 
ed by  a  select  Joint  Committee, 
whereof  Mr.  Clay18  was  chairman, 
was  adopted.  By  this  Compromise, 
Missouri  was  required  to  pledge  her- 
self that  no  act  should  be  passed  by 
her  Legislature,  "  by  which  any  of  the 
citizens  of  either  of  the  States  should 
be  excluded  from  the  enjoyment  of 
the  privileges  and  immunities  to 
which  they  are  entitled  under  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States." 
With  this  added  as  a  proviso,  the 
joint  resolve  admitting  Missouri  final- 
ly passed  the  House  by  86  Yeas  to 
82  Nays  ;  and  the  Senate  concurred 19 
by  26  Yeas  to  15  Nays.  Missouri, 
through  her  legislature,  complied 
with  the  condition,  and  thereby  be- 
came an  admitted  State.  And  thus 
closed  the  memorable  Missouri  con- 
troversy, which  had  for  two  years  dis- 
turbed the  harmony,  and  threatened 
the  peace  of  the  Union.20 

language  as  this?  All  things  considered,  we 
wish  that  the  Missouri  question  may  be  suffered 
to  rest  where  it  is,  as  the  lesser  evil ;  but,  if  Con- 
gress pleases  to  take  it  up  again,  and  refuses  to 
admit  the  Territory  under  the  Constitution  which 
its  Convention  has  formed,  and  is  without  power 
to  enforce  its  determination,  it  is  high  time,  in- 
deed, that  a  new  organization  of  affairs  should 
take  place. "—ivies'  Register,  August  26,  1820, 
vol.  xviil,  p.  451. 

18  Colonel  William  H.  Russell,  of  Missouri,  a 
distant  relative  and  life-long  friend  of  Mr.  Clay, 
in  a  letter  (1862)  to  Hon.  James  S.  Rollins,  M. 
C,  from  his  State,  says  that  Mr.  Scott,  the  Dele- 
gate from  Missouri  at  the  time  of  her  admission, 
told  him  that  Mr.  Clay,  at  the  close  of  the  strug- 
gle, said  to  him  :  "  Now,  go  home,  and  prepare 
your  State  for  gradual  Emancipation." 

^February  27,  1821. 

20  Even  John  Adams's  faith  in  the  Union  was 
somewhat  shaken  in  this  stormy  passage  of  its 


THE  UNION  NOT  A  MERE  LEAGUE. 


81 


VIII. 

STATE  EIGHTS — NULLIFICATION. 


So  long  as  the  people  of  any  State 
withheld  their  assent  from  the  Fed- 
eral Constitution,  it  was  represented 
and  reprobated  by  its  adversaries  as 
a  scheme  of  absolute  and  undis- 
guised consolidation.  They  pointed 
to  its  sweeping  provisions,  whereby 
all  power  with  regard  to  war,  to 
treaties,  and  to  diplomatic  or  commer- 
cial intercourse  with  foreign  nations, 
to  the  currency,  to  naturalization,  to 
the  support  of  armies,  etc.,  etc.,  was 
expressly  withdrawn  from  the  States 
and  concentrated  in  the  Federal 
Government,1  as  proof  irresistible  of 
the  correctness  of  their  position.  The 
express  inhibition  of  any  alliance, 
compact,  or  treaty  between  two  or 
more  of  the  States,  was  even  more 
conclusive  on  this  head.  They  point- 
history.  In  a  letter  to  Thomas  Jefferson,  De- 
cember 18,  18 19," he  said: 

"The  Missouri  question,  I  hope,  will  follow 
the  other  waves  under  the  ship,  and  do  no 
harm.  I  know  it  is  high  treason  to  express  a 
doubt  of  the  perpetual  duration  of  our  vast 
American  empire,  and  our  free  institutions;  and 
I  say  as  devoutly  as  father  Paul,  esto  perpetua  : 
and  I  am  sometimes  Cassandra  enough  to  dream 
that  another  Hamilton,  another  Burr,  may  rend 
this  mighty  fabric  in  twain,  or  perhaps  into  a 
leash,  and  a  few  more  choice  spirits  of  the  same 
stamp  might  produce  as  many  nations  in  North 
America  as  there  are  in  Europe." — Adams's 
Works,  vol.  x.,  p.  386. 

1  "  1.  No  State  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  or 
confederation ;  grant  letters  of  marque  pv  repri- 
sal ;  coin  money ;  emit  bills  of  credit ;  make  any 
thing  but  gold  and  silver  coin  a  tender  in  pay- 
ment of  debts;  pass  any  bill  of  attainder,  ex- 
post-facto  law,  or  law  impairing  the  obligation 
of  contracts ;  or  grant  any  title  of  nobility. 

"2.  No  State  shall,  without  the  consent  of 
the  Congress,  lay  any  imposts  or  duties  on  im- 
ports or  exports,  except  what  may  be  absolutely 
necessary  for  executing  its  inspection  laws ;  and 
the  net  produce  of  all  duties  and  imposts  laid  by 
any  State  on  imports  or  exports,  shall  be  for 
the  use  of  the  treasury  of  the  United  States ; 
and  all  such  laws  shall  be  subject  to  the  revis- 


ed  to  the  fact,  that  the  very  pream- 
ble to  this  instrument  proclaimed  it 
the  work  of  "  the  people  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,"  and  not  a  mere  alliance 
or  pact  between  the  States  them- 
selves in  their  capacity  of  separate 
and  sovereign  political  communities. 
Patrick  Henry  urged  this  latter  ob- 
jection with  much  force  in  the  Vir- 
ginia ratifying  Convention.2  These 
cavilers  were  answered,  frankly  and 
firmly :  "  It  is  the  work  of  1  the  people 
of  the  United  States,'  as  distinguished 
from  the  States  in  their  primary  and 
sovereign  capacity ;  and  why  should 
not  the  fact  be  truly  stated  ?"  Gen- 
eral Washington  did  not  hesitate  to 
assert,  in  his  plain,  earnest,  practical 
way,  that  the  end  sought  by  the  new 
framework  was  the  "  consolidation  of 

ion  and  control  of  the  Congress.  No  State  shall, 
without  the  consent  of  Congress,  lay  any  duty 
on  tonnage,  keep  troops  or  ships  of  war  in  time 
of  peace,  enter  into  any  agreement  or  compact 
with  another  State  or  with  a  foreign  power,  or 
engage  in  war  unless  actually  invaded,  or  in  such 
imminent  danger  as  will  not  admit  of  delay." — 
The  Constitution,  Art.  I.,  sec.  10. 

2  In  the  Virginia  Convention  (Wednesday. 
June  4,  1788,  and  the  day  following)  Mr.  Henry 
spoke  as  follows: 

"That  this  is  a  consolidated  government  is 
demonstrably  clear ;  and  the  danger  of  such  a 
government  is,  to  my  mind,  very  striking.  I 
have  the  highest  veneration  for  those  gentle- 
men [who  formed  the  Constitution] ;  but,  Sir, 
give  me  leave  to  demand,  What  right  had  they 
to  say,  We,  the  peopled  My  political  curiosity, 
exclusive  of  my  anxious  solicitude  for  the  public 
welfare,  leads  me  to  ask,  Who  authorized  them 
to  say,  We,  the  people,  instead  of  We,  the  States  ? 
States  are  the  characteristics  and  the  soul  of  a 
confederation.  If  the  States  be  not  the  agents 
of  this  compact,  it  must  be  one  great,  consolida- 
ted, national  government,  of  the  people  of  all 
the  States.  *  *  *  I  need  not  take  much  pains 
to  show  that  the  principles  of  this  system  are 
extremely  pernicious,  impolitic,  and  dangerous." 
—Elliots  Debates,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  22,  44. 


82 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


our  Union,"3  wliich  he  never  ceased 
to  regard  as  of  the  highest  impor- 
tance and  the  greatest  beneficence. 
History  teaches  scarcely  anything 
more  clearly  than  that  it  was  the 
jMirpose  of  the  framers  of  the  Consti- 
tution to  render  the  inhabitants  of 
all  the  States  substantially  and  per- 
petually one  people,  living  under  a 
common  Government,  and  known  to 
the  rest  of  mankind  by  a  common 
national  designation.4  The  advan- 
tages secured  to  the  people  of  all  the 
States  by  the  "  more  perfect  Union" 
attained  through  the  Constitution, 
were  so  striking  and  manifest  that, 
after  they  had  been  for  a  few  years 
experienced  and  enjoyed,  they  si- 
lenced all  direct  and  straightforward 
opposition.  Those  who  had  origin- 
ally opposed  and  denounced  the  Con- 
stitution became — at  least  in  profes- 
sion— its  most  ardent  admirers  and 
vigilant  guardians.  The}T  volunteered 
their  services  as  its  champions  and  pro- 
tectors against  those  who  had  framed 
it  and  with  difficulty  achieved  its  rat- 
ification. These  were  plainly  and 
persistently  accused  of  seeking  its 
subversion  through  the  continual  en- 
largement of  Federal  power  by  lati- 
tudinous  and  unwarranted  construc- 


tion.5 They  vehemently  disclaimed  | 
any  desire  to  return  to  the  chronic 1 
feebleness  and  anarchy  of  the  sup- 
planted Confederation,  and  consecra- 
ted their  energies  to  battling  against 
the  measureless  ills  of  an  unbalanced  I 
and  centralized  despotism.  They 
generally  rejected  the  appellation! 
of  Anti-Federalists,  and  chose  to  be 
distinctively  known  as  Republicans. 
Thomas  Jefferson,  who  had  been  ab- 
sent as  embassador  to  France  through- 
out the  five  or  six  preceding  years, 
and  who  had  therefore  taken  no  con- 
spicuous or  decided  part  either  for  or 
against  the  Constitution  in  its  incipi- 
ency,  became  the  leader,  and  was  for 
many  years  thereafter  the  oracle,  of 
their  party. 

The  Federalists,  strong  in  the  pos- 
session of  power,  and  in  the  popular- 
ity and  influence  of  their  great  chief, 
Washington,  were  early  misled  into* 
some  capital  blunders.  Among  these 
was  the  passage  of  the  acts  of  Con- 
gress, famous  as  the  Alien  and  Sedi- 
tion laws.  The  aliens,  whom  the 
political  tempests  then  convulsing 
Europe  had  drifted  in  large  numbers 
to  our  shores,  were  in  good  part  tur- 
bulent, restless  adventurers,  of  despe- 
rate fortunes,  who  sought  to  embroil 


3  In  the  address  of  the  Federal  Convention  to 
the  people,  signed  by  Washington  as  its  Presi- 
dent, September  17,  1787. 

4  "  Citizens  by  birth  or  choice  of  a  common 
country,  that  country  has  a  right  to  concentrate 
your  affections.  The  name  of  American,  which 
belongs  to  you  in  your  National  capacity,  must 
always  exalt  the  just  pride  of  Patriotism,  more 
than  any  appellation  derived  from  local  discrim- 
inations."—  Washington's  Farewell  Address. 

6  In  the  Federal  Convention  of  1787  (Debate 
of  Monday,  June  18th) : 

Mr.  Hamilton,  of  New  York,  said:  "The 
General  power,  whatever  be  its  form,  if  it  pre- 
serves itself,  must  swallow  up  the  State  Govern- 
ments. Otherwise,  it  would  be  swallowed  up  by 
them.  It  is  against  all  the  principles  of  good 
government  to  vest  the  requisite  powers  in  such 


a  body  as  Congress.  Two  sovereignties  cannot 
exist  within  the  same  limits." 

Mr.  Wilson,  of  Pennsylvania  (June  20th), 
"was  tenacious  of  the  idea  of  preserving  the 
State  Governments."  But  in  the  next  day's 
debate :  "  Taking  the  matter  in  the  more 
general  view,  he  saw  no  danger  to  the  States 
from  the  General  Government.  On  the  contra- 
ry, he  conceived  that,  in  spite  of  every  precau- 
tion, the  General  Government  would  be  in  per- 
petual danger  of  encroachments  from  the  State 
Governments."  And 

Mr.  Madison,  of  Virginia,  "was  of  the  opinion, 
in  the  first  place,  that  there  was  less  danger 
of  encroachment  from  the  General  Government 
than  from  tho  State  Governments ;  and,  in  the 
second  place,  that  the  mischiefs  from  the  en- 
croachments would  be  less  fatal,  if  made  by  the 
former,  than  if  made  by  the  latter." — Madison's 
Papers,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  884,  903,  921. 


THE  RESOLU 

us  in  the  contest  then  devastating 
the  Old  World.  Washington,  and 
the  Federal  magnates  who  surround- 
ed him,  were  inflexibly  averse  to  this, 
and  baffled  all  attempts  to  involve  us 
in  a  foreign  war.  This  very  natural- 
ly offended  the  European  refugees 
among  us,  who  looked  anxiously  to 
this  country  for  interference  to  rees- 
tablish them  in  power  and  prosperity 
in  their  own.  Hence,  they  generally 
took  the  lead  in  reprobating  and  stig- 
matizing the  negotiation  and  ap- 
proval of  Jay's  treaty6  with  Great 
Britain,  whereby  our  past  differences 
and  misunderstandings  with  that 
power  were  adjusted.  They  were  in 
good  part  politicians  and  agitators 
by  trade,  instinctively  hostile  to  a 
government  so  cold-blooded  and  un- 
iinpulsive  as  ours,  and  ardently  de- 
sired a  change.  Regarding  them  as 
dangerous  and  implacable  enemies  to 
the  established  policy  of  non-inter- 
vention, and  to  those  who  upheld  it, 
the  Alien  law  assumed  to  empower 
the  President  to  send  out  of  the 
country  any  foreigner  whose  further 
stay  among  us  should  be  deemed  by 
him  incompatible  with  the  public 
safety  or  tranquillity.  The  Sedition 
law  provided  for  the  prosecution  and 
punishment  of  the  authors  of  false, 
malicious,  and  wicked  libels  on  the 
President,  and  others  high  in  author- 
ity. The  facts  that  no  one  ever  was 
sent  away  under  the  Alien  act,  and 
that  the  Sedition  law  was  hardly 
more  than  the  common  law  of  libel 
applied  specially  to  those  who  should 
venture  to  speak  evil  of  dignities, 
proved  rather  the  folly  of  such  legis- 
lation than  its  necessity  or  its  accord- 
ance with  the  Constitution.  Party 
.spirit  and  party  feeling  ran  high.  It 


TIONS  OF  '98.  83 

was  far  easier  to  libel  a  hated  oppo- 
nent than  to  refute  his  arguments. 
The  best  newspapers  of  that  day 
would  hardly  maintain  a  comparison, 
either  for  ability  or  decorum,  with 
the  third  class  of  our  time ;  and 
personalities  largely  supplied  the 
place  of  learning  and  logic.  Hence, 
many  prosecutions  under  the  Sedition 
law;  some  of  them,  doubtless,  richly 
deserved ;  but  all  tending  to  excite 
hostility  to  the  act  and  its  authors. 
No  other  contributed  half  so  palpa- 
bly to  the  ultimate  overthrow  of  the 
Federal  ascendency. 

When  John  Adams  became  Presi- 
dent, in  1797,  the  South  had  become 
the  stronghold  of  the  Opposition. 
Mr.  Madison  had  dissolved  his  earlier 
association  with  the  great  body  of  the 
framers  of  the  Constitution,  and  be- 
come the  lieutenant  of  Mr.  Jefferson. 
Kentucky — a  Virginia  colony  and 
offset — was  ardently  and  almost 
unanimously  devoted  to  the  ideas 
and  the  fortunes  of  Jefferson ;  and  he 
was  privately  solicited  to  draft  the 
manifesto,  through  which  the  new 
State  beyond  the  Alleghanies  pro- 
claimed, in  1798,  her  intense  hostility 
to  Federal  rule.  The  famous  "  Reso- 
lutions of  '98"  were  thus  originated ; 
Mr.  Jefferson's  authorship,  though 
suspected,  was  never  established 
until  he  avowed  it  in  a  letter  more 
than  twenty  years  afterward.  These 
resolutions  are  too  long  to  be  here 
quoted  in  full,  but  the  first  is  as  fol- 
lows : 

"Resolved,  That  the  several  States  com- 
posing the  United  States  of  America  are  not 
united  on  the  principle  of  unlimited  submis- 
sion to  their  General  Government ,  but  that, 
by  a  compact  under  the  style  and  title  of  a 
Constitution  for  the  United  States,  and  of 
amendments  thereto,  they  constituted  a 
General  Government  for  special  purposes — 


6  Signed  November  19. 179-4;  ratified  by  Yfasliington,  August  14,  1795. 


84: 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


delegated  to  that  Government  certain  defi- 
nite powers,  reserving,  each  State  to  itself, 
the  residuary  mass  of  right  to  their  own 
self-government ;  and  that  whensoever  the 
General  Government  assumes  undelegated 
powers,  its  acts  are  unauthoritative,  void, 
and  of  no  force ;  that  to  this  compact  each 
State  acceded  as  a  State,  and  as  an  integral 
party,  its  co-States  forming,  as  to  itself,  the 
other  party ;  that  the  Government  created 
by  this  compact  was  not  made  the  exclusive 
or  final  judge  of  the  extent  of  the  powers 
delegated  to  itself;  since  that  would  have 
made  its  discretion,  and  not  the  Constitu- 
tion, the  measure  of  its  powers ;  but  that,  as 
in  all  other  cases  of  compact  among  powers 
having  no  common  judge,  each  party  has  an 
equal  right  to  judge  for  itself,  as  well  of 
infractions  as  of  the  mode  and  measure  of 
redress." 

The  resolves  proceed,  at  great 
length,  to  condemn  not  only  the  Alien 
and  Sedition  law%  as  utterly  uncon- 
stitutional and  void,  but  even  the 
act,  recently  passed,  to  punish  frauds 
committed  on  the  Bank  of  the  United 
States,  as  well  as  other  acts  and  parts 
of  acts ;  and  conclude  with  a  call  on 
the  other  States  to  unite  with  Ken- 
tucky in  condemning  and  opposing 
all  such  usurpations  of  power  by  the 
Federal  Government,  and  by  express- 
ing her  undoubting  confidence 

"That  they  will  j^ncur  with  this  com- 
monwealth in  considering  the  said  acts  as  so 
palpably  against  the  Constitution  as  to 
amount  to  an  undisguised  declaration  that 
that  compact  is  not  meant  to  be  the  measure 
of  the  powers  of  the  General  Government, 
but  that  it  will  proceed  in  the  exercise,  over 
these  States,  of  all  powers  whatsoever :  that 
they  will  view  this  as  seizing  the  rights  of 
the  States,  and  consolidating  them  in  the 
hands  of  the  General  Government,  with  the 
power  assumed  to  bincl  the  States  (not 
merely  as  to  the  cases  made  federal  {casus 
foederis),  but)  in  all  cases  whatsoever,  by 
laws  made,  not  with  their  consent,  but  by 
others  against  their  consent :  that  this  would 
be  to  surrender  the  form  of  government  we 
have  chosen,  and  live  under  one  deriving  its 
powers  from  its  own  will,  and  not  from  our 
authority ;  and  that  the  co-States,  returning 
to  their  natural  right  in  cases  not  made  fede- 
ral, will  concur  in  declaring  these  acts  void 
and  of  no  force,  and  will  each  take  measures 
of  its  own  in  providing  that  neither  these 


acts,  nor  any  others  of  the  General  Govern-i 
ment,  not  plainly  and  intentionally  author- 
ized by  the  Constitution,  shall  be  exercised 
within  their  respective  territories. 

"  9th.  Resolved,  That  the  said  Committee 
be  authorized  to  communicate,  by  writing  or 
personal  conferences,  at  any  times  or  places 
whatever,  with  any  person  or  persons  who 
may  be  appointed  by  any  one  or  more  co- 
States  to  correspond  or  confer  with  them, 
and  that  they  lay  their  proceedings  before- 
the  next  session  of  Assembly." 

The  Virginia  resolves  on  the  same 
subject,  passed  by  her  Legislature  in 
1799,  were  drafted  by  Mr.  Madison — 
doubtless  after  consultation  with  his 
chief,  Mr.  Jefferson — and  did  not 
differ  materially  in  spirit  or  expres- 
sion from  those  of  Kentucky. 

Mr.  Jefferson  became  President  on 
the  4th  of  March,  1801.  Up  to  this 
hour,  he  had  been  an  extreme  and 
relentless  stickler  for  the  most  rigid 
and  literal  construction  of  the  Federal 
pact,  and  for  denying  to  the  Govern- 
ment all  authority  for  which  express 
warrant  could  not  be  found  in  the 
provisions  of  that  instrument.  Said 
he7:  "In  questions  of  power,  then, 
let  no  more  be  heard  of  confidence  in 
man,  but  bind  him  down  from  mis- 
chief by  the  chains  of  the  Constitu- 
tion." 

His  fidelity  to  his  declared  princi- 
ple was  soon  subjected  to  a  searching 
ordeal.  Louisiana  fell  into  the  hands 
of  Bonaparte,  who,  it  was  not  improb- 
able, might  be  induced  to  sell  it.  It 
was  for  us  a  desirable  acquisition ; 
but  where  was  the  authority  for  buy- 
ing it?  In  the  Constitution,  there 
clearly  was  none,  unless  under  that 
very  power  to  provide  for  the  general 
welfare,  which,  as  he  had  expressly 
declared,  was  meant  by  the  instru- 
ment "  to  be  subsidiary  only  to  the 
execution  of  limited  powers." 8  lie 


7  Eighth  Kentucky  Resolve. 


Seventh  Kentucky  Resolve. 


STRICT  AND  LOOS 


E  CONSTRUCTION. 


So 


was  quite  too  large  and  frank  a  man 
to  pretend  that  his  action  in  this  case 
was  justified  by  the  Constitution,  as 
he  understood  and  had  always  inter- 
preted it.    He  said  : 9 

"  This  treaty  must  of  course  be  laid  before 
both  Houses,  because  both  have  important 
functions  to  exercise  respecting  it.  They,  I 
presume,  will  see  their  duty  to  their  country 
in  ratifying  and  paying  for  it,  so  as  to  secure 
a  good  which  would  otherwise  be  probably 
never  again  in  their  power.  But  I  suppose 
they  must  then  appeal  to  the  nation  for  an 
additional  article  to  the  Constitution,  ap- 
proving and  confirming  an  act  which  the 
nation  had  not  previously  authorized.  The 
Constitution  has  made  no  provision  for  our 
holding  foreign  territory,  still  less  for  incor- 
porating foreign  nations  into  our  Union. 
The  Executive,  in  seizing  the  fugitive  occur- 
rence which  so  much  advances  the  good  of 
their  country,  have  done  an  act  beyond  the 
Constitution.  The  Legislature,  in  casting 
behind  them  metaphysical  subtleties,  and 
risking  themselves  like  faithful  servants, 
must  ratify  and  pay  for  it,  and  throw  them- 
selves on  their  country  for  doing  for  them 
unauthorized  what  we  know  they  would 
have  done  for  themselves  had  they  been  in  a 
situation  to  do  it.  It  is  the  case  of  a  guardi- 
an, investing  the  money  of  his  ward  in  pur- 
chasing an  important  adjacent  territory ; 
and  saying  to  him,  when  of  age,  'I  did  this 
for  your  good ;  I  pretend  to  no  right  to  bind 
you :  you  may  disavow  me,  and  I  must  get 
out  of  the  scrape  as  I  can.  I  thought  it  my 
duty  to  risk  myself  for  you.'  But  we  shall 
not  be  disavowed  by  the  nation,  and  their 
act  of  indemnity  will  confirm,  and  not 
weaken,  the  Constitution,  by  more  strongly 
marking  out  its  lines." 

In  a  letter  to  Wilson  C.  Nicholas,10 
he  examines  and  thoroughly  refutes 
the  assumption,  suggested  by  Mr.  1ST., 
that  the  power  to  purchase  Louisiana 
"  might  possibly  be  distilled  from  the 
authority  given  to  Congress  to  admit 
new  States  into  the  Union."  He 
says :  "  But  when  I  consider  that  the 
limits  of  the  United  States  are  pre- 
cisely fixed  by  the  treaty  of  1783,  and 
that  the  Constitution  expressly  de- 
clares itself  to  be  made  for  the  Uni- 

9  Letter  to  Senator  Breckinridge,  August  12, 
1803.  jo  September  1,  1803. 


ted  States,  I  cannot  help  believing  the 
intention  was  not  to  permit  Congress 
to  admit  into  the  Union  new  States, 
which  should  be  formed  outside  of 
the  territory  for  which,  and  under 
whose  authority  alone,  they  were  then 
acting.  I  do  not  believe  it  was  meant 
that  they  might  receive  England,  Ire- 
land, Holland,  etc.,  into  it,  which 
would  be  the  case  on  your  construc- 
tion." After  disposing  in  like  man- 
ner of  "  the  opinion  of  those  who  con- 
sider the  grant  of  the  treaty-making 
power  as  boundless,"  and  completing 
his  demonstration  that  there  was  no 
power  whatever  in  the  Constitution, 
as  he  construed  it,  to  make  this  pur- 
chase, he,  with  more  good  sense  than 
consistency,  concludes:  "I  confess, 
then,  I  think  it  important,  in  the  pres- 
ent case,  to  set  an  example  against 
broad  construction,  by  appealing  for 
new  power  to  the  people.  If,  how- 
ever, our  friends  shall  think  differ- 
ently, certainly  I  shall  acquiesce  with 
satisfaction confiding,  that  the  good 
sense  of  our  country  will  correct  the 
evil  of  construction  when  it  shall 
produce  ill  effects." 

When,  in  1811,  the  Territory  of 
Orleans  was  moulded  into  the  State 
of  Louisiana,  Mr.  Josiah  Quincy,  a 
young  and  very  ardent  Federalist  who 
then  represented  the  city  of  Boston 
in  the  House,  indulged  in  what  re- 
sembled very  closely  a  menace  of 
contingent  secession ;  and  similar  ful- 
minations  were  uttered  by  sundry 
New  England  Federalists  under  the 
pressure  of  Mr.  Jefferson's  Embargo 
and  of  the  War  of  1812.  The  famous 
but  unsavory  Hartford  Convention," 
held  near  the  close  of  that  war,  and 

11  For  proceedings  of  this  Convention,  see 
Niles's  Eegister,  January  14,  1815. 


86 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


by  which  the  ruin  of  the  Federal 
party  was  completed,  evinced  its  dis- 
content with  matters  in  general,  but 
especially  with  Democracy  and  the 
War,  by  a  resort  to  rhetoric  which 
was  denounced  as  tending  to  dis- 
union, but  which  does  not  seem  to 
warrant  the  imputation.  And  when- 
ever the  right  of  secession  or  of  nulli- 
fication has  been  asserted,  whether 
directly  or  by  clear  implication,  in 
any  part  of  the  country,  or  by  any 
party  out  of  power,  such  assertion 
has  called  forth  expressions  of  em- 
phatic rebuke  and  dissent  from  other 
sections12  and  antagonistic  parties. 
Mr.  Webster,13  in  replying  to  Mr. 
Hayne  of  South  *  Carolina  on  this 
subject,  forcibly  said : 

"  I  understood  the  gentleman  to  maintain, 
that,  without  revolution,  without  civil  com- 
motion, without  rebellion,  a  remedy  for  sup- 
posed abuse  and  transgression  of  the  powers 
of  the  General  Government  lies  in  a  direct 
appeal  to  the  interference  of  the  State  Gov- 
ernments." 

Mr.  Hayne  here  rose  and  said :  "  He  did 
not  contend  for  the  mere  right  of  revolution, 
but  for  the  right  of  constitutional  resistance. 
What  he  maintained  was  that,  in  case  of  a 
plain,  palpable  violation  of  the  Constitution 
by  the  General  Government,  a  State  may  in- 
terpose ;  and  that  this  interposition  is  con- 
stitutional." 

Mr.  "Webster  resumed: — "So^  Sir,  I  under- 
stood the  gentleman,  and  am  happy  to  find 
that  I  did  not  misunderstand  him.  What  he 
contends  for  is,  that  it  is  constitutional  to  in- 
terrupt the  administration  of  the  Constitu- 
tion itself,  in  the  hands  of  those  who  are 
chosen  and  sworn  to  administer  it,  by  the 
direct  interference,  in  form  of  law,  of  the 
States,  in  virtue  of  their  sovereign  capacity. 
The  inherent  right  of  the  people  to  reform 
their  government,  I  do  not  deny ;  and  they 
have  another  right,  and  that  is,  to  resist  un- 

12  The  following  extract  is  a  fair  specimen  of 
the  prevailing  sentiment,  at  the  time  of  the  as- 
sembling of  the  '^Hartford  Convention,"  of  the 
South — including  South  Carolina — on  the  sub- 
ject of  Secession: 

"No  man,  no  association  of  men,  no  State  or 
set  of  States,  has  a  right  to  withdraw  itself  from 
this  Union,  of  its  own  account.  The  same  power 
that  knit  us  together  can  unknit.    The  same 


constitutional  laws,  without  overturning  the 
government.  It  is  no  doctrine  of  mine 
that  unconstitutional  laws  bind  the  people. 
The  great  question  is,  1  Whose  prerogative  is  l 
it  to  decide  on  the  constitutionality  or  uncon- 
stitutionality of  the  laws?'  On  that,  the 
main  debate  hinges.  The  proposition  that, 
in  case  of  a  supposed  violation  of  the  Consti- 
tution by  Congress,  the  States  have  a  consti- 
tutional right  to  interfere  and  annul  the  law 
of  Congress,  is  the  proposition  of  the  gentle- 
man. I  do  not  admit  it.  If  the  gentleman 
had  intended  no  more  than  to  assert  the 
right  of  revolution  for  justifiable  cause,  he 
would  have  said  only  what  all  agree  to.  But 
I  cannot  conceive  that  there  can  be  a  mid- 
dle course  between  submission  to  the  laws, 
when  regularly  pronounced  constitutional, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  open  resistance,  which 
is  revolution  or  rebellion,  on  the  other.  I 
say,  the  right  of  a  State  to  annul  a  law  of 
Congress  cannot  be  maintained,  but  on  the 
ground  of  the  inalienable  right  of  man  to 
resist  oppression ;  that  is  to  say,  upon  the 
ground  of  revolution.  I  admit  that  there  is 
an  ultimate  violent  remedy,  above  the  Con- 
stitution and  in  defiance  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, which  may  be  resorted  to  when  a  rev- 
olution is  to  be  justified.  But  I  do  not  admit 
that,  under  the  Constitution,  and  in  confor- 
mity with  it,  there  is  any  mode  in  which 
a  State  Government,  as  a  member  of  the 
Union,  can  interfere  and  stop  the  progress 
of  the  general  movement,  by  force  of  her 
own  laws,  under  any  circumstances  what- 
ever. *  *  *  Sir,  the  human  mind  is  so  con- 
stituted that  the  merits  of  both  sides  of  a 
controversy  appear  very  clear,  and  very  pal- 
pable, to  those  who  respectively  espouse 
them ;  and  both  sides  usually  grow  clearer 
as  the  controversy  advances.  South  Caro« 
lina  sees  unconstitutionality  in  the  tariff; 
she  sees  oppression  there  also ;  and  she  sees 
danger.  Pennsylvania,  with  a  vision  not  less 
sharp,  looks  at  the  same  tariff,  and  sees  no 
such  thing  in  it ;  she  sees  it  all  constitutional, 
all  useful,  all  safe.  The  faith  of  South  Car- 
olina is  strengthened  by  opposition,  and  she 
now  not  only  sees,  but  resolves,  that  the  tariff 
is  palpably  unconstitutional,  oppressive,  and 
dangerous ;  but  Pennsylvania,  not  to  be  be- 
hind her  neighbors,  and  equally  willing  to 
strengthen  her  own  faith  by  a  confident  as- 
severation, resolves  also,  and  gives  to  every 


formality  which  formed  the  links  of  the  Union 
is  necessary  to  dissolve  it.  The  majority  of  the 
States  which  formed  the  Union  must  consent  to 
the  withdrawal  of  any  branch  of  it.  Until  that 
consent  has  been  obtained,  any  attempt  to  dissolve  the 
Union,  or  distract  the  efficacy  of  its  laws,  is  trea- 
son— treason  to  all  intents  and  purposes.11 — Rich- 
mond Enquirer,  November  1,  1814. 

13  Debate  on  Foot's  resolutions,  January  26, 
1830. 


MR.  WEBSTER  ON 


NULLIFICATION. 


87 


warm  affirmative  of  South  Carolina  a  plain, 
downright,  Pennsylvania  negative.  South 
Carolina,  to  show  the  strength  and  unity  of 
her  opinion,  brings  her  assembly  to  a  una- 
nimity, within  seven  voices;  Pennsylvania, 
not  to  be  outdone  in  this  respect  any  more 
than  in  others,  reduces  her  dissentient  frac- 
tion to  a  single  vote.  Now,  Sir,  again  I  ask 
the  gentleman,  What  is  to  be  done?  Are 
these  States  both  right?  If  not,  which  is  in 
the  wrong  ?  or,  rather,  which  has  the  best 
right  to  decide?  And  if  he,  and  if  I,  are  not 
to  know  what  the  Constitution  means,  and 
what  it  is,  till  those  two  State  Legislatures, 
and  the  twenty -two  others,  shall  agree  in  its 
construction,  what  have  we  sworn  to  when 
we  have  sworn  to  maintain  it?  I  was  forci- 
bly struck,  Sir,  with  one  reflection,  as  the 
gentleman  went  on  in  his  speech.  He 
quoted  Mr.  Madison's  resolutions14  to  prove 
that  a  State  may  interfere,  in  a  case  of 
deliberate,  palpable,  and  dangerous  exercise 
of  a  power  not  granted.  The  honorable 
member  supposes  the  tariff  law  to  be  such 
an  exercise  of  power  ;  and  that,  consequent- 
ly, a  case  has  arisen  in  which  the  State  may, 
if  it  see  fit,  interfere  by  its  own  law.  Now 
it  so  happens,  nevertheless,  that  Mr.  Madi- 
son deems  this  same  tariff  law  quite  consti- 
tutional! Instead  of  a  clear  and  palpable 
violation,  it  is,  in  his  judgment,  no  violation 
at  all.  So  that,  while  they  use  his  authority 
for  a  hypothetical  case,  they  reject  it  in  the 
very  case  before  them.  All  this,  Sir,  shows 
the  inherent  futility — I  had  almost  used  a 
stronger  word — of  conceding  this  power  of 
interference  to  the  States,  and  then  attempt- 
ing to  secure  it  from  abuse  by  imposing 
qualifications  of  which  the  States  themselves 
are  to  judge.  One  of  two  things  is  true: 
either  the  laws  of  the  Union  are  beyond  the 
discretion  and  beyond  the  control  of  the 
States;  or  else  we  have  no  constitution  of 
General  Government,  and  are  thrust  back 
again  to  the  days  of  the  Confederation." 

In  his  brief  speech,  which  closed 
that  debate,  and  finished  the  doctrine 
of  Nullification,  Mr.  Webster  said : 

"  Sir,  if  I  were  to  concede  to  the  gentle- 
man his  principal  proposition,  namely,  that 
the  Constitution  is  a  compact  between 
States,  the  question  would  still  be,  What 
provision  is  made  in  this  compact  to  settle 
points  of  disputed  construction,  or  contested 
power,  that  shall  come  into  controversy? 
And  this  question  would  still  be  answered, 
and  conclusively  answered,  by  the  Constitu- 
tion itself.  While  the  gentleman  is  contend- 
ing against  construction,  he  himself  is  set- 
ting up  the  most  dangerous  and  loose  con- 


struction. The  Constitution  declares  that, 
the  laics  of  Congress  passed  in  pursuance  of 
the  Constitution  shall  be  the  supreme  law  of 
the  land.  No  construction  is  necessary 
here.  It  declares  also,  with  equal  plainness 
and  precision,  that  the  judicial  power  of  the 
United  States  shall  extend  to  every  case  aris- 
ing under  the  laws  of  Congress:  This  needs 
no  construction.  Here  is  a  law,  then,  which 
is  declared  to  be  supreme ;  and  here  is  a 
power  established,  which  is  to  interpret  that 
law.  Now,  Sir,  how  has  the  gentleman  met 
this?  Suppose  the  Constitution  to  be  a 
compact,  yet  here  are  its  terms;  and  how 
does  the  gentleman  get  rid  of  them  ?  He 
cannot  argue  the  seal  off  the  bond,  nor  the 
words  out  of  the  instrument.  Here  they 
are ;  what  answer  does  he  give  to  them  ? 
None  in-  the  world,  Sir,  except,  that  the 
effect  of  this  would  be  to  place  the  States  in 
a  condition  of  inferiority ;  and  that  it  results 
from  the  very  nature  of  things,  there  being 
no  superior,  that  the  parties  must  be  their 
own  judges!  Thus  elosely  and  cogently 
does  the  honorable  gentleman  reason  on  the 
words  of  the  Constitution  !  The  gentleman 
says,  if  there  be  such  a  power  of  final  deci- 
sion in  the  General  Government,  he  asks 
for  the  grant  of  that  power.  Well,  Sir,  I 
show  him  the  grant.  I  turn  him  to  the 
very  words.  I  show  him  that  the  laws  of 
Congress  are  made  supreme ;  and  that  the 
judicial  power  extends,  by  express  words,  to 
the  interpretation  of  these  laws.  Instead  of 
answering  this,  he  retreats  into  the  general 
reflection,  that  it  must  result  from  the  na- 
ture of  things,  that  the  States,  being  parties, 
must  judge  for  themselves. 

"I  have  admitted,  that,  if  the  Constitution 
were  to  be  considered  as  the  creature  of  the 
State  governments,  it  might  be  modified,  in- 
terpreted, or  construed  according  to  their 
pleasure.  But,  even  in  that  case,  it  would 
be  necessary  that  they  should  agree.  One 
alone  could  not  interpret  it  conclusively ; 
one  alone  could  not  construe  it ;  one  alone 
could  not  modify  it.  Yet  the  gentleman's 
doctrine  is,  that  Carolina  alone  may  con- 
strue and  interpret  that  compact,  which 
equally  binds  all,  and  gives  equal  rights  to 
all. 

"  So,  then,  Sir,  even  supposing  the  Con- 
stitution to  be  a  compact  between  the  States, 
the  gentleman's  doctrine,  nevertheless,  is 
not  maintainable ;  because  first,  the  General 
Government  is  not  a  party  to  the  compact, 
but  a  government  established  by  it,  and 
vested  by  it  with  the  powers  of  trying  and 
deciding  doubtful  questions;  and,  secondly, 
because,  if  the  Constitution  be  regarded  as  a 
compact,  not  one  State  only,  but  all  the 
States,  are  parties  to  that  compact,  and  one 


«  The  Virginia  Resolves  of  1799, 


88 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


can  have  no  right  to  fix  npon  it  her  own 
peculiar  construction." 


Andrew  Jackson  and  John  C. 
Calhoun — two  of  the  most  remarka- 
ble men  ever  produced  in  this  or  any 
other  country — were  destined  to  lead 
the  rival  forces  by  which  the  Nullifi- 
cation issue  was  finally  brought  to  a 
practical  conclusion.  Though  they 
became  and  died  fierce  antagonists, 
and  even  bitter  personal  enemies, 
their  respective  characters  and  careers 
exhibited  many  points  of  resemblance. 
Each  was  of  that  "Scotch-Irish" 
Presbyterian  stock  with  which  Crom- 
well repeopled  the  north  of  Ireland 
from  Scotland,  after  having  all  but 
exterminated  its  original  Celtic  and 
Catholic  inhabitants,  who  resisted 
and  defied  his  authority.  That 
Scotch-Irish  blood  to  this  day  evinces 
something  of  the  Cromwellian  ener- 
gy, courage,  and  sturdiness.  Each 
was  of  Revolutionary  Whig  antece- 
dents— Jackson,  though  but  thirteen 
years  of  age,  having  been  in  arms  for 
the  patriotic  cause  in  1780  ;  his  bro- 
ther Hugh  having  died  in  the  service 
the  preceding  year.  Andrew  (then 
but  fourteen),  with  his  brother  Ro- 
bert, was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Brit- 
ish in  1781,  and  wounded  in  the  head 
and  arm  while  a  captive,  for  refusing 
to  clean  his  captor's  boots.  His  bro- 
ther was,  for  a  like  offense,  knocked 
down  and  disabled.  John  C.  Cal- 
houn was  only  born  in  the  last  year 
of  the  Revolutionary  War;  but  his 
father,  Patrick  Calhoun,  was  an 
ardent  and  active  Whig  throughout 
the  struggle.  Each  was  early  left 
fatherless — Andrew  Jackson's  father 
having  died  before  his  illustrious  son 

15 "  Fellow-citizens  of  my  native  State  /" — 
appealing  to  South  Carolinians  in  his  Proelama- 


was  born ;  while  the  father  of  John 
C.  Calhoun  died  when  his  son  was 
still  in  his  early  teens.  Each  was  by 
birth  a  South  Carolinian ;  for,  though 
General  Jackson's  birth-place  is 
claimed  by  his  biographers  for  North 
Carolina,  he  expressly  asserted  South 
Carolina15  to  be  his  native  State,  in 
the  most  important  and  memorable 
document  to  which  his  name  is  ap- 
pended, and  which  flowed  not  merely 
from  his  pen,  but  from  his  heart. 
Each  was  of  the  original  Anti-Feder- 
al, strict-construction  school  in  our 
politics — Calhoun's  father  having  ve- 
hemently opposed  the  adoption  of 
the  Federal  Constitution ;  while  Jack- 
son, entering  Congress  as  the  sole  re- 
presentative of  the  newly  admitted 
State  of  Tennessee  (December  5, 
1796),  voted  in  a  minority  of  twelve 
against  the  address  tendering  to  Gen- 
eral  Washington,  on  his  retirement 
from  the  Presidency,  a  respectful  ex- 
pression of  the  profound  admiration 
and  gratitude  wherewith  his  whole 
public  career  was  regarded  by  Con- 
gress and  the  country.  General 
Jackson  was  not  merely  an  extreme 
Republican  of  the  Jeffersonian  State- 
Rights  School ;  he  was  understood  to 
side  with  Colonel  Hayne  at  the  time- 
of  his  great  debate  on  Nullification 
with  Mr.  Webster.  Each  entered 
Congress  before  attaining  his  thirti- 
eth year,  having  already  taken  a  con- 
spicuous part  in  public  affairs.  Each 
was  first  chosen  to  the  House,  but 
served  later  and  longer  in  the  Senate. 
Each  was  a  slaveholder  through  most 
of  his  career,  always  found  on  the 
side  of  Slavery  in  any  controversy 
affecting  its  claims  or  interests  during 
his  public  life ;  and  neither  emanci- 

|  tion  against  the  Nullifies,  Dec.  11,  1832.  lie 
|  can  hardly  have  been  mistaken  on  this  head. 


PROTECTION 


—  MR.  JEFFERSON'S  VIEW. 


59 


I  pated  his  slaves  by  his  will.  Each 
I  became,  for  the  first  time,  a  candidate 
for  the  Presidency  in  1824,  when 
i  each  counted  with  confidence  on  the 
powerful  support  of  Pennsylvania. 
"When  that  State,  through  her  leading 
politicians,  decided  to  support  Jack- 
I  son,  Calhoun  fell  out  of  the  race,  but 
was  made  Yice-President  without 
serious  opposition ;  General  Jackson 
receiving  a  plurality  of  the  electoral 
votes  for  President,  but  failing  of 
success  in  the  House.  In  1828,  their 
names  were  placed  on  the  same 
ticket,  and  they  were  triumphantly 
elected  President  and  Yice-Presi- 
dent respectively,  receiving  more 
than  two-thirds  of  the  electoral  votes, 
including  those  of  every  State  south 
of  the  Potomac.  This  is  the  only 
instance  wherein  the  President  and  j 
Yice-President  were  both  chosen  from 
those  distinctively  known  as  Slave 
States  ;  though  New  York  was  nom- 
inally and  legally  a  Slave  State  when 
her  Aaron  Burr,  George  Clinton,  and 
Daniel  D.  Tompkins  were  each  chosen 
Yice-President  with  the  last  three 
Yirginian  Presidents  respectively. 
Alike  tall  in  stature,  spare  in  frame, 
erect  in  carriage,  austere  in  morals, 
imperious  in  temper,  of  dauntless 
courage,  and  inflexible  will,  Jackson 
and  Calhoun  were  each  fitted  by  na- 
ture to  direct,  to  govern,  and  to 
mould  feebler  men  to  his  ends ;  but 
they  were  not  fitted  to  coalesce  and  | 
work  harmoniously  together.  They 
had  hardly  become  the  accepted 
chiefs  of  the  same  great,  predominant 
party,  before  they  quarreled;  and 
their  feud,  never  healed,  exerted  a 
signal  and  baneful  influence  on  the 
future  of  their  country. 

The  Protective  Policy,  though  its 


earliest  conspicuous  champion  in  our 
national  councils  was  Alexander 
Hamilton,  General  Washington's 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  came,  at 
a  later  day,  to  be  mainly  championed 
by  Republicans.  The  great  mer- 
chants were  leading  Federalists ;  the 
great  sea-ports  were  mainly  Federal 
strongholds ;  the  seaboard  was  in 
good  part  Federal :  it  yearned  for 
extensive  and  ever-expanding  com- 
merce, and  mistakenly,  but  naturally, 
regarded  the  fostering  of  Home 
Manufactures  as  hostile  to  the  con- 
summation it  desired.  Mr.  Jeffer- 
son's Embargo  had  borne  with  great 
severity  upon  the  mercantile  class, 
inciting  a  dislike  to  all  manner  of 
commercial  restrictions.  The  inte- 
rior, on  the  other  hand,  was  prepon- 
derantly Republican,  and  early  com- 
prehended the  advantage  of  a  more 
symmetrical  development,  a  wider 
diversification,  of  our  Xational  Indus- 
try, through  the  legislative  encou- 
ragement of  Home  Manufactures. 
The  Messages  of  all  the  Republican 
Presidents,  down  to  and  including 
General  Jackson,  recognize  and 
affirm  the  wisdom,  beneficence,  and 
constitutionality  of  Protective  legis- 
lation. The  preamble  to  the  first 
tariff  act  passed  by  Congress  under 
the  Federal  Constitution  explicitly 
affirms  the  propriety  of  levying  im- 
posts, among  other  ends,  "for  the 
protection  of  Domestic  Manufac- 
tures." Mr.  Jefferson,  in  his  Annual 
Message  of  December  14,  1806,  after 
announcing  that  there  is  a  prospect 
of  an  early  surplus  of  Federal  reve- 
nue over  expenditure,  proceeds : 

"  The  question,  therefore,  now  comes  for- 
ward—  to  what  other  objects  shall  these 
surpluses  be  appropriated,  and  the  whole 
surplus  of  impost,  after  the  entire  discharge 


90 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


of  the  public  debt,  an  J  during  those  inter- 
vals when  the  purposes  of  war  shall  not  call 
for  them  ?  Shall  we  siqypress  the  impost  and 
give  that  advantage  to  foreign  over  domestic 
manufactures?  On  a  few  articles  of  more 
general  and  necessary  use,  the  suppression, 
in  due  season,  will  doubtless  be  right;  but 
the  great  mass  of  the  articles  on  which  im- 
post is  paid  is  foreign  luxuries,  purchased  by 
those  only  who  are  rich  enough  to  afford 
themselves  the  use  of  them.  Their  patriot- 
ism would  certainly  prefer  its  continuance 
and  application  to  the  great  purposes  of  the 
public  education,  roads,  rivers,  canals,  and 
such  other  objects  of  public  improvement  as 
it  may  be  thought  proper  to  add  to  the  con- 
stitutional enumeration  of  federal  powers. 
By  these  operations,  new  channels  of  com- 
munication will  be  opened  between  the 
States;  the  lines  of  separation  will  disap- 
pear ;  their  interests  will  be  identified,  and 
their  Union  cemented  by  new  and  indissolu- 
ble ties." 

"Education  is  here  placed  among  the  arti- 
cles of  public  care,  not  that  it  would  be  pro- 
posed to  take  its  ordinary  branches  out  of 
the  hands  of  private  enterprise,  which  man- 
ages so  much  better  all  the  concerns  to 
which  it  is  equal ;  but  a  public  institution 
can  alone  supply  those  sciences  which, 
though  rarely  called  for,  are  yet  necessary 
to  complete  the  circle,  all  the  parts  of  which 
contribute  to  the  improvement  of  the  coun- 
try, and  some  of  them  to  its  preservation. 
The  subject  is  now  proposed  for  the  consid- 
eration of  Congress,  because,  if  approved,  by 
the  time  the  State  Legislatures  shall  have 
deliberated  on  this  extension  of  the  federal 
trusts,  and  the  laws  shall  be  passed,  and 
other  arrangements  made  for  their  execu- 
tion, the  necessary  funds  will  be  on  hand 
and  without  employment.  I  suppose  an 
amendment  to  the  Constitution,  by  consent 
of  the  States,  necessary,  because  the  objects 
now  recommended  are  not  among  those  enu- 
merated in  the  Constitution,  and  to  which 
it  permits  the  public  moneys  to  be  applied." 

Mr.  Jefferson,  it  will  be  seen,  sug- 
gests an  amendment  to  the  Constitu- 
tion, to  give  Congress  power  to  raise 
and  appropriate  money  to  the  "great 
purposes  of  education,  roads,  rivers, 
canals,"  etc. ;  but  he  betrays  no  sus- 
picion that  the  incidental  Protec- 
tion then  confessedly  enjoyed  by  our 
Home  Manufactures  was  given  in 
defiance  of  "the  Constitution  as  it 
is."  On  the  contrary,  an  enlarge- 
ment of  federal  power  was  suggested 


|  by  him  with  reference  to  new  objects, 
not  to  those  already  provided  for. 
Had  these  required  such  enlargement, 
the  duties  should  have  been  repealed 
or  reduced  at  once,  to  be  reim- 
posed  whenever  Congress  should  be 
clothed  with  the  requisite  constitu- 
tional power. 

Henky  Clay  entered  Congress 
under  Jefferson,  in  1806,  and  was 
an  earnest,  thorough,  enlightened 
Protectionist  from  the  start.  Mr. 
Calhoun  first  took  his  seat  in  1811, 
when  the  question  of  war  with  Great 
Britain  dwarfed  all  others;  and  his 
zealous  efforts,  together  with  those 
of  Clay,  Felix  Grundy,  and  other 
ardent  young  Republicans,  finally 
overbore  the  reluctance  of  Madison 
and  his  more  sedate  councilors,  and 
secured  a  Declaration  of  "War  on  the 
18th  of  June,  1812.  At  the  close  of 
that  war,  a  revision  of  the  existing 
Tariff  was  imperatively  required ; 
and  no  man  did  more  than  John  C. 
Calhoun — then,  for  his  last  term,  a 
leading  member  of  the  House — to 
secure  the  efficient  Protection  of 
Home  Manufactures,  but  especially 
of  the  Cotton  Manufacture,  by  the 
Tariff  of  1816  ;  which  Massachusetts, 
and  most  of  New  England,  opposed, 
precisely  because  it  was  Protective, 
and  therefore,  in  the  short-sighted 
view,  hostile  to  the  interests  of  Com- 
merce and  Navigation.  Internal  Im- 
provements, and  all  other  features  of 
what  was  termed  the  National  in 
contradistinction  to  the  Radical  or 
strict-construction  theory  of  the  na- 
ture and  functions  of  our  Federal 
Government,  found  in  Mr.  Calhoun 
and  his  personal  adherents  their 
most  thorough-going  champions :  and 
South  Carolina  was,  about  1820,  the 


THE  TAEIF 

arena  of  a  stirring  conflict  between 
her  u  National"  school  of  politicians, 
headed  by  Calhoun  and  McDuffie, 
and  the  "  Radicals,"  whose  chief  was 
"William  H.  Crawford,  of  Georgia. 
Repeated  duels  between  Mr.  McDuffie 
and  Colonel  William  Cuming,  of  Geor- 
gia, in  one  of  which  McDuffie  was  se- 
verely wounded,  were  among  the  in- 
cidents of  this  controversy.  Yet  but 
few  years  elapsed  before  Mr.  Calhoun 
and  his  trusty  henchman,  McDuf- 
fie, appeared  in  the  novel  character 
of  champions  of  "  State  Rights,"  and 
relentless  antagonists  of  Protection, 
and  all  the  "  National"  projects  they 
had  hitherto  supported !  Mr.  Calhoun 
attempted,  some  years  afterward,  to 
reconcile  this  flagrant  inconsistency ; 
but  it  was  like  "  arguing  the  seal  off 
the  bond" — a  feat  to  which  the  sub- 
tlest powers  of  casuistry  are  utterly 
inadequate.  He  did  prove,  howev- 
er, that  his  change  did  not  follow, 
but  preceded,  his  quarrel  with  Gen- 
eral Jackson — his  original,  though 
then  unacknowledged,  demonstration 
againstProtection  as  unconstitutional, 
and  in  favor  of  Nullification  as  a  re- 
served right  of  each  State,  having 
been  embodied  in  an  elaborate  docu- 
ment known  as  "  The  South  Carolina 
Exposition,"  adopted  and  put  forth 
by  the  Legislature  of  his  State  near 
the  close  of  1828.  The  doctrines 
therein  affirmed  were  those  propound- 
ed by  Hayne  and  refuted  by  Webster 
m  the  great  debate  already  noticed. 

The  Tariff  of  1828— the  highest 
and  most  protective  ever  adopted  in 
this  country — was  passed  by  a  Jack- 
son Congress,  of  which  Yan  Buren, 
Silas  Wright,  and  the  Jacksonian 
leaders  in  Pennsylvania  and  Ohio, 
were  master-spirits.    It  was  opposed 


FOF1323.  91 

by  most  of  the  members  from  the  Cot- 
ton States,  and  by  a  majority  of  those 
from  New  England — some  provisions 
having  been  engraftedupon  it  with  the 
alleged  purpose  and  the  certain  effect 
of  making  it  obnoxious  to  Massachu- 
setts and  the  States  which,  on  either 
side,  adjoined  her.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  members  from  the  Middle 
and  Western  Free  States,  without 
distinction  of  party,  supported  it  al- 
most unanimously.  This  Tariff  im- 
posed high  duties  on  Iron,  m  Lead, 
Hemp^  Wool,  and  other  bulky  sta- 
ples, and  was  very  generally  popular. 
Under  it,  the  industry  of  the  Free 
States,  regarded  as  a  whole,  was 
more  productive,  more  prosperous, 
better  rewarded,  than  ever  before, 
and  the  country  exhibited  a  rapid 
growth  in  wealth,  intelligence,  and 
general  comfort. 

The  South — that  is,  the  cotton- 
growing  region  —  for  Louisiana, 
through  .her  sugar-planting  interest, 
sustained  the  Protective  policy,  and 
shared  in  the  prosperity  thence  result- 
ing— now  vehemently  opposed  the 
Tariff,  declaring  herself  thereby 
plundered  and  impoverished.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  her  condition  was 
less  favorable,  her  people  less  com- 
fortable, than  they  had  been ;  but 
the  contrast  between  the  thrift,  pro- 
gress, and  activity  of  the  Free  States, 
and  the  stagnation,  the  inertia,  the 
poverty,  of  the  cotton  region,  was 
very  striking.  And,  as  the  South 
was  gradually  unlearning  her  Revo- 
lutionary principles,  and  adopting 
instead  the  dogma  that  Slavery  is 
essentially  right  and  beneficent,  she 
could  not  now  be  induced  to  appre- 
hend, nor  even  to  consider,  the  real 
cause  of  her  comparative  wretched- 
ness; though  she  was  more  than  once 


92 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"kindly  and  delicately  reminded  of  it. 
Mr.  George  M.  Dallas,16  of  Pennsyl- 
vania— a  life-long  Democrat  and 
anti-Abolitionist,  cautious,  conserva- 
tive, conciliatory — replying  to  one  of 
Mr.  Hayne's  eloquent  and  high- 
vrrought  portrayals  of  the  miserable 
state  to  which  the  South  and  her  in- 
dustry had  been  reduced  by  the  Pro- 
tective policy,  forcibly  and  truthfully 
said: 

"  What,  Sir,  is  the  cause  of  Southern  dis- 
fcress^  Has  any  gentleman  yet  ventured  to 
designate  it?  I  am  neither  willing  nor 
competent  to  natter.  To  praise  the  honora- 
ble Senator  from  South  Carolina  would  be 
'  To  add  perfume  to  the  violet — 
Wasteful  and  ridiculous  excess.' 
But.  if  he  has  failed  to  discover  the  source 
of  the  evils  he  deplores,  who  can  unfold  it? 
Amid  the  warm  and  indiscriminating  denun- 
ciations with  which  he  has  assailed  the 
policy  of  protecting  domestic  manufactures 
and  native  produce,  he  frankly  avows  that 
he  would  not  'deny  tliat  there  are  other 
causes,  besides  the  Tariff,  which  have  con- 
tributed to  produce  the  evils  which  he  has 
depicted.1  What  are  those  '  other  causes  V 
In  what  proportion  have  they  acted?  How 
much  of  this  dark  shadowing  is  ascribable  to 
each  singly,  and  to  all  in  combination  ? 
Would  the  Tariff  be  at  all  felt  or  denounced, 
if  those  other  causes  were  not  in  operation  ? 
Would  not,  in  fact,  its  influence,  its  discrimi- 
nations, its  inequalities,  its  oppressions,  but 
for  those  'other  causes,1  be  shaken,  by  the 
elasticity,  energy,  and  exhaustless  spirit  of 
the  South,  as  'dew-drops  from  the  lion^ 
mane  V  These  inquiries  must  be  satisfac- 
torily answered  before  we  can  be  justly 
required  to  legislate  away  an  entire  system. 
If  it  be  the  root  of  all  evil,  let  it  be  exposed 
and  demolished.  If  its  poisonous  exhalations 
be  but  partial,  let  us  preserve  such  portions 
as  are  innoxious.  If,  as  the  luminary  of 
day,  it  be  pure  and  salutary  in  itself,  let  us 
not  wish  it  extinguished,  because  of  the 
shadows,  clouds,  and  darkness,  which  ob- 
scure its  brightness,  or  impede  its  vivifying 
power. 

"  That  '  other  causes1  still,  Mr.  President, 
for  Southern  distress,  do  exist,  cannot  be 
doubted.  They  combine  with  the  one  I 
have  indicated,  and  are  equally  unconnected 
with  the  manufacturing  policy.  One  of 
these  it  is  peculiarly  painful  to  advert  to ; 
and  when  I  mention  it,  I  beg  honorable 


Senators  not  to  suppose  that  I  do  it  in  the 
spirit  of  taunt,  of  reproach,  or  of  idle  de- 
clamation. Kegarding  it  as  a  misfortune 
merely,  not  as  a  fault — as  a  disease  inherited, 
not  incurred — perhaps  to  be  alleviated,  but 
not  eradicated — I  should  feel  self-condemned 
were  I  to  treat  it  other  than  as  an  existing 
fact,  whose  merit  or  demerit,  apart  from  the 
question  under  debate,  is  shielded  from 
commentary  by  the  .highest  and  most  just 
considerations.  I  refer,  Sir,  to  the  character 
of  Southern  labor,  in  itself,  and  in  its  in- 
fluence on  others.  Incapable  of  adaptation 
to  the  ever-varying  changes  of  human  socie- 
ty and  existence,  it  retains  the  communities 
in  which  it  is  established,  in  a  condition  of 
apparent  and  comparative  inertness.  The 
lights  of  Science  and  the  improvements  of 
Art,  which  vivify  and  accelerate  elsewhere, 
cannot  penetrate,  or  if  they  do,  penetrate 
with  dilatory  inefficiency,  among  its  opera- 
tives. They  are  not  merely  instinctive  and 
passive.  While  the  intellectual  industry  of 
other  parts  of  this  country  springs  elastically 
forward  at  every  fresh  impulse,  and  manual 
labor  is  propelled  and  redoubled  by  count- 
less inventions,  machines,  and  contrivances, 
instantly  understood  and  at  once  exercised, 
the  South  remains  stationary,  inaccessible  to 
such  encouraging  and  invigorating  aids. 
Nor  is  it  possible  to  be  wholly  blind  to  the 
moral  effect  of  this  species  of  labor  upon 
those  freemen  among  whom  it  exists.  A 
disrelish  for  humble  and  hardy  occupation ; 
a  pride  adverse  to  drudgery  and  toil ;  a 
dread  that  to  partake  in  the  employments 
allotted  to  color  may  be  accompanied  also 
by  its  degradation,  are  natural  and  inevita- 
ble. The  high  and  lofty  qualities  which,  in 
other  scenes  and  for  other  purposes,  charac- 
terize and  adorn  our  Southern  brethren,  are 
fatal  to  the  enduring  patience,  the  corporal 
exertion,  and  the  painstaking  simplicity,  by 
which  only  a  successful  yeomanry  can  be 
formed.  When,  in  fact,  Sir,  the  Senator 
from  South  Carolina  asserts  that  '  Slaves  are 
too  improvident,  too  incapable  of  that  mi- 
nute, constant,  delicate  attention,  and  that 
persevering  industry  which  are  essential  to 
manufacturing  establishments,1  he  himself 
admits  the  defect  in  Southern  labor,  by 
which  the  progress  of  his  favorite  section 
must  be  retarded.  He  admits  an  inability 
to  keep  pace  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  He 
admits  an  inherent  weakness ;  a  weakness 
neither  engendered  nor  aggravated  by  the 
Tariff — which,  as  societies  are  now  consti- 
tuted and  directed,  must  drag  in  the  rear, 
and  be  distanced  in  the  common  race.11 

South  Carolina  did  not  heed  these 


1C  Speech  in  the  Senate,  February  27,  1832. 


NULLIFICATION  MADE  PRACTICAL. 


93 


gentle  admonitions.  The  convictions 
of  her  leading  men  were,  doubtless, 
Pro-Slavery  and  Anti-Tariff ;  but 
their  aspirations  and  exasperations 
likewise  tended  to  confirm  them  in 
the  course  on  which  they  had  resolved 
and  entered.  General  Jackson  and 
Mr.  Calhoun  had  become  estranged 
and  hostile  not  long  after  their  joint 
election  as  President  and  Yice-Presi- 
dent,  in  1828.  Mr.  Calhoun's  san- 
guine hopes  of  succeeding  to  the 
Presidency  had  been  blasted.  Mr. 
Yan  Buren  supplanted  him  as  Vice- 
President  in  1832,  sharing  in  Jack- 
son's second  and  most  decided 
triumph.  And,  though  the  Tariff  of 
1828  had  been  essentially  modified 
during  the  preceding  session  of  Con- 
gress, South  Carolina  proceeded,  di- 
rectly after  throwing  away  her  vote 
in  the  election  of  1832,  to  call  a  Con- 
vention of  her  people,  which  met  at 
her  Capitol  on  the  19th  of  Novem- 
ber. That  Convention  was  composed 
of  her  leading  politicians  of  the  Cal- 
houn school,  with  the  heads  of  her 
great  families,  forming  a  respectable 
and  dignified  assemblage.  The  net 
result  of  its  labors  was  an  Ordinance 
of  Nullification,  drafted  by  a  grand 
Committee  of  twenty-one,  and  adopt- 
ed with  entire  unanimity.  By  its 
terms,  the  existing  Tariff  was  form- 
ally pronounced  "  null,  void,  and  no 
law,  nor  binding  on  this  State,  its 
officers,  or  citizens,"  and  the  duties 
on  imports  imposed  by  that  law  were 
forbidden  to  be  paid  within  the  State 
of  South  Carolina  after  the  1st  day 
of  February  ensuing.  The  Ordinance 
contemplated  an  act  of  the  Legisla- 
ture nullifying  the  Tariff  as  afore- 
said ;  and  prescribed  that  no  appeal 
to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 


States  against  the  validity  of  said 
act  should  be  permitted  ;  no  copy  of 
the  proceedings  should  be  taken  for 
the  purpose  of  making  such  appeal ; 
and  any  attempt  to  appeal  to  the  J u- 
diciary  of  the  United  States  from  any 
decision  of  a  State  court  affirming  and 
upholding  this  Ordinance,  should  be 
"  dealt  with  as  for  a  contempt  of  the 
court"  thus  upholding  and  affirming. 
Every  office-holder  of  the  State,  and 
"every juror"  was  required  expressly 
to  swear  to  obey  this  Ordinance,  and 
all  legislative  acts  based  thereon. 
Should  the  Federal  Government  un- 
dertake to  enforce  the  law  thus  nulli- 
fied, or  in  any  manner  to  harass  or 
obstruct  the  foreign  commerce  of  the 
State,  South  Carolina  should  there- 
upon  consider  herself  no  longer  a 
member  of  the  Federal  Union  : 

"  The  people  of  this  State  will  thenceforth 
hold  themselves  absolved  from  all  further 
obligation  to  maintain  or  preserve  their  poli- 
tical connection,  with  the  people  of  the  other 
States,  and  will  forthwith  proceed  to  organ- 
ize a  separate  government,  and  do  all  other 
acts  and  things  which  sovereign  and  inde- 
pendent States  may  of  right  do." 

Thus  was  Nullification17  embodied 
in  an  Ordinance  preparatory  to  its 
reduction  to  practice.  The  Legisla- 
ture, in  which  the  Nullifiers  were  an 
overwhelming  majority,  elected  Mr. 
Webster's  luckless  antagonist,  Eobert 
Y.  Hayne,  Governor  of  the  State ; 
and  the  Governor,  in  his  Message, 
thoroughly  indorsed  the  action  of  the 
nullifying  Convention,  whereof  he 
had  been  a  member. 

"I  recognize,"  said  he,  "no  allegiance  as 
paramount  to  that  which  the  citizens  of 
South  Carolina  owe  to  the  State  of  their 
birth  or  their  adoption.  I  here  publicly 
declare,  and  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  under- 
stood, that  I  shall  hold  myself  bound,  by  the 
highest  of  all  obligations,  to  carry  into 
effect,  not  only  the  Ordinance  of  the  Con- 


17  November  24,  1832. 


94: 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


vention,  but  every  act  of  the  Legislature, 
and  every  judgment  of  our  own  courts,  the 
enforcement  of  which  may  devolve  upon  the 
executive.  I  claim  no  right  to  revise  their 
acts.  It  will  be  my  duty  to  execute  them  ; 
and  that  duty  I  mean,  to  the  utmost  of  my 
power,  faithfully  to  perform." 

He  proceeded : 

"  If  the  sacred  soil  of  Carolina  should  be 
polluted  by  the  footsteps  of  an  invader,  or 
be  stained  with  the  blood  of  her  citizens, 
shed  in  her  defense,  I  trust  in  Almighty  God 
that  no  son  of  hers,  native  or  adopted,  who 
has  been  nourished  at  her  bosom,  or  been 
cherished  by  her  bounty,  will  be  found  rais- 
ing a  parricidal  arm  against  our  common 
mother.  And  even  should  she  stand  alone 
in  this  great  struggle  for  constitutional 
liberty,  encompassed  by  her  enemies,  that 
there  will  not  be  found,  in  the  wide  limits 
of  the  State,  one  recreant  son  who  will  not 
fly  to  the.  rescue,  and  be  ready  to  lay  down 
his  life  in  her  defense.  South  Carolina  can- 
not be  drawn  down  from  the  proud  emi- 
nence on  which  she  has  now  placed  herself, 
except  by  the  hands  of  her  own  children. 
Give  her  but  a  fair  field,  and  she  asks  no 
more.  Should  she  succeed,  hers  will  be 
glory  enough  to  have  led  the  way  in  the 
noble  work  of  kefokm.  And  if,  after  mak  - 
ing  these  efforts  due  to  her  own  honor,  and 
the  greatness  of  the  cause,  she  is  destined 
utterly  to  fail,  the  bitter  fruits  of  that  failure, 
not  to  herself  alone,  but  to  the  entire  South, 
nay,  to  the  whole  Union,  will  attest  her  vir- 
tue." 

The  Legislature  proceeded  to  pass 
the  acts  requisite  to  give  practical 
effect  to  the  Ordinance,  and  the  Gov- 
ernor to  accept  the  services  of  volun- 
teers, who  were  not  mustered  into 
service,  but  directed  to  hold  them- 
selves in  readiness  for  action  at  a 
moment's  notice.  Mr.  Calhoun  re- 
signed the  Yice-Presidencj  when  he 
had  three  months  still  to  serve,  and 
was  chosen  to  the  Senate  to  fill  the 
seat  vacated  by  Mr.  Hayne's  accept- 
ance of  the  governorship.  Leaving 
his  State  foaming  and  surging  with 
preparations  for  war,  Mr.  Calhoun, 
in  December,  calmly  proceeded  to 
Washington,  where  he  took  his  seat 
in  the  Senate,  and  swore  afresh  to 


maintain  the  Constitution,  as  if  un- 
conscious of  the  tempest  he  had  ex- 
cited, and  which  was  now  preparing 
to  burst  upon  his  head. 

General  Jackson  had  already18 
made  provision  for  the  threatened 
emergency.  Ordering  General  Scott 
to  proceed  to  Charleston  for  the  pur- 
pose of  "  superintending  the  safety 
of  the  ports  of  the  United  States  in 
that  vicinity,"  and  making  the  requi- 
site disposition  of  the  slender  military 
and  naval  forces  at  his  command,  the 
President  sent  confidential  orders  to 
the  Collector  for  the  port  of  Charles- 
ton, whereof  the  following  extract 
sufficiently  indicates  the  character 
and  purpose : 

"Upon  the  supposition  that  the  measures  of 
the  Convention,  or  the  acts  of  the  Legislature 
may  consist,  in  part,  at  least,  in  declaring 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  imposing 
duties  unconstitutional,  and  null  and  void, 
and  in  forbidding  their  execution,  and  the 
collection  of  the  duties  within  the  State  of 
South  Carolina,  you  will,  immediately  after 
it  shall  be  formally  announced,  resort  to  all 
the  means  provided  by  the  laws,  and  partic- 
ularly by  the  act  of  the  2d  of  March,  1799, 
to  counteract  the  measures  which  may  be 
adopted  to  give  effect  to  that  declaration. 

"For  this  purpose,  you  will  consider 
yourself  authorized  to  employ  the  revenue 
cutters  which  may  be  within  your  district, 
and  provide  as  many  boats  and  employ  as 
many  inspectors  as  may  be  necessary  for  the 
execution  of  the  law,  and  for  the  purposes 
of  the  act  already  referred  to.  You  will, 
moreover,  cause  a  sufficient  number  of  offi- 
cers of  cutters  and  inspectors  to  be  placed 
on  board,  and  in  charge  of  every  vessel 
arriving  from  a  foreign  port  or  place,  with 
goods,  wares,  or  merchandise,  as  soon  as 
practicable  after  her  first  coming  within 
your  district,  and  direct  them  to  anchor  her 
in  some  safe  place  within  the  harbor,  where 
she  may  be  secure  from  any  act  of  violence, 
and  from  any  unauthorized  attempt  to  dis- 
charge her  cargo  before  a  compliance  with 
the  laws  ;  and  they  will  remain  on  board  of 
her  at  such  place  until  the  reports  and  en- 
tries required  by  law  shall  be  made,  both  of 
vessel  and  cargo,  and  the  duties  paid,  or 
secured  to  be  paid,  to  your  satisfaction,  and 
until  the  regular  permit  shall  be  granted  Cor 


 .  »_ 

November  6th. 


JACKSON  AGAINS 


T  NULLIFICATION. 


95 


j  landing  the  cargo;  and  it  will  be  your  duty, 
against  any  forcible  attempt,  to  retain  and 
defend  the  custody  of  the  said  vessel,  by  the 
aid  of  the  officers  of  the  customs,  inspectors, 
and  officers  of  the  cutters,  until  the  requisi- 
tions of  the  law  shall  be  fully  complied  with ; 
and,  in  case  of  any  attempt  to  remove  her 
or  her  cargo  from  the  custody  of  the  officers 
of  the  customs,  by  the  form  of  legal  process 
from  State  tribunals,  you  will  not  yield  the 
custody  to  such  attempt,  but  will  consult 
the  law  officer  of  the  district,  and  employ 
such  means  as,  under  the  particular  circum- 
stances, you  may  legally  do,  to  resist  such 
process,  and  prevent  the  removal  of  the 
vessel  and  cargo. 

"Should  the  entry  of  such  vessel  and 
cargo  not  be  completed,  and  the  dutie:  paid, 
or  secured  to  be  paid,  by  bond  or  bonds, 
with  sureties  to  your  satisfaction,  within  the 
time  limited  by  law,  you  will,  at  the  expira- 
tion of  that  time,  take  possession  of  the  car- 
go, and  land  and  store  the  same  at  Castle 
Pinckney,  or  some  other  safe  place,  and,  in 
due  time,  if  the  duties  are  not  paid,  sell  the 
same,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  56th 
section  of  the  act  of  the  2d  of  March,  1799  ; 
and  you  are  authorized  to  provide  such 
stores  as  may  be  necessary  for  that  purpose." 

The  contrast  between  the  spirit 
evinced  in  these  instructions,  and 
that  exhibited  by  General  Jackson's 
successor,  on  the  occurrence  of  a  simi- 
lar outbreak  at  Charleston  twenty- 
eight  years  later,  is  very  striking. 

Congress  reconvened  on  the  3d  of 
December ;  but  the  President's  Mes- 
sage, delivered  on  the  following  day, 
made  no  allusion  to  the  impending 
peril  of  civil  convulsion  and  war. 
One  week  later,  however,  the  country 
was  electrified  by  the  appearance  of 
the  famous  Proclamation,  wherein 
the  President's  stern  resolve  to  crush 
Nullification  as  Treason  was  fully 
manifested.  And,  though  this  docu- 
ment received  its  final  fashion  and 
polish  from  the  pen  of  the  able  and 
eminent  Edward  Livingston,  who 
then  worthily  filled  the  post  of  Secre- 
tary of  State,  it  is  abundantly  estab- 
lished19 that  the  original  draft  was  the 


President's  own,  and  that  he  insisted 
throughout  on  expressing  and  enforc- 
ing his  own  sentiments  and  convic- 
tions. The  language  may  in  part  be 
Livingston's ;  the  positions  and  the 
principles  are  wholly  Jackson's  ;  and 
their  condemnation  of  the  Calhoun 
or  South  Carolina  theory  of  the 
nature,  genius,  and  limitations  of  our 
Federal  pact,  are  as  decided  and 
sweeping  as  any  ever  propounded  by  ■ 
Hamilton,  by  Marshall,  or  by  Web- 
ster himself. 

After  reciting  the  purport  and 
effect  of  the  South  Carolina  Ordi- 
nance, General  Jackson  proceeds: 

"The  Ordinance  is  founded,  not  on  the 
indefeasible  right  of  resisting  acts  which  are 
plainly  unconstitutional  and  too  oppressive 
to  be  endured ;  but  on  the  strange  position 
that  any  one  State  may  not  only  declare  an 
act  of  Congress  void,  but  prohibit  its  execu- 
tion ;  that  they  may  do  this  consistently 
with  the  Constitution ;  that  the  true  con- 
struction of  that  instrument  permits  a  State 
to  retain  its  place'  in  the  Union,  and  yet  be 
bound  by  no  other  of  its  laws  than  those  it 
may  choose  to  consider  as  constitutional! 
It  is  true,  they  add  that,  to  justify  this  abro- 
gation of  a  law,  it  must  be  palpably  con- 
trary to  the  Constitution ;  but  it  is  evident 
that,  to  give  the  right  of  resisting  laws  of 
that  description,  coupled  with  the  uncon- 
trolled right  to  decide  what  laws  deserve 
that  character,  is  to  give  the  power  of  resist- 
ing all  laws.  For,  as,  by  this  theory,  there 
is  no  appeal,  the  reasons  alleged  by  the 
State,  good  or  bad,  must  prevail.  If  it  should 
be  said  that  public  opinion  is  a  sufficient 
check  against  the  •  abuse  of  this  power,  it 
may  be  asked  why  it  is  not  deemed  a  suffi- 
cient guard  against  the  passage  of  an  uncon- 
stitutional act  by  Congress.  There  is,  how- 
ever, a  restraint  in  this  last  case,  which 
makes  the  assumed  power  of  a  State  more 
indefensible,  and  which  does  not  exist  in  the 
other.  There  are  two  appeals  from  an  un- 
constitutional act  passed  by  Congress — one 
to  the  Judiciary,  the  other  to  the  people  and 
the  States.  There  is  no  appeal  from  the 
State  decision  in  theory,  and  the  practical 
illustration  shows  that  the  courts  are  closed 
against  an  application  to  review  it,  both 
judges  and  jurors  being  sworn  to  decide  in 
its  favor.    But  reasoning  on  this  subject  is 


19  See  Tarton's  Life 


of  Jackson,  pp.  455-6. 


9  3 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


superfluous  when  our  social  compact  in  ex- 
press terms  declares  that  the  laws  of  the 
United  States,  its  Constitution,  and  the  trea- 
ties made  under  it,  are  the  supreme  law  of 
the  land ;  and,  for  greater  caution,  adds, 
'that  the  judges  in  every  State  shall  be 
bound  thereby,  anything  in  the  constitution 
or  laws  of  any  State  to  the  contrary  not- 
withstanding.' And  it  may  be  asserted, 
without  fear  of  refutation,  that  no  federative 
government  could  exist  without  a  similar 
provision.  Look,  for  a  moment,  to  the  con- 
sequences. If  South  Carolina  considers  the 
revenue  laws  unconstitutional,  and  has  a 
right  to  prevent  their  execution  in  the  port 
of  Charleston,  there  would  be  a  clear  con- 
stitutional objection  to  their  collection  in 
every  other  port,  and  no  revenue  could  be 
collected  anywhere;  for  all  imposts  must  be 
equal.  It  is  no  answer  to  repeat,  that  an 
unconstitutional  law  is  no  law,  so  long  as 
the  question  of  legality  is  to  be  decided  by 
the  State  itself;  for  every  law,  operating 
injuriously  upon  any  local  interest,  will  be 
perhaps  thought,  and  certainly  represented 
as,  unconstitutional ;  and,  as  has  been 
shown,  there  is  no  appeal. 

"If  this  doctrine  had  been  established  at 
an  earlier  day,  the  Union  would  have  been 
dissolved  in  its  infancy.  The  Excise  law  in 
Pennsylvania,  the  Embargo  and  Non-Inter- 
course law  in  the  Eastern  States,  the  car- 
riage-tax in  Virginia,  were  all  deemed  un- 
constitutional, and  were  more  unequal  in 
their  operation  than  any  of  the  laws  now 
complained  of;  but,  fortunately,  none  of 
those  States  discovered  that  they  had  the 
right  now  claimed  by  South  Carolina.  The 
war  into  which  we  were  forced,  to  support 
the  dignity  of  the  nation  and  the  rights  of 
our  citizens,  might  have  ended  in  defeat  and 
disgrace,  instead  of  victory  and  honor,  if  the 
States  who  supposed  it  a  ruinous  and  uncon- 
stitutional measure  had  thought  they  pos- 
sessed the  right  of  nullifying  the  act  by 
which  it  was  declared,  and  denying  supplies 
for  its  prosecution.  Hardly  and  unequally 
as  those  measures  bore  upon  several  mem- 
bers of  the  Union,  to  the  Legislatures  of 
none  did  this  efficient  and  peaceable  remedy, 
as  it  is  called,  suggest  itself.  The  discovery 
of  this  important  feature  in  our  Constitution 
was  reserved  for  the  present  day.  To  the 
statesmen  of  South  Carolina  belongs  the  in- 
vention, and  upon  the  citizens  of  that  State 
will  unfortunately  fall  the  evils  of  reducing 
it  to  practice." 

General  Jackson  summed  up  his 
objections  to  Nullification  in  these 
unambiguous  terms : 

"I  consider,  then,  the  power  to  annul  a 


I  law  of  the  United  States,  assumed  by  one  I 
I  State,  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  the  I 
Union,  contradicted  expressly  by  the  letter  ] 
of  the  Constitution,  unauthorized  by  its  spir-  I 
it,  inconsistent  with  every  principle  on  which  I 
it  was  founded,  and  destructive  of  the  great  I 
object  for  which  it  was  formed." 

A  little  farther  on,  he  proclaimed 
his   concurrence  in   the   "  Nation- 
al," as  contradistinguished  from  the  • 
"  State  Eights,"  theory  of  our  Fed- 
eration, in  these  words : 

"The  Constitution  of  the  United  States, 
then,  forms  a  Government,  not  a  league; 
and,  v/hether  it  be  formed  by  compact  be- 
tween the  States,  or  in  any  other  manner, 
its  character  is  the  same.  It  is  a  govern- 
ment in  which  all  the  people  are  represent- 
ed, which  acts  directly  on  the  people  indi- 
vidually, not  upon  the  States — they  retained 
all  the  power  they  did  not  grant.  But  each 
State,  having  expressly  parted  with  so  many 
powers,  as  to  constitute,  jointly  with  the 
other  States,  a  single  nation,  cannot,  from 
that  period,  possess  any  right  to  secede ;  be- 
cause such  secession  does  not  break  a  league, 
but  destroys  the  unity  of  a  nation,  and  any 
injury  to  that  unity  is  not  only  a  breach 
which  would  result  from  the  contravention 
of  a  compact,  but  it  is  an  offense  against  the 
whole  Union.  To  say  that  any  State  may 
at  pleasure  secede  from  the  Union,  is  to  say 
that  the  United  States  are  not  a  nation,  be- 
cause it  would  be  a  solecism  to  contend  that 
any  part  of  a  nation  might  dissolve  its  connec- 
tion with  the  other  parts,  to  their  injury  or 
ruin,  without  committing  any  offense.  Seces- 
sion, like  any  other  revolutionary  act,  may 
be  morally  justified  by  the  extremity  of  op- 
pression ;  but  to  call  it  a  constitutional  right, 
is  confounding  the  meaning  of  terms,  and 
can  only  be  done  through  gross  error,  or  to 
deceive  those  who  are  willing  to  assert  a 
right,  but  would  pause  before  they  make  a 
revolution,  or  incur  the  penalties  conse- 
quent on  a  failure." 

The  dogma  of  State  Sovereignty, 

as    contravening    or   limiting  the 

proper  Nationality  of  the  Kepublic, 

is  thus  squarely  confronted  : 

"The  States  severally  have  not  retained 
their  entire  sovereignty.  It  has  been  shown 
that,  in  becoming  parts  of  a  nation,  not  mem- 
bers of  a  league,  they  surrendered  many  of 
their  essential  parts  of  sovereignty.  The 
right  to  make  treaties,  declare  war,  levy 
taxes,  exercise  exclusive  judicial  and  legisla- 
tive powers,  were  all  of  them  functions 


APPEAL  TO  SOU 

of  sovereign  power.  The  States,  then,  for 
all  these  important  purposes,  were  no  longer 
sovereign.  The  allegiance  of  their  citi- 
zens was  transferred,  in  the  first  instance, 
to  the  Government  of  the  United  States; 
they  became  American  citizens,  and  owed 
obedience  to  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States,  and  to  laws  made  in  conformity  with 
the  powers  it  vested  in  Congress.  This 
last  position  has  not  been,  and  cannot  be, 
denied.  How,  then,  can  that  State  be  said 
to  be  sovereign  and  independent,  whose  cit- 
izens owe  obedience  to  laws  not  made  by  it, 
and  whose  magistrates  are  sworn  to  disre- 
gard those  laws,  when  they  come  in  conflict 
with  those  passed  by  another  ?  What  shows, 
conclusively,  that  the  States  cannot  be  said 
to  have  reserved  an  undivided  sovereignty, 
is,  that  they  expressly  ceded  the  right  to 
punish  treason — not  treason  against  their 
separate  power,  but  treason  against  the  Uni- 
ted States.  Treason  is  an  offense  against 
sovereignty,  and  sovereignty  must  reside  with 
the  power  to  punish  it." 

Mr.  Jefferson  Davis,  in  one  of  his 
earlier  manifestoes  from  Richmond, 
saw  fit  to  speak  of  the  severance  of 
our  Union  as  athe  dissolution  of  a 
league."  General  Jackson  anticipa- 
ted and  refuted  this  assumption  as 
follows : 

"  How  is  it  that  the  most  perfect  of  those 
several  modes  of  Union  should  now  be  con- 
sidered as  a  mere  league,  that  may  be  dis- 
solved at  pleasure  ?  It  is  from  an  abuse  of 
terms.  Compact  is  used  as  synonymous 
with  league,  although  the  true  term  is  not 
employed,  because  it  would  at  once  show 
the  fallacy  of  the  reasoning.  It  would  not 
do  to  say  that  our  Constitution  was  only  a 
league,  but  it  is  labored  to  prove  it  a  com- 
pact (which,  in  one  sense,  it  is),  and  then  to 
argue  that,  as  a  league  is  a  compact,  every 

\  compact  between  nations  must,  of  course, 
be  a  league,  and  that,  from  such  an  engage- 
ment, every  sovereign  power  has  a  right  to 
recede.  But  it  has  been  shown  that,  in  this 
sense,  the  States  are  not  sovereign,  and  that, 
even  if  they  were,  and  the  national  consti- 
tution had  been  formed  by  compact,  there 
would  be  no  right  in  any  one  State  to  ex- 
onerate itself  from  its  obligations. 

"  So  obvious  are  the  reasons  which  forbid 
this  secession,  that  it  is  necessary  only  to 
allude  to  them.  The  Union  was  formed  for 
the  benefit  of  all.    It  was  produced  by  mu- 

<  tual  sacrifices  of  interests  and  opinions.  Can 
those  sacrifices  be  recalled  ?  Can  the  States 
who  magnanimously  surrendered  their  title 
to  the  territories  of  the  West,  recall  the 


TH  CAROLINA.  97 

grant  ?  Will  the  inhabitants  of  the  inland 
States  agree  to  pay  the  duties  that  may  be 
imposed  without  their  assent  by  those  on 
the  Atlantic  or  the  Gulf,  for  their  own  ben- 
efit ?  Shall  there  be  a  free  port  in  one  State 
and  onerous  duties  in  another?  No  one  be- 
lieves that  any  right  exists  in  a  single  State 
to  involve  all  the  others  in  these  and  count- 
less other  evils,  contrary  to  engagements  sol- 
emnly made.  Every  one  must  see  that  the 
other  States,  in  self-defense,  must  oppose  it 
at  all  hazards." 

Having  thus  frankly  and  vigor- 
ously set  forth  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  our  political  system,  though 
at  much  greater  length,  and  with  a 
variety  and  fullness  of  illustration, 
General  Jackson  proceeds  to  pro- 
claim 

"  That  the  duty  imposed  on  me  by  the 
Constitution  '  to  take  care  that  the  laws  be 
faithfully  executed'  shall  be  performed  to 
the  extent  of  the  powers  already  vested  in 
me  by  law,  or  of  such  others  as  the  wisdom 
of  Congress  shall  devise  and  intrust  to  me 
for  that  purpose;  and  to  warn  the  citizens 
of  South  Carolina,  who  have  been  deluded 
into  an  opposition  to  the  laws,  of  the  danger 
they  will  incur  by  obedience  to  the  illegal 
and  disorganizing  Ordinance  of  the  Conven- 
tion." 

And  he  closes  a  most  pathetic  and 
eloquent  appeal  to  the  people  of 
South  Carolina  in  these  memorable 
and  stirring  words : 

"  Contemplate  the  condition  of  that  coun- 
try of  which  you  still  form  an  important 
part! — consider  its  Government,  uniting  in 
one  bond  of  common  interest  and  general' 
protection  so  many  different  States — giving 
to  all  their  inhabitants  the  proud  title  of 
American  citizens — protecting  their  com- 
merce— securing  their  literature  and  their 
arts — facilitating  their  intercommunication 
— defending  their  frontiers — and  making 
their  names  respected  in  the  remotest  parts 
of  the  earth !  Consider  the  extent  of  its- 
territory,  its  increasing  and  happy  popula- 
tion, its  advance  in  the  arts,  which  render  life- 
agreeable,  and  the  sciences  which  elevate 
the  mind!  See  education  spreading  the 
lights  of  religion,  humanity,  and  general  in- 
formation, into  every  cottage  in  this  wide 
extent  of  our  territories  and  States  !  Behold 
it  as  the  asylum  where  the  wretched  and 
the  oppressed  find  a  refuge  and  support! 
Look  on  this  picture  of  happiness  and  honor,, 


93 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  say,  ^Ve,  too,  aee  citizens  of  America. 
Carolina  is  one  of  these  proud  States ;  her 
arras  have  defended,  her  best  blood  has 
cemented,  this  happy  Union !  And  then 
add,  if  you  can,  without  horror  ancl  re- 
morse, '  This  happy  Union  we  will  dissolve 
— this  picture  of  peace  and  prosperity  we 
will  deface — this  free  intercourse  we  will 
interrupt — these  fertile  fields  we  will  deluge 
with  blood — the  protection  of  that  glorious 
flag  we  renounce — the  very  name  of  Ameri- 
cans we  discard.'  And  for  what,  mistaken 
men!  for  what  do  you  throw  away  these 
inestimable  blessings — for  what  would  you 
exchange  your  share  in  the  advantages  and 
honor  of  the  Union?  For  the  dream  of  a 
separate  independence — a  dream  interrupted 
by  bloody  conflicts  with  your  neighbors,  and 
a  vile  dependence  on  foreign  power  !  If 
your  leaders  could  succeed  in  establishing  a 
separation,  what  would  be  yonr  situation? 
Are  you  united  at  home?  Are  you  free 
from  the  apprehension  of  civil  discord,  with 
all  its  fearful  consequences  ?  Do  our  neigh- 
boring republics,  every  day  suffering  some 
new  revolution  or  contending  with  some 
new  insurrection,  do  they  excite  your  envy? 

"  But  the  dictates  of  a  high  duty  oblige  me 
solemnly  to  announce  that  you  cannot  suc- 
ceed. The  laws  of  the  United  States  must 
be  executed.  I  have  no  discretionary  power 
on  the  subject — my  duty  is  emphatically 
pronounced  in  the  Constitution.  Those  who 
told  you  that  you  might  peaceably  prevent 
their  execution,  deceived  you — they  could 
not  have  been  deceived  themselves.  They 
know  that  a  forcible  opposition  could  alone 
prevent  the  execution  of  the  laws,  and  they 
know  that  such  opposition  must  be  repelled. 
Their  object  is  disunion :  be  not  deceived 
by  names.  Disunion,  by  armed  force,  is 
treason.  Are  you  really  ready  to  incur  its 
guilt  ?  If  you  are,  on  the  heads  of  the  insti- 
gators of  the  act  be  the  dreadful  conse- 
quences— on  their  heads  be  the  dishonor; 
but  on  yours  may  fall  the  punishment — on 
your  unhappy  State  will  inevitably  fall  all 
the  evils  of  the  conflict  you  force  upon  the 
Government  of  your  country.  It  cannot 
accede  to  the  mad  project  of  disunion,  of 
which  you  would  be  the  first  victims — its 
first  magistrate  cannot,  if  he  would,  avoid 
the  performance  of  his  duty — the  conse- 
quence must  be  fearful  for  you,  distressing 
.  to  your  fellow-citizens  here,  and  the  friends 
of  .good  government  throughout  the  world. 
Its  enemies  have  beheld  our  prosperity 
with  a  vexation  they  could  not  conceal — it 
was  a  standing  refutation  of  their  slavish 
doctrines,  and  they  would  point  to  our  dis- 
cords with  the  •triumph  of  malignant  joy. 
It  is  yet  in  your  power  to  disappoint  them. 
There  is  yet  time  to  show  that  the  descend- 


ants of  the  Pinckneys,  the  Sumptcrs,  the 
Rutledges,  and  of  the  thousand  other  names 
which  adorn  the  pages  of  your  Revolution- 
ary history,  will  not  abandon  that  Union,  to 
support  which  so  many  of  them  fought,  and 
bled,  and  died.  I  adjure  you,  as  you  honor 
their  memory,  as  you  love  the  cause  of  free- 
dom to  which  they  dedicated  their  lives— as 
you  prize  the  peace  of  your  country,  the 
lives  of  its  best  citizens,  and  your  own  fair 
fame,  to  retrace  your  steps.  Snatch  from 
the  archives  of  your  State  the  disorganizing 
edict  of  its  Convention — bid  its  members  to 
reassemble  and  promulgate  the  decided  ex- 
pression of  your  will  to  remain  in  the  path 
which  alone  can  conduct  you  to  safety, 
prosperity,  and  honor — tell  them  that,  com- 
pared to  disunion,  all  other  evils  are  light, 
because  that  brings  with  it  an  accumulation 
of  all — declare  that  you  will  never  take  the 
field  unless  the  star-spangled  banner  of  your 
country  shall  float  over  you — that  you  will 
not  be  stigmatized  when  dead,  and  dishonor- 
ed and  scorned  while  you  live,  as  the  authors 
of  the  first  attack  on  the  Constitution  of 
your  country !  Its  destroyers  you  cannot  be. 
You  may  disturb  its  peace — you  may  inter- 
rupt the  course  of  its  prosperity — you  may 
cloud  its  reputation  for  stability — but  its 
tranquillity  will  be  restored,  its  prosperity 
will  return,  and  the  stain  upon  its  national 
character  will  be  transferred,  and  remain  an 
eternal  blot  on  the  memory  of  those  who 
caused  the  disorder." 

Turning  from  the  deluded  minor- 
ity to  the  loyal  and  Union-loving 
majority  of  the  American  people,  the 
President  concludes  his  Proclamation 
as  follows : 

"Fellow-citizens  of  the  United  States! 
The  threat  of  unhallowed  disunion,  the 
names  of  those  (once  respected)  by  whom 
it  was  uttered,  the  array  of  military  force  to 
support  it,  denote  the  approach  of  a  crisis  in 
our  affairs,  on  which  the  continuance  of  our 
unexampled  prosperity,  our  political  exist- 
ence, and  perhaps  that  of  all  free  govern- 
ments, may  depend.  The  conjuncture  de- 
manded a  full,  a  free,  and  explicit  annuncia- 
tion, not  only  of  my  intentions,  but  of  my  prin- 
ciples of  action ;  and,  as  the  claim  was  assert- 
ed of  a  right  by  a  State  to  annul  the  laws  of  the 
Union,  and  even  to  secede  from  it,  at  pleas- 
ure, a  frank  exposition  of  my  opinions  in 
relation  to  the  origin  and  form  of  our  Gov- 
ernment, and  the  construction  I  give  to  the 
instrument  by  which  it  was  created,  seemed 
to  be  proper.  Having  the  fullest  confidence 
in  the  justness  of  the  legal  and  constitutional 
opinion  of  my  duties,  which  has  been  ex- 


GENERAL  JACKSON  ON  THE  RIGHT  OF  SECESSION. 


99 


pressed,  I  rely  with  equal  confidence  on 
your  undivided  support  in  my  determination 
to  execute  the  laws — to  preserve  the  Union 
by  all  constitutional  means — to  arrest,  if 
possible,  by  moderate,  but  firm  measures, 
the  necessity  of  a  recourse  to  force.  And  if 
it  be  the  will  of  Heaven  that  the  recurrence 
of  its  primeval  curse  on  man  for  the  shed- 
ding of  a  brother's  blood  should  fall  upon 
our  land,  that  it  be  not  called  down  by  any 
offensive  act  of  the  United  States. 

"  Fellow-citizens  !  the  momentous  case  is 
before  you.  On  your  undivided  support  of 
your  Government  depends  the  decision  of 
the  great  question  it  involves,  whether  your 
sacred  Union  will  be  preserved,  and  the 
blessing  it  secures  to  us  as  one  people  shall 
be  perpetuated.  No  one  can  doubt  that  the 
unanimity  with  which  that  decision  will  be 
expressed  will  be  such  as  to  inspire  new 
confidence  in  republican  institutions,  and 
that  the  prudence,  the  wisdom,  and  the 
courage  which  it  will  bring  to  their  defense, 
will  transmit  them  unimpaired  and  invigor- 
ated to  our  children. 

"  May  the  great  Ruler  of  nations  grant,  that 
the  signal  blessings  with  which  He  has  fa- 
vored ours  may  not,  by  the  madness  of 
party,  or  personal  ambition,  be  disregarded 
and  lost:  and  may  His  wise  providence 
bring  those  who  have  produced  this  crisis  to 
see  the  folly,  before  they  feel  the  misery,  of 
civil  strife ;  and  inspire  a  returning  venera- 
tion for  that  Union,  which,  if  we  may  dare 
to  penetrate  His  designs,  He  has  chosen  as 
the  only  means  of  attaining  the  high  des- 
tinies to  which  we  may  reasonably  aspire." 

General  Jackson's  Special  Message 
against  Nullification20  is  equally  de- 
cided and  thorough  in  its  hostility  to 
the  Calhoun  heresy,  under  all  its  as- 
pects, and  dissects  the  Ordinance  of 
Nullification,  and  the  legislative  acts 
based  thereon,  with  signal  ability  and 
cogency.  A  single  extract,  bearing 
directly  upon  the  alleged  right  of 
Secession,  will  here  be  given  : 

"  The  right  of  the  people  of  a  single  State 
to  absolve  themselves  at  will,  and  without 
the  consent  of  the  other  States,  from  their 
most  solemn  obligations,  and  hazard  the 
liberties  and  happiness  of  the  millions  com- 
posing this  Union,  cannot  be  acknowledged. 
Such  authority  is  believed  to  be  utterly  re- 
pugnant both  to  the  principles  upon  which 
the  General  Government  is  constituted,  and 


to  the  objects  which  it  was  expressly  formed 
to  attain. 

"  Against  all  acts  which  may  be  alleged 
to  transcend  the  constitutional  power  of 
Government,  or  which  may  be  inconvenient 
or  oppressive  in  their  operation,  the  Consti- 
tution itself  has  prescribed  the  modes  of 
redress.  It  is  the  attribute  of  free  institu- 
tions that,  under  them,  the  empire  of  reason 
and  law  is  substituted  for  the  power  of  the 
sword.  To  no  other  source  can  appeals  for 
supposed  wrongs  be  made,  consistently  with 
the  obligations  of  South  Carolina ;  to  no 
other  can  such  appeals  be  made  with  safety 
at  any  time;  and  to  their  decisions,  when 
constitutionally  pronounced,  it  becomes  the 
duty,  no  less  of  the  public  authorities  than 
of  the  people,  in  every  case  to  yield  a  patri- 
otic submission. 

"  That  a  State,  or  any  other  great  portion 
of  the  people,  suffering  under  long  and  in- 
tolerable oppressions,  and  having  tried  all 
constitutional  remedies  without  the  hope  of 
redress,  may  have  a  natural  right,  when 
their  happiness  can  be  no  otherwise  secured, 
and  when  they  can  do  so  without  greater 
injury  to  others,  to  absolve  themselves  from 
their  obligations  to  the  Government,  and 
appeal  to  the  last  resort,  need  not,  on  the 
present  occasion,  be  denied. 

"  The  existence  of  this  right,  however, 
must  depend  on  the  oauses  which  justify 
its  exercise.  It  is  the  ultima  ratio,  which 
presupposes  that  the  proper  appeals  to  all 
other  means  of  redress  have  been  made  in 
good  faith,  and  which  can  never  be  rightfully 
resorted  to  unless  it  be  unavoidable.  It  is 
not  the  right  of  the  State,  but  of  the  individ- 
ual, and  of  all  the  individuals  in  the  State. 
It  is  the  right  of  mankind  generally  to  se- 
cure, by  all  means  in  their  power,  the  bless- 
ings of  liberty  and  happiness  ;  but  when  for 
these  purposes  any  body  of  men  have  volun- 
tarily associated  themselves  under  any  parti- 
cular form  of  government,  no  portion  of 
them  can  dissolve  the  association  without 
acknowledging  the  correlative  right  in  the 
remainder  to  decide  whether  that  dissolu- 
tion can  be  permitted  consistently  with  the 
general  happiness.  In  this  view,  it  is  a 
right  dependent  upon  the  power  to  enforce 
it.  Such  a  right,  though  it  may  be  admitted 
to  preexist,  and  cannot  be  wholly  surren- 
dered, is  necessarily  subjected  to  limitations 
in  all  free  governments,  and  in  compacts  of 
all  kinds,  freely  and  voluntarily  entered  into, 
and  in  which  the  interest  and  welfare  of  the 
individual  become  identified  with  those  of 
the  community  of  which  he  is  a  member. 
In  compacts  between  individuals,  however 
deeply  they  may  affect  their  relations,  these 
principles  are  acknowledged  to   create  a 


20  January  16,  1833. 


100  THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


sacred  obligation ;  and  in  compacts  of  civil 
government,  involving  the  liberty  and  hap- 
piness of  millions  of  mankind,  the  obligation 
cannot  be  less." 

The  unanimity  and  enthusiasm, 
with  which  the  people  of  the  Free 
States  responded  to  these  downright 
manifestations  of  a  purpose  to  pre- 
serve at  all  hazards  the  integrity  of 
the  Union,  are  still  freshly  remem- 
bered. Those  States  had  just  been 
convulsed  by  a  Presidential  contest, 
wherein  their  people  were  about 
equally  divided  into  zealous  advo- 
cates and  equally  zealous  opponents 
of  General  Jackson's  re-election. 
Though  his  triumph  had  been  over- 
whelming, so  far  as  the  choice  of 
Electors  was  concerned,  the  popular 
majorities,  whereby  those  electors 
were  chosen,  were  very  meager  in 
several  of  the  States,  including  New 
York,  Ohio,  and  New  Jersey ;  while 
the  majorities  against  him  in  Massa- 
chusetts, Connecticut,  Rhode  Island, 
Yermont,  and  Kentucky,  were  heavy. 
But  the  States  which  had  opposed 
his  re-election,  the  citizens  who  had 
deprecated  it  as  confirming  and  re- 
newing a  lease  of  virtually  absolute 
power  in  hands  too  prone  to  stretch 
Authority  and  Prerogative  to  the 
utmost,  now  vied  with  their  late  an- 
tagonists in  pledging  devotion  and 
support  to  the  elected  chief  of  the 
Republic  in  his  efforts  to  preserve 
its  unity  and  vitality.  Great  public 
meetings  were  held  in  the  principal 
cities  to  give  formal  and  influential 
expression  to  the  sentiment ;  the 
Press,  all  but  unanimously,  echoed 
and  stimulated  the  popular  plaudits ; 
and  General  Jackson  was  never  be- 
fore nor  afterward  so  strong  through- 
out the  Free  States,  as  during  the 


few  months  which  followed  a  most 
vigorous  and  determined  struggle  to 
defeat  his  re-election. 

At  the  South,  the  case  was  some- 
what different,  though  in  every  State 
— South  Carolina,  of  course,  except- 
ed— the  President's  course  was  ap- 
proved by  a  decided  majority.  The  . 
great  mass  of  the  voting  population 
of  nearly  all  these  States  had  just 
given  General  Jackson  their  suffrages 
for  the  second  or  third  time — they 
had  long  enough  been  told  that  he 
was  a  despot,  an  usurper,  a  tyrant, 
etc.,  without  believing  it;  and  they 
were  little  inclined  to  repudiate  in  a 
moment  the  convictions  and  the  asso- 
ciations of  a  lifetime.  In  Virginia 
alone  was  there  any  official  exhibition 
of  sympathy  with  South  Carolina  in 
her  self-invoked  peril ;  and  she  sent 
a  commissioner21  to  that  State  rather 
to  indicate  her  fraternal  regard  than 
to  proffer  any  substantial  assistance. 

There  was  some  windy  talk  of  op- 
posing by  force  the  passage  of  a  Fed- 
era!  army  southward  through  the  Old 
Dominion  on  an  errand  of  "  subjuga- 
tion ;"  and  her  Governor,22  in  his  an- 
nual Message,  said  something  imply- 
ing such  a  purpose.  Ex-Governor 
Troup,  of  Georgia,  and  a  few  other 
doctrinaires  of  the  extreme  State 
Rights  school,  muttered  some  words 
of  sympathy  with  the  Nullifiers,  about 
to  be  crushed  under  the  iron  heel  of 
Federal  power — some  vague  protest 
against  Consolidation ;  but  that  was 
all.  Had  it  become  necessary  to  call 
for  volunteers  to  assert  and  maintain 
the  National  authority  on  the  soil 
of  the  perverse  State,  they  would 
doubtless  have  offered  themselves 
by  thousands  from  nearly  or  quite 


21  Benjamin  Watkins  Leigh. 

22  John  Floyd,  father  of  the  late  John  B.  Floyd,  Mr.  Buchanan's  Secretary  of  War. 


MR.  CLAY'S  TARIFF  COMPROMISE. 


101 


every  Southern  as  well  as  Northern 
State. 

But  it  did  not  become  necessary. 
Congress  in  due  time  took  up  the 
Tariff,  with  a  view  to  its  revision  and 
reduction.  The  Jacksonian  ascend- 
ency was  decided  in  every  depart- 
ment of  the  Government.  Andrew 
Stevenson  (anti-Tariff),  of  Virginia, 
was  Speaker  of  the  House,  Gulian  C. 
Verplanck  (anti-Tariff)  was  Chair- 
man of  its  Committee  of  Ways  and 
Means,  whence  a  bill  containing 
sweeping  reductions  and  equaliza- 
tions of  duties  was,  at  an  early 
period  of  the  session,  reported ;  and, 
though  no  conclusive  action  was  had 
on  this  measure,  the  mere  fact  of 
its  introduction  was  seized  upon  by 
the  Nullifiers  as  an  excuse  for  recoil- 
ing from  the  perilous  position  they 
had  so  recklessly  assumed.  A  few 
days  before  the  1st  of  February,  the 
Nullifying  chiefs  met  at  Charleston, 
and  gravely  resolved  that,  inasmuch 
as  measures  were  then  pending  in 
Congress  which  contemplated  such 
reductions  of  duties  on  imports  as 
South  Carolina  demanded,  the  exe- 
cution of  the  Nullifying  Ordinance, 
and  of  course  of  all  legislative  acts 
subsidiary  thereto,  should  be  post- 
poned till  after  the  adjournment  of 
that  body ! 

But  Mr.  Verplanck's  bill23  made 
such  slow  progress  that  its  passage, 
even  at  the  last  moment,  seemed  ex- 
ceedingly doubtful.  Mr.  Webster  for- 
cibly urged  that  no  concession  should 
be  made  to  South  Carolina  until  she 
should  have  abandoned  her  treasona- 
ble attitude.  The  manufacturers  beset 
the  Capitol  in  crowds,  remonstrating 
against  legislation  under  duress,  in 
defiance  of  the  public  interest  and 


the  convictions  of  a  majority  of  the 
members,  which  would  whelm  them 
in  one  common  ruin.  Finally 24,  Mr. 
Clay  was  induced  to  submit  his  Com- 
promise Tariff,  whereby  one-tenth  of 
the  excess  over  twenty  per  cent,  of 
each  and  every  existing  impost  was 
to  be  taken  off  at  the  close  of  that 
year ;  another  tenth  two  years  there- 
after ;  so  proceeding  until  the  31st 
of  June,  1842,  when  all  duties  should 
be  reduced  to  a  maximum  of  twenty 
per  cent.  This  Compromise  Tariff, 
being  accepted  and  supported  by 
Mr.  Calhoun  and  the  Nullifiers,  was 
offered  in  the  House,  as  a  substitute 
for  Mr.  Yerplanck's  bill,  by  Mr. 
Letcher,  of  Kentucky  (Mr.  Clay's  im- 
mediate representative  and  devoted 
friend),  on  the  25th  of  February; 
adopted  and  passed  at  once  by  a 
vote  of  119  to  85  ;  agreed  to  by  the 
Senate ;  and  became  a  law  in  the 
last  hours  of  the  session :  General 
Jackson,  though  he  openly  condemned 
it  as  an  unwise  and  untimely  conces- 
sion to  rampant  treason,  not  choos- 
ing to  take  the  responsibility  of  veto- 
ing, nor  even  of  pocketing  it,  as  he 
clearly  might  have  done.  South  Car- 
olina thereupon  abandoned  her  Ordi- 
nance and  attitude  of  Nullification ; 
and  the  storm  that  lowered  so  black 
and  imminent  suddenly  gave  place 
to  a  sunny  and  smiling  calm. 

But  General  Jackson  was  deeply 
dissatisfied,  and  with  reason.  He 
saw  in  this  easy  accommodation  the 
seeds  of  future  perils  and  calamities. 
He  insisted  that  Calhoun  was  a  trai- 
tor ;  and  to  the  end  of  his  days 
regretted  that  he  had  not  promptly 
arrested  and  tried  him  as  such.  He 
denied  that  dissatisfaction  with  the 
Protective  policy  was  the  real  incite- 


23  Reported  December  28th. 


24  February  12,  1833. 


102  THE  AMERICA 

ment  to  the  ambitious  and  restless 
Carolinian's  attempt  at  practical  Nul- 
lification. "  The  Tariff,"  he  wrote  in 
1834,  to  an  intimate  friend  in  Geor- 
gia, "was  but  a  pretext.  The  next 
will  he  the  Slavery  or  Negro  ques- 
tion" 


But  while  Nullification  was  thus 
sternly  crushed  out  in  South  Caroli- 
na, it  was  simultaneously  allowed  a 
complete  triumph  in  the  adjoining 
State  of  Georgia.  The  circumstan- 
ces wTere  briefly  as  follows : 

The  once  powerful  and  warlike 
Aboriginal  tribes  known  to  us  as 
"  Cherokees"  and  "  Creeks,"  origin- 
ally possessed  respectively  large  ter- 
ritories, which  are  now  included 
within  the  States  of  North  Carolina, 
Georgia,  Tennessee,  and  Alabama. 
With  those  tribes,  treaties  wrere  from 
time  to  time  made  by  our  Govern- 
ment, whereof  each  had  for  its  main 
object  the  transfer,  for  a  specified 
consideration,  of  lands  by  the  Indi- 
ans to  the  United  States.  One  of  the 
conditions  on  which  we  sought  and 
obtained  those  lands  was  thus  suc- 
cinctly expressed  in  the  treaty  with 
the  Cherokees  negotiated  on  the  bank 
of  the  Holston,  in  1791,  under  the 
Presidency  of  Washington : 

"  Article  7.  The  United  States  solemnly 
guaranty  to  the  Cherokee  Nation  all  their 
lands  not  hereby  ceded." 

The  stipulationsof  this  treaty  were 
recognized,  and  their  validity  con- 
firmed by  the  treaty  of  1794,  nego- 

25  The  following  is  that  portion  of  the  Treaty 
of  Ghent  relating  to  the  Indians : 

"Article  the  Ninth,  The  United  States  of 
America  engage  to  put  an  end,  immediately 
after  the  ratification  of  the  present  treaty,  to 
hostilities  with  all  the  tribes  or  nations  of  In- 
dians with  whom  they  may  be  at  war  at  the 
time  of  such  ratification;  and  forthwith  to  re- 
store to  such  tribes  or  nations,  respectively,  all 


1  CONFLICT. 

tiated  by  Henry  Knox,  Secretary  of 
War,  "being  authorized  thereto  by 
the  President  of  the  United  States." 
A  further  treaty,  negotiated  in  1798, 
under  John  Adams,  recognized  and 
ratified  afresh  all  the  obligations  in- 
curred, the  guaranties  given,  by  for- 
mer treaties.  Such  stipulations  con- 
tinued to  be  made,  at  least  down  to 
1817,  when  one  was  negotiated  on 
our  part  by  Andrew  Jackson  and 
others,  again  renewing  and  confirm- 
ing to  the  Cherokees  all  former  stip- 
ulations and  guaranties. 

Still  more:  when,  in  1814,  the 
Treaty  of  Ghent  wTas  negotiated, 
wThereby  the  war  of  1812  wTith  Great 
Britain  was  terminated,  the  Brit- 
ish commissioners  long  and  fairly  in- 
sisted on  including  her  Aboriginal 
allies  in  that  war  in  the  provis- 
ions and  stipulations  of  the  treaty, 
especially  that  which  exacted  a  mu- 
tual restoration  of  all  territories  or 
places  taken  by  one  party  from  the 
other  during  the  preceding  contest. 
Our  commissioners  naturally  demur- 
red to  this,  preferring  to  insert  an 
article  which  set  forth  the  humane 
and  benevolent  principles  whereby 
(as  it  alleged)  our  Government  regu- 
lates its  conduct  towTard  the  Indian 
tribes  within  our  borders.25  And  Mr. 
Clay,  one  of  the  negotiators  of  that 
treaty,  declared,  in  his  speech  on  the 
Cherokee  Grievances  in  1835,  that 
the  British  commissioners  wTould  nev- 
er have  been  satisfied  with  this,  if 
they  had  understood  that  those  tribes 

the  possessions,  rights,  and  privileges,  which 
they  may  have  enjoyed  or  been  entitled  to  in 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  aud  eleven,  previ- 
ous to  such  hostilities.  Provided  ahoays,  That 
such  tribes  or  nations  shall  agree  to  desist  from 
all  hostilities  against  the  United  States  of 
America,  their  citizens  and  subjects,  upon  the 
ratification  of  the  present  treaty  being  notified 
to  such  tribes  or  nations,  and  shall  so  desist 
accordingly." 


GEORGIA  AN 

held  their  rights  and  possessions  guar- 
anteed to  them  by  Federal  treaties 
subject  to  the  good-will  and  pleasure 
of  the  several  States,  or  any  of  them. 

In  1802,  Georgia  ceded,  on  certain 
conditions,  her  western  territory,  now 
composing  the  States  of  Alabama 
and  Mississippi,  to  the  Union.  Among 
these  conditions,  our  Government 
undertook  to  extinguish  the  Indian 
title  to  all  lands  within  the  bound- 
aries of  the  State  as  thereby  consti- 
tuted, so  soon  as  this  could  be  effect- 
ed "  peaceably  and  on  reasonable 
terms." 26  And  this  object  was  ur- 
gently, perse veringly,  and  not  always 
honorably,  pursued.  In  February, 
1825,  just  as  Mr.  Monroe's  Adminis- 
tration was  passing  away,  certain 
commissioners,  selected  by  Mr.  Cal- 
houn, then  Secretary  of  War,  at- 
tempted to  obtain  from  the  Creeks, 
at  a  council  held  at  Indian  Springs, 
a  cession  of  their  lands ;  but  were 
baffled  by  the  stern  resolve  of  chiefs 
and  people — the  tribe  having  pre- 
viously prescribed  the  penalty  of 
death  for  any  one  who  should 
make  such  sale.  Thus  defeated, 
the  commissioners  resorted  to  a 
too  common  practice:  they  bribed 
an  inconsiderable  minority  of  the 
Creeks,  including  one  or  two  alleged 
chiefs,  to  give  their  formal  assent  to 
such  an  instrument  as  they  desired. 
This  sham  treaty  was  hurried  to 
Washington,  and  forced  through  the 
expiring  Senate  on  the  last  day  of 
the  session,  before  its  true  character 

26  The  following  is  the  entire  article : 

"Fourthly,  That  the  United  States  shall,  at 
'their  own  expense,  extinguish,  for  the  use  of 
Georgia,  as  early  as  the  same  can  be  peaceably 
obtained,  on  reasonable  terms,  the  Indian  title 
to  the  country  of  Talassee,  to  the  lands  left  out  by 
the  line  drawn  with  the  Creeks,  in  the  year  one 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  ninety-eight,  which 
had  been  previously  granted  by  the  State  of 


D    THE    INDIANS.  103 

could  be  generally  known.  The 
Creeks,  upon  learning  that  such  a 
pretended  treaty  had  been  made,  held 
a  general  council,  wherein  it  was 
formally  disavowed  and  denounced, 
and  a  party  was  at  once  dispatched 
to  the  home  of  Mcintosh,  a  chief  who 
had  signed  the  fraud,  to  execute  the 
sentence  of  the  law  upon  him.  Mc- 
intosh and  another  principal  signer 
were  shot  dead  on  sight,  and  due 
notice  given  that  the  pretended  treaty 
was  utterly  repudiated. 

Governor  Troup,  of  Georgia,  of 
course  assumed  the  validity  of  the 
instrument,  and  prepared  to  take 
forcible  possession  of  the  Creek  lands. 
The  Creeks  appealed  to  the  Govern- 
ment, demanding  the  enforcement  of 
the  treaties  whereby  they  were  guar- 
anteed protection  in  the  peaceable 
enjoyment  of  their  clearly  denned 
territorial  possessions.  Mr.  Adams, 
who  had  now  succeeded  to  the  Presi- 
dency, looked  fully  into  the  matter, 
saw  that  their  claim  was  just,  and 
assured  them  that  they  should  be  de- 
j  fended.  Governor  Troup  threatened 
to  employ  force ;  Mr.  Adams  did 
employ  it.  He  ordered  General 
Gaines,  with  a  body  of  regulars,  to 
the  scene  of  apprehended  conflict, 
and  gave  Georgia  fair  notice  that  she 
must  behave  herself.  The  Governor 
talked  loudly,  but  did  not  see  fit  to 
proceed  from  words  to  blows.  The 
Indian  Springs  fraud  proved  abor- 
tive; but  Georgia  and  her  backers 
scored  up  a  heavy  account  against 

Georgia,  both  which  tracts  had  formally  been 
yielded  by  the  Indians ;  and  to  the  lands  within 
the  forks  of  the  Oconee  and  Ocmulgee  rivers; 
for  which  several  objects,  the  President  of  the 
United  States  has  directed  that  a  treaty  should 
be  immediately  held  with  the  Creeks ;  and  that 
the  United  States  shall,  in  the  same  manner,  also 
extinguish  the  Indian  title  to  all  other  lands 
within  the  State  of  Georgia." — American  State 
Papers,  vol.  xvi,  p.  114. 


104 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Mr.  Adams,  to  be  held  good  against 
him  not  only,  but  all  future  '  Yankee' 
and  '  Puritan'  aspirants  to  the  Presi- 
dency. 

General  Jackson  was  chosen  Presi- 
dent in  1828,  receiving  more  than 
two-thirds  of  the  Electoral  votes,  in- 
cluding those  of  all  the  Slave  States 
but  Delaware  and  a  part  of  Mary- 
land. In  Georgia,  there  were  two 
Jackson  Electoral  tickets  run,  but 
none  for  Adams.  And  the  first  An- 
nual Message  of  the  new  President 
gave  the  Indians  due  notice  that 
Georgia  had  not  so  voted  from  blind 
impulse — that  their  dearest  rights, 
their  most  cherished  possessions,  were 
among  her  "  spoils  of  victory."  In 
this  Message,  the  solemn  obligations 
which  our  Government  had  volun- 
teered to  assume,  in  treaty  after 
treaty  with  the  Creeks  and  Chero- 
kees,  were  utterly  ignored,  and  the 
rights  and  possessions  of  the  Indians 
dealt  with  precisely  as  if  no  such 
treaties  had  ever  existed !  Georgia 
had  herself,  through  her  citizens, 
participated  in  negotiating,  and, 
through  her  Senators,  united  in  rati- 
fying those  treaties ;  yet  not  only 
was  she  held  at  liberty  to  disobey 
and  trample  on  them,  but  the  United 
States  was  regarded  as  equally  ab- 
solved, by  the  convenient  fiction  of 
State  Sovereignty,  from  all  liability 
to  maintain  and  enforce  them  !  No 
one  could  deny  that  we  had  solemnly 
engaged,  by  repeated  treaties,  to  pro- 
tect the  Indians  in  the  undisturbed  use 
and  enjoyment  forever  of  the  lands 
which  we  had  admitted  to  be,  and 
marked  out  as,  theirs.  No  one  could 
deny  that  we  had  obtained  large 
cessions  of  valuable  lands  by  these 
treaties.  No  one  doubted  that  Geor- 
gia had  urged  us  to  make  these  trea- 


ties, and  had  eagerly  appropriated 
the  lands  thus  obtained  by  the  Union, 
and  passed  directly  over  to  her :  but 
then,  Georgia  was  a  sovereign  State, 
and  entitled  to  do  as  she  liked  with 
all  the  lands  within  her  borders,  and 
all  the  people  living  thereon,  no  mat- 
ter if  in  flagrant  violation  of  the  laws 
and  treaties  of  the  United  States! 
And  the  new  President  did  not  scru- 
ple to  assert  and  reiterate  the  un- 
truth that  the  Creeks  and  Cherokees 
respectively  were  attempting  to 
"erect  an  independent  government 
within  the  limits  of  Georgia  and 
Alabama,"  ringing  all  possible 
changes  on  the  falsehood,  and  gravely 
quoting  from  the  Constitution  that 
"  No  new  State  shall  be  formed  or 
erected  within  the  limits  of  any  other 
State,"  as  precluding  the  mainte- 
nance by  the  Creeks  and  Cherokees 
of  their  governments  in  territories 
which  they  had  possessed  and  gov- 
erned long  before  Georgia  had  been 
colonized,  or  the  name  Alabama  in- 
vented. 

This  deliberate  and  flagrant  perver- 
sion of  the  question  to  be  decided 
was  persisted  in  through  several 
pages  of  the  Message.  Says  the 
President : 

"  Actuated  by  this  view  of  the  subject,  I 
informed  the  Indians  inhabiting  parts  of 
Georgia  and  Alabama  that  their  attempt  to 
establish  an  independent  government  would 
not  be  countenanced  by  the  Executive  of  the 
United  States,  and  advised  them  to  emigrate 
beyond  the  Mississippi,  or  submit  to  the 
laws  of  those  States." 

What  the  Indians  demanded  was 
simply  that  the  portion  of  their  im- 
memorial possessions  which  they  had 
reserved  for  their  own  use  and  enjoy- 
ment in  making  liberal  cessions  to 
our  Government,  should  still  be  left 
to  them — that  they  should  be  protect- 


GEORGIA  EXPELLING  THE  CHEROKEES. 


105 


ed  in  such  enjoyment,  by  the  United 
States,  as  we  had  solemnly  stipulated 
by  treaty  that  they  should  be,  tak- 
ing our  pay  for  it  in  advance.  But 
General  Jackson,  in  urging  them  to 
migrate  beyond  the  Mississippi,  did 
not  hesitate  to  speak  of  their  rights 
and  their  immunities  as  follows : 

u  This  emigration  should  be  voluntary ;  for 
it  would  be  as  cruel  as  unjust  to  compel  the 
Aborigines  to  abandon  the  graves  of  their 
fathers,  and  seek  a  home  in  a  distant  land. 
But  they  should  be  distinctly  informed  that, 
if  they  remain  within  the  limits  of  the  States, 
they  must  be  subject  to  their  laws.  In 
return  for  their  obedience,  as  individuals, 
they  will,  without  a  doubt,  be  protected  in 
the  enjoyment  of  those  possessions  which 
they  have  improved  by  their  industry.  But 
it  seems  to  me  visionary  to  suppose  that,  in 
this  state  of  things,  claims  can  he  allowed  on 
tracts  of  country  on  which  they  have  neither 
dwelt  nor  made  improvements,  merely  because 
they  have  seen  them  from  the  mountain,  or 
passed  them  in  the  chase.  Submitting  to 
the  laws  of  the  States,  and  receiving,  like 
other  citizens,  protection  in  their  persons 
and  property,  they  will  ere  long  become 
merged  in  the  mass  of  our  population." 

How  "  voluntary"  their  emigration 
was  to  be,  and  what  sort  of  "  protec- 
tion in  their  persons  and  property" 
they  were  likely  to  receive  in  case 
they  refused  to  "  abandon  the  graves 
of  their  fathers,  and  seek  a  home  in  a 
distant  land,"  let  the  laws  which 
Georgia  proceeded  to  enact  bear  wit- 
ness. Grown  weary  of  awaiting  the 
operation  of  the  methods  whereby 
she  had  already  secured,  at  no  cost  to 
herself,  the  gradual  acquisition  of 
the  greater  part  of  the  Indian  lands 
within  her  borders  when  she  acceded 
to  the  Union,  that  State  passed  acts 
abolishing  the  government  of  the 
Cherokees,  and  reducing  them  at  a 
word  to  the  condition  of  unprotected 
vassals.  Their  lands  were  thereupon 
divided  into  counties,  surveyed,  and 
ordered  to  be  distributed  by  lottery 
among  the  white  citizens  of  the  State, 


of  whom  each  was  to  have  a  ticket. 
A  reservation  of  one  hundred  and 
sixty  acres  to  each  head  of  a  Chero- 
kee family  was  made  ;  but  this  reser- 
vation conferred  or  recognized  only  a 
right  of  possession  during  the  good 
pleasure  of  the  State  Legislature. 
The  Indians,  whose  government  was 
thus  abolished,  were  allowed  no 
voice  in  that  to  which  they  were  arbi- 
trarily subjected ;  they  could  not  even 
give  testimony  in  a  Georgia  court, 
though  denied  a  resort  to  any  other. 
The  fortunate  drawer  of  Cherokee 
lands  in  the  Georgia  State  lottery  was 
entitled  to  call  upon  the  Governor  to 
put  him  in  summary  possession,  ex- 
pelling any  adverse  [Indian]  claim- 
ant. If  there  were  two  or  more 
antagonist  white  claimants,  their  re- 
spective claims  were  to  be  deliberately 
adjudicated  by  the  courts,  according 
to  the  dictates  of  ordinary  jurispru- 
dence. If  any  one  sought  to  legally 
hold  or  recover  lands  against  a  claim- 
ant under  this  rule,  he  must  make 
express  affidavit  that  he 

"  was  not  liable  to  be  dispossessed  of  said 
land  by  or  under  any  one  of  the  provisions 
of  the  said  act  of  the  General  Assembly 
of  Georgia,  passed  December  20,  1833 : 
*  *  *  in  which  issue  the  person  to  whom 
possession  of  said  land  was  delivered  shall 
join:  and  which  issue  shall  constitute  the  en- 
tire pleadings  between  the  parties  ;  nor  shall 
the  court  allow  any  matter  other  than  is  con- 
tained in  said  issue  to  be  placed  upon  the 
regular  files  of  said  court ;  *  *  *  nor  shall 
said  court,  at  the  instance  of  either  party, 
pass  any  order,  or  grant  any  injunction,  to 
stay  said  cause,  nor  permit  to  be  ingrafted 
on  said  cause  any  other  proceedings  what- 
ever.'''1 

It  can  hardly  be  necessary  to  say 
that  the  sole,  unconcealed  object  of 
this  legislation  was  to  deprive  the 
Cherokees  of  the  protection  of  the 
courts  of  the  United  States,  or  any 
adjudication  therein  touching  their 
rights,  by  precluding  any  appeal  to 


106 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


said  courts  for  the  sake  of  testing  the 
validity  of  these  acts  of  the  Legisla- 
ture of  Georgia. 

That  State  had  already  decisively 
indicated  that,  if  unable  to  make  or  1 
control  such  adjudication,  she  was 
abundantly  ready  to  defy  it. 

A  Cherokee  named  Tassells  was  ar- 
Bested  on  a  Georgia  warrant  for  kill-  , 
ing  another  Indian  within  the  Cher-  ' 
okee  territory.  His  counsel  obtained 
a  writ  of  error  from  a  United  States  ! 
court,  requiring  Georgia  to  show  cause 
why  he  should  not  be  discharged  and 
his  case  remitted  to  the  Cherokee  au-  \ 
thorities,  according  to  existing  treaties. 
Georgia  defied  the  writ  and  hung  the 
Indian.    And  this  finished  the  case. 

Some  time  thereafter,  two  mission- 
aries of  the  American  Board  among  j 
theCherokees  were  arrested  on  a  Geor-  j 
gia  process,  tried  for,  and  convicted  i 
of^  inciting  the  Indians  to  resist  the 
policy  of  the  State  of  Georgia  de- 
signed to  effect  the  expulsion  of  the 
Indians  from  her  soil.  They  were  of 
course  sentenced  to  the  State  Prison. 
They  appealed  by  writ  of  error  to 
the  courts  of  the  United  States,  and 
the  final  adjudication  thereon  was 
had  before  the  Supreme  Court  at 
Washington,  the  decision  being  pro- 
nounced by  Chief  Justice  Marshall. 
It  was  entirely  in  favor  of  the  mis- 
sionaries and  against  the  pretensions 


of  Georgia,  holding  that  the  treaties 
between  the  United  States  and  the 
Cherokees  were  valid  and  binding  on 
all  the  States,  and  paramount  to  all 
State  laws,  according  to  that  provis 
ion  of  the  Federal  Constitution  which 
prescribes : 

"Article  VI.,  §  2.  This  Constitution,  and! 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  which  shall  be 
made  in  pursuance  thereof ;  and  all  treaties 
made,  or  w  hich  shall  be  made,  under  the 
authority  of  the  United  States,  shall  be  the 
supreme  laic  of  the  land  ;  and  the  judges  m. 
every  State  shall  be  bound  thereby,  anything 
in  the  constitution  or  laws  of  any  State  to 
the  contrary  notwithstanding." 

The  attorneys  for  the  missionaries 
sought  to  have  this  judgment  en- 
forced, but  could  not.  General  Jack- 
son was  President,  and  would  do 
nothing  of  the  sort.  "  Well :  John 
Marshall  has  made  his  decision: 
now  let  him  enforce  it!"™  was  his 
commentary  on  the  matter.  So  the 
missionaries  languished  years  in  pris- 
on, and  the  Cherokees  were  finally 
(1838)  driven  into  exile,  in  defiance 
of  the  mandate  of  our  highe-t  judi- 
cial tribunal. 98  Georgia  was  permit- 
ted to  violate  the  faith  of  solemn 
treaties  and  defy  the  adjudications  of 
our  highest  court.  South  Carolina 
was  put  down  in  a  similar  attempt 
for  the  will  of  Andrew  Jackson,  not 
the  Constitution,  was  in  those  years 
u  the  supreme  law  of  the  land." 29 


27  I  am  indebted  for  this  fact  to  the  late  Gov- 
ernor George  X.  Briggs,  of  Massachusetts,  who 
was  in  Washington  as  a  member  of  Congress 
when  the  decision  was  rendered. 

28  President  Jackson,  in  his  first  Annual  Mes- 
sage, already  referred  to,  had  said: 

"A  portion  of  the  Southern  tribes,  having 
mingled  much  with  the  whites,  and  made  some 
progress  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life,  have  lately 
attempted  to  erect  an  independent  government 
within  the  limits  of  the  States  of  Georgia  and 
Alabama." 

And  Colonel  Benton,  in  his  "Thirty  Years' 
Tiew,"  says  (vol.  L,  p.  164),  General  Jackson 


"refused  to  sustain  those  Southern  tribes  in 
their  attempt  to  set  up  an  independent  govern- 
ment within  the  States  of  Alabama  and  Georgia*" 

Both  these  gentlemen  well  knew — Colonel 
Benton  could  not  but  know — that  the  Cherokeea 
only  claimed  or  sought  the  rights  which  they 
had  possessed  and  enjoyed  from  time  immemo- 
rial, which  were  solemnly  guaranteed  to  them 
by  treaty  after  treaty,  whereof  the  subsisting 
validity  and  pertinence  were  clearly  affirmed 
by  the  tribunal  of  ultimate  resort. 

25  The  late  Jeremiah  Evarts,  long  the  efficient 
and  honored  Secretary  of  the  American  Board 


ABOLITION  IX  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  AGE. 


107 


IX. 

THE  EISE  AXD  PEOGBESS  OF  ABOLITION. 


The  General  Congress  which  con- 
vened at  Philadelphia  in  1774,  framed 
articles  of  Association  between  the 
colonies,  one  of  which  was  a  solemn 
agreement  "  that  we  will  neither  im- 
port nor  purchase  any  slave  imported 
after  the  1st  of  December  next ;"  be- 
ing moved  thereto  by  State  action  of 
like  character,  wherein  Virginia  and 
North  Carolina  were  honorably  con- 
spicuous. Most  of  the  States,  accord- 
ingly, prohibited  the  Slave -Trade 
during  or  soon  after  the  Eevolution. 
Throughout  the  war  for  indepen- 
dence, the  Eights  of  Man  were  pro- 
claimed as.  the  great  objects  of  our 
struggle.  General  Gates,  the  hero 
of  Saratoga,  emancipated  his  slaves 
in  1780.  The  first  recorded  Aboli- 
tion Society — that  of  Pennsylvania 
— was  formed  in  1774.  The  New 
York  Manumission  Society  was  found- 
ed in  17S5:  John  Jay  was  its  first 
President;  Alexander  Hamilton  its 
second.  Rhode  Island  followed  in 
17S0;  Maryland  inl7S9;  Connecti- 
cut in  1790  ;  Virginia  in  1791 ;  New 
Jersey  in  1792.  The  discovery  that 
such  societies  were  at  war  with  the 
Federal  Constitution,  or  with  the 
reciprocal  duties  of  citizens  of  the 
several  States,  was  not  made  till 
nearlv  forty  vears  afterward.  These 


Abolition  Societies  were  largely  com- 
posed of  the  most  eminent  as  well  as 
the  worthiest  citizens.  Among  them 
were,  in  Maryland,  Samuel  Chase, 
a  signer  of  the  Declaration,  and 
Luther  Martin,  one  of  the  framers 
of  the  Constitution;  in  Delaware, 
James  A.  Bayard,1  afterward  in 
Congress,  and  Caesar  A.  Rodney, 
who  became  Attorney-GeneraL  The 
Pennsylvania  Society  had  Benja- 
min Franklin  for  its  President, 
and  Benjamin  Rush  for  Secretary 
— both  signers  of  the  Declaration. 
This,'  among  other  such  societies, 
memorialized  the  first  Federal  Con- 
gress, then  sitting  at  Philadelphia, 
against  Slavery,  asking 

"that  you  will  be  pleased  to  countenance 
the  restoration  to  liberty  of  those  unhappy 
men  who,  alone  in  this  land  of  freedom,  are 
degraded  into  perpetual  bondage,  and  who, 
amid  the  general  joy  of  surrounding  free- 
men, are  groaning  in  servile  subjection ; 
that  you  will  devise  means  for  removing 
this  inconsistency  of  character  from  the 
American  people;  that  you  will  promote 
mercy  and  justice  toward  this  distressed 
race;  and  that  you  will  step  to  the  very 
verge  of  the  power  vested  in  you  for  dis- 
couraging every  species  of  traffic  in  the  per- 
sons of  our  fellow-men.*1 

Congress  courteously  received  this 
and  similar  memorials,  calmly  con- 
sidered them,  and  decided  that  it  had 
no  power  to  abolish  Slavery  in  the 


of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions,  who  de- 
Toted  the  best  of  his  life  to  the  cause  of  the 
Cherokees,  has  summed  up,  in  a  letter  to  a  sym- 
pathizing friend,  his  convictions  as  to  the  ulti- 
#We  cause  of  the  perfidy  and  oppression  of 
which  they  were  the  victims : 

"Without  that  disregard  of  human  rights 
which  is  to  be  found  among  slaveholders  only, 
nothing  could  have  been  done  against  the  Indi- 
ans; and  without  the  base  surrender  of  all  per- 


sonal dignity  and  independence  to  the  capricious 
mandate  of  party  discipline,  the  slaveholders 
would  not  have  received  aid  enough  to  carry 
their  point'1 — Life  of  Jeremiah  Evarts,  Boston. 
1S45,  p.  367. 

1  Father  of  one  of  her  present  U.  9.  Senators. 

5  Franklin,  then  S4  years  of  age.  signed  this 
memorial  on  the  3d  of  February,  1790,  and  died 
on  the  17th  of  April  following. 


108 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


States  which  saw  fit  to  authorize  and 
cherish  it.  There  was  no  excitement, 
no  menace,  no  fury.  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia,  of  course,  opposed  the 
prayer,  but  in  parliamentary  lan- 
guage. It  is  noteworthy,  that  among 
those  who  leaned  furthest  toward  the 
petitioners  were  Messrs.  Parker  and 
Page,  of  Virginia — the  latter  in  due 
time  her  Governor.  They  urged,  not 
that  the  prayer  should  be  granted, 
but  that  the  memorial  be  referred, 
and  respectfully  considered. 

Yermont  framed  a  State  Constitu- 
tion in  1777,  and  embodied  in  it  a 
Bill  of  Eights,  whereof  the  first  arti- 
cle precluded  Slavery. 

Massachusetts  framed  a  constitu- 
tion in  1780,  wherein  was  embodied 
a  Declaration  of  Rights,  affirming 
that 

"All  men  are  born  free  and  equal,  and 
have  certain  natural,  essential,  and  inaliena- 
ble rights,  among  which  are  the  right  of 
enjoying  and  defending  their  lives  and  liber- 
ties, and  that  of  acquiring,  possessing,  and 
protecting  property." 

The  Supreme  Court  of  that  State, 
upon  the  first  case  arising  which  in- 
volved the  question,  decided  that  this 
provision  had  abolished  Slavery. 

New  Hampshire  was,  in  like  man- 
ner, held  to  have  abolished  Slavery 
by  her  Constitution,  framed  in  1783. 

Pennsylvania  passed  a  Gradual 
Emancipation  Act,  March  1,  1780. 
All  persons  born  in  that  State  after 
that  day,  were  to  be  free  at  the  age 
of  twenty-eight. 

Ehode  Island  provided  by  law  that 
all  persons  born  in  that  State  after 
March,  1784,  should  be  free. 

Connecticut,  in  1784,  passed  an 
act  providing  for  gradual  Abolition. 
She  had  still  two  thousand  seven 
hundred  and  fifty-nine  slaves  in  1790. 


New  York  provided  for  Gradual 
Emancipation  in  1799.  In  1817,  a 
further  act  was  passed,  decreeing  that 
there  should  be  no  Slavery  in  the 
State  after  the  4th  of  July,  1827. 
Ten  thousand  slaves  were  set  free  at 
once  by  this  act. 

New  Jersey  passed  an  act,  in  1804, 
designed  to  put  an  end  to  Slavery. 
It  was  so  very  gradual  in  its  opera- 
tion, that  the  census  of  1840  reported 
six  hundred  and  seventy-four  slaves 
as  still  held  in  that  State. 

The  frequently  reiterated  Southern 
assertion  that  the  Northern  States 
"  sold  their  slaves  to  the  South,  and 
then  abolished  Slavery,"  is  abundant- 
ly refuted.  Pennsylvania,  New  York, 
and  doubtless  most  other  States,  by 
their  acts  of  emancipation,  imposed 
severe  penalties  on  the  exportation 
of  slaves.  Delaware,  though  a  Slave 
State,  long  since  did.  and  still  does, 
the  same. 


The  North  emerged  from  the  Mis- 
souri struggle  chafed  and  mortified. 
It  felt  that,  with  Eight  and  Power 
both  on  its  side,  it  had  been  badly 
beaten,  through  the  treachery  of  cer- 
tain of  its  own  representatives,  whom 
it  proceeded  to  deal  with  accordingly. 
Few,  indeed — hardly  one — of  those 
Northern  members  who  had  sided 
with  the  South  in  that  struggle  were 
reelected.  That  lesson  given,  what 
more  could  be  done?  Missouri  was 
in  the  Union,  and  could  not  be  turned 
out.  Arkansas  was  organized  as  a 
Slave  Territory,  and  would  in  due 
time  become  a  Slave  State.  What 
use  in  protracting  an  agitation  which 
had  no  longer  a  definite  object  ?  Mr. 
Monroe  had  just  been  reelected  Presi- 
dent, and  the  harmony  of  the  party 
would  be  disturbed  by  permitting 


THE  SOUTH  REBUKES  EDWARD  EYERETT. 


109 


the  feud  to  become  chronic.  Those 
who  perpetuated  it  would  be  most 
unlikely  to  share  bounteously  in  the 
distribution  of  Federal  offices  and 
honors.  Then  a  new  Presidential 
contest  began  to  loom  up  in  the  dis- 
tance, and  all  manner  of  speculations 
were  current,  and  hopes  were  buoy- 
ant, with  regard  to  it.  Yet  more : 
the  Cotton  culture  was  rapidly  ex- 
panding, and  with  it  Southern  trade, 
bringing  the  Northern  seaports  more 
and  more  under  their  sway. 

There  had  been  an  effort,  in  1817, 
to  secure  the  passage  through  Con- 
gress of  a  more  effective  Fugitive 
Slave  Law,  which  was  defeated,  after 
a  most  spirited  discussion.  In  1826 
(March  9th),  the  subject  of  Slavery 
was  brought  before  the  House  by  Mr. 
Edward  Everett — then  a  new  and 
very  young  member  from  Massachu- 
setts— who  incidentally  expressed  his 
hostility  to  all  projects  of  violent  Abo- 
lition, his  readiness  to  shoulder  a  mus- 
ket to  put  down  a  slave  insurrection, 
and  his  conviction,  with  regard  to 
!  Slavery,  that,  "  while  it  subsists, 
I  where  it  subsists,  its  duties  are  pre- 
I  supposed  and  sanctioned  by  religion," 
etc.,  etc.  But  this  strange  outburst, 
instead  of  being  gratefully  hailed  and 
welcomed,  was  repelled  and  reprobat- 

3  Roger  "Brooke  Taney — now  Chief  Justice  of 
;  the  United  States — in  defending  as  a  lawyer,  in 
I  1818,  before  a  Maryland  court,  Rev.  Jacob  G-ru- 
j  ber,  charged  with  anti-Slavery  inculcations  and 
:  acts,  thus  happily  set  forth  the  old  Revolution- 
ary idea  of  Slavery,  and  the  obligations  it  im- 
poses: 

"  A  hard  necessity,  indeed,  compels  us  to  en- 
dure the  evils  of  Slavery  for  a  time.  It  was 
imposed  upon  us  by  another  nation,  while  yet 

;  we  were  in  a  state  of  colonial  vassalage.  It  can- 
not be  easily  or  suddenly  removed.    Tet,  while 

\  it  continues,  it  is  a  blot  on  our  national  charac- 
ter, and  every  real  lover  of  freedom  confidently 
hopes  that  it  will  be  effectually,  though  it  must 
be  gradually,  wiped  away,  and  earnestly  looks 
for  the  means  by  which  this  necessary  object 


ed  by  the  South.  Mr.  Mitchell,  of 
Tennessee,  though  himself  a  slave- 
holder, pointedly  dissented  from  it. 
Mr.  C.  C.  Cambreleng,  of  New  York, 
(a  North  Carolinian  by  birth  and 
training),  said: 

"  The  gentleman  from  Massachusetts  has 
gone  too  far.  He  has  expressed  opinions 
which  ought  not  to  escape  animadversion. 
I  heard  them  with  great  surprise  and  regret. 
I  was  astonished  to  hear  him  declare  that 
Slavery — domestic  Slavery — say  what  you 
will,  is  a  condition  of  life,  as  well  as  any 
other,  to  be  justified  by  morality,  religion, 
and  international  law,"  etc.,  etc. 

And  John  Randolph,  of  Yirginia 
— himself  a  life-long  slaveholder  and 
opponent  of  the  North — saw  fit  to 
say: 

"Sir,  I  envy  neither  the  head  nor  the 
heart  of  that  man  from  the  North,  who  rises 
here  to  defend  Slavery  upon  principle." 

So  that,  so  late  as  1826,  the  doc- 
trine of  the  essential  righteousness  and 
beneficence  of  Slavery  had  not  yet 
been  accepted  in  any  quarter.3 

Yirginia,  in  1829,  assembled4  a 
Convention  of  her  people  to  revise 
their  Constitution.  Ex-President 
J ames  Monroe*  was  chosen  to  preside, 
and  was  conducted  to  the  chair  by 
ex-President  James  Madison  and 
Chief  Justice  Marshall.    The  first 

may  be  attained.  And,  until  it  shall  be  accom- 
plished, until  the  time  come  when  we  can  point 
without  a  blush  to  the  language  held  in  tho 
Declaration  of  Independence,  every  friend  of 
humanity  will  seek  to  lighten  the  galling  chain 
of  Slavery,  and  better,  to  the  utmost  of  his 
power,  the  wretched  condition  of  the  slave." 

4At  Richmond,  October  5th. 

5  Mr.  Monroe,  in  a  speech  (November  2d),  on 
the  Basis  of  Representation,  said,  incidentally  of 
Slavery : 

"No  imputation  can  be  cast  on  Yirginia  in 
this  matter.  She  did  all  that  it  was  in  her  power 
to  do  to  prevent  the  extension  of  Slavery,  and  to 
mitigate  its  evils  so  far  as  she  could." 


4 


HO  THE  AMERICA 

earnest  collision  was  on  the  White 
JBasis,  so  called — that  is,  on  the  pro- 
position that  representation  and  po- 
litical power  should  be  apportioned 
to  the  several  counties  on  the  basis 
of  their  White  population  alone.  The 
Committee  on  the  Legislative  depart- 
ment decided  in  favor  of  the  White 
Basis  by  13  to  11 — James  Madison's 
vote  giving  that  side  the  majority ; 
but  he  voted  also  against  the  White 
Basis  for  the  Senate,  making  a  tie  on 
that  point.  A  strong  excitement 
having  arisen  on  this  question,  Gen- 
eral Robert  B.  Taylor,  of  Norfolk,  an 
advocate  of  the  White  Basis,  resigned, 
and  his  seat  was  filled  by  Hugh  B. 
Grigsby,  of  opposite  views.  At 
length,6  the  Convention  came  to  a 
vote,  on  the  proposition  of  a  Mr. 
Green,  of  Culpepper,  that  the  White 
Basis  be  stricken  out,  and  the  Feder- 
al Basis  (the  white  inhabitants  with 
"three-fifths  of  all  other  persons") 
be  substituted.  This  was  defeated — 
Yeas  47  (including  Grigsby  afore- 
said) ;  Nays  49 — every  delegate  vot- 
ing. Among  the  Yeas  were  ex- 
President  Madison,  Chief  Justice 
Marshall,  Benjamin  Watkins  Leigh, 
Philip  P.  Barbour,  John  Randolph 
of  Roanoke,  William  B.  Giles,  John 
Tyler,  etc.  Among  the  Nays  (for 
the  White  Basis)  were  ex-President 
Monroe,  Philip  Doddridge,  Charles 
F.  Mercer,  Chapman  Johnson,  Lewis 
Summers,  etc.  As  a  rule,  Western 
(comparatively  Free)  Virginia  voted 

6  November  lGth. 

7  Hezekiah  Niles,  in  his  Weekly  Register  of  Oc- 
tober 31,  1829,  thus  forcibly  depicted  the  mo- 
mentous issues  for  Virginia  and  the  country, 
then  hinging  on  the  struggle  in  Richmond: 

"Virginia  Convention. — The  committees 
having  chiefly  reported,  'the  tug  of  war'  between 
the  'old  lights'  and  the  new  has  commenced ;  and 
the  question  is  to  be  settled  whether  trees  and 
stones,  and  arbitrary  divisions  of  land,  with 


N  CONFLICT. 

for  the  White  Basis,  with  some  help 
from  the  East ;  and  it  was  computed 
that  the  majority  represented  402,631 
of  Free  Population,  and  the  minority 
but  280,000.  But  the  minority  was' 
strong  in  intellect,  in  numbers,  and 
in  resolution,  and  it  fought  desperate- 
ly through  weeks  of  earnest  debate 
and  skillful  maneuvering.  President 
Monroe,  in  December,  resigned  the 
chair,  and  his  seat,  and  his  constit- 
uents offered  the  latter  to  General  R. 
B.  Taylor  aforesaid,  who  declined, 
when  it  was  given  to  a  Mr.  Osborne. 
Finally,  a  proposition  by  Mr.  Upshur 
(afterward  Secretary  of  State)  was  so 
amended,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Gordon, 
as  to  prescribe,  arbitrarily,  that  thir- 
teen Senators  should  be  apportioned 
to  counties  west  of  the  Blue  Ridge, 
and  nineteen  to  those  east  of  it,  with 
a  corresponding  allotment  of  Dele- 
gates in  four  parcels  to  the  various 
natural  divisions  of  the  State,  and 
was  carried  by  55  Yeas  to  41  Nays — 
a  motion  that  the  Senate  apportion- 
ment be  based  on  Federal  numbers, 
and  that  for  the  House  on  the  White 
population,  having  first  been  voted 
down— 48  to  48.  So  the  effort  of 
the  West,  and  of  the  relatively  non- 
slaveholding  sections  of  Yirginia,  to 
wrest  political  power  from  the  slave- 
holding  oligarchy  of  the  tide-water 
counties,  was  defeated,  despite  the 
sanguine  promise  at  the  outset ;  and 
the  Old  Dominion  sunk  again  into 
the   arms    of   the  negro-breeders.7 

almost  as  senseless  herds  of  black  slaves,  or  the 
free,  tax-paying  inhabitants  of  the  State,  shall 
have  political  power.  Very  important  events 
will  grow  out  of  this  convention,  and  their  effect 
will  not  be  confined  to  Virginia.  We  hope  and 
believe,  that  the  free  white  population  of  the 
State  will  be  adopted  as  the  basis  of  representa- 
tion in  the  popular  branch  of  the  Legislature — 
indeed,  it  cannot  be  popular  without  it ;  but  per- 
haps the  Senate  may  be  apportioned  according 
to  'federal  numbers,'  in  which  three-fifths  of  the 


THE  YOUTH  OP  B 


ENJAMIN  LUNDT. 


Ill 


U  Some  years  later  (in  1831-2),  on  the 

I  occurrence  of  the  slave  insurrection  in 

I  Southampton  county,  known  as  Nat. 

|  Turner's,  her  people  were  aroused  to 
a  fresh  and  vivid  conception  of  the 

(  perils  and  evils  of  Slavery,  and  her 

I  Legislature,  for  a  time,  seemed  on  the 
point  of  inaugurating  a  system  of 

[  Gradual  Emancipation  ;  but  the  im- 
pulse was  finally,  though  with  diffi- 
culty, overborne.  Several  who  have 
since  cast  in  their  lot  with  the  Slave- 

3  holders'  Rebellion — among  them  Jas. 
C.  Faulkner,  late  Minister  to  Eng- 

I  land — at  that  time  spoke  earnestly 
and  forcibly  for  Emancipation,  as  an 

I  imperative  necessity.  And  this  is 
noteworthy  as  the  last  serious  effort 
by  the  politicians  of  any  Slave  State8 
to  rid  her  of  the  giant  curse,  prior  to 
the  outbreak  of  the  Slaveholders'  Re- 
bellion. 


Benjamej  Ltjndy  deserves  the  high 
honor  of  ranking  as  the  pioneer  of 
direct  and  distinctive  Anti-Slavery 

slaves  are  counted.  If  the  latter  may  stand  as 
a  peace-offering  to  the  departing  power  of  the 
old  lights,  we  would  let  them  have  it — in  a  few 
years,  under  a  liberal  Constitution,  the  free  pop- 
ulation of  middle  and  western  Virginia  will  be 
bo  increased,  that  the  power  in  the  Senate,  de- 
rived from  slaves,  will  not  be  injuriously  felt. 
And  then  will  the  tacticians,  who  have  kept  Vir- 
ginia back  half  a  century,  compared  with  New 
York  and  Pennsylvania,  disappear,  and  give 
place  to  practical  men — then  will  roads  and  ca- 
nals be  made,  domestic  manufactures  encour- 
aged, and  a  free  and  virtuous  and  laborious  peo- 
ple give  wealth  and  power  and  security  to  the 
commonwealtn — the  1  old  families,'  as  they  are 
called — persons  much  partaking  of  the  character 
of  the  old  nobility  of  France,  imbecile  and  incor- 
rigible— pass  away,  and  a  healthful  and  happy, 
bold  and  intelligent  middle  class  rise  up  to 
sweeten  and  invigorate  society,  by  rendering 
labor  honorable;  and  Richmond  will  not  any 
longer  be  all  Virginia,  as  a  distinguished  gen- 
tleman used  to  proclaim,  in  matters  of  politics 
or  policy.  The  moral  effects  of  these  tilings  over 
the  slave  population  of  Virginia,  and  in  the  ad- 
jacent States,  are  hardly  to  be  calculated.  The 
presence  of  numerous  slaves .  is  incompatible 
■with  that  of  a  numerous  free  population ;  and  it 
is  shown  that  the  labor  of  the  latter,  in  all  tho 


in  America.  Many  who  lived  before 
and  cotemporary  with  him  were  Ab- 
olitionists :  but  he  was  the  first  of  our 
countrymen  who  devoted  his  life  and 
all  his  powers  exclusively  to  the  cause 
of  the  slave.  Born  in  Sussex  county, 
New  Jersey,  January  4,  1789,  of 
Quaker  parents,  whose  ancestors  for 
several  generations  had  lived  and  died 
in  this  country,  he  injured  himself, 
while  still  a  mere  boy,  by  excessive 
labor  on  his  father's  farm,  incurring 
thereby  a  partial  loss  of  hearing,  from 
which  he  never  recovered.  Slight  in 
frame  and  below  the  common  hight, 
unassuming  in  manner  and  gentle  in 
spirit,  he  gave  to  the  cause  of  Emanci- 
pation neither  wealth,  nor  eloquence, 
nor  lofty  abilities,  for  he  had  them 
not;  but  his  courage,  perseverance, 
and  devotion  were  unsurpassed  ;  and 
these  combined  to  render  him  a  for- 
midable, though  disregarded  if  not 
despised,  antagonist  to  our  national 
crime.  Leaving  his  father's  farm  at 
nineteen  years  of  age,  he  wandered 

important  operations  of  agriculture  or  the  arts, 
except  the  cultivation  of  cotton,  sugar,  tobacco, 
and  rice  (as  at  present  carried  on),  is  the  cheap- 
est and  the  best.  And  in  truth,  it  would  not 
perhaps  be  straining  the  facts  too  far,  to  express 
an  opinion,  that  the  greatest  question  before  the 
Virginia  convention  is,  the  perpetual  duration 
of  negro  slavery,  or  the  increase  of  a  generous 
and  free  white  population." 

8  In  1849,  when  Kentucky  revised  her  State 
Constitution,  Henry  Clay  formally  renewed  the 
appeal  in  favor  of  Gradual  Emancipation,  which 
he  had  made,  when  a  very  young  man,  on  the 
occasion  of  her  organization  as  a  State ;  but  the 
response  from  the  people  was  feeble  and  iueffect- 
ive.  Delaware  has  repeatedly  endeavored  to 
rid  herself  of  Slavery  by  legislation;  but  parti- 
san Democracy  has  uniformly  opposed  and  de- 
feated every  movement  looking  to  this  end.  She, 
though  slaveholding,  has  for  sixty  years  or  more 
been  truly,  emphatically,  a  Border  State.  Sla- 
very has  only  been  kept  so  long  alive  within  her 
limits  for  the  benefit,  and  by  the  strenuous 
efforts,  of  the  Democratic  party.  It  is  now  evi- 
dently near  its  end. 


« 


112 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"westward  to  Wheeling,  Virginia, 
where,  during  the  next  four  years, 
he  learned  the  trade  of  a  saddler, 
and  gained  an  insight  into  the  cruel- 
ties and  villainies  of  slaveholding — 
Wheeling  being  at  that  time  ar  great 
thoroughfare  for  negro-traders  and 
their  prey  on  their  route  from  Mary- 
land and  Yirginia  to  the  lower  Mis- 
sissippi. Before  he  made  Wheeling 
his  home,  he  had  spent  some  time  at 
Mount  Pleasant,  Ohio,  whither  he 
returned  after  learning  his  trade, 
and  remained  there  two  years,  dur- 
ing which  he  married  a  young  wo- 
man of  like  spirit  to  his  own.  He 
then,  after  a  long  visit  to  his  father 
in  New  Jersey,  settled  at  St.  Clairs- 
ville,  Ohio,  near  Wheeling,  and 
opened  a  shop,  by  which  in  four 
years  he  .made  about  three  thousand 
dollars  above  his  expenses,  and,  with 
a  loving  wife  and  two  children,  was 
as  happy  and  contented  with  his  lot 
as  any  man  need  be. 

But  the  impression  made  on  his 
mind  by  his  experiences  of  Slavery 
in  Wheeling  could  not  be  shaken  off 
nor  resisted.  In  the  year  1815,  when 
twenty-six  years  of  age,  he  organized 
an  anti-Slavery  association  known 
as  the  "  Union  Humane  Society," 
whereof  the  first  meeting  was  held 
at  his  own  house,  and  consisted  of 
but  five  or  six  persons.  Within  a  few 
months,  its  numbers  were  swelled  to 
four  or  five  hundred,  and  included 
the  best  and  most  prominent  citizens 
of  Belmont  and  the  adjacent  coun- 
ties. Lundy  wrote  an  appeal  to  phi- 
lanthropists on  the  subject  of  Slavery, 
which  was  first  printed  on  the  4th  of 
January,  1816,  being  his  twenty-sev- 
enth birthday.  Short  and  simple  as 
it  was,  it  contained  the  germ  of  the 
entire  anti- Slavery  movement.  A 


weekly  journal  entitled  The  Philan- 
thropist was  soon  after  started  at 
Mount  Pleasant  by  Charles  Osborne ; 
and  Lundy,  at  the  editor's  invitation, 
contributed  to  its  columns,  mainly  by 
selections.  In  a  few  months,  he  Was 
urged  by  Osborne  to  join  him  in  the 
newspaper  enterprise,  and  finally  con- 
sented to  do  so,  removing  to  Mount 
Pleasant.  Meantime,  he  made  a  voy- 
age to  St.  Louis  in  a  flat-boat  to  dis- 
pose of  his  stock  of  saddlery.  Arriv- 
ing at  that  city  in  the  fall  of  1819, 
when  the  whole  region  was  convulsed 
by  the  Missouri  Question,  he  was 
impelled  to  write  on  the  side  there 
unpopular  in  the  journals  of  the  day. 
His  speculation  proved  unfortunate 
— the  whole  West,  and,  indeed,  the 
whole  country,  being  then  involved 
in  a  commercial  convulsion,  with 
trade  stagnant  and  almost  every  one 
bankrupt.  He  returned  to  his  home 
on  foot  during  the  ensuing  winter, 
having  been  absent  nearly  two  years, 
and  lost  all  he  was  worth. 

Meantime,  Osborne,  tired  of  his 
thankless  and  profitless  vocation,  had 
sold  out  his  establishment,  and  it  had 
been  removed  to  Jonesborough,  Ten- 
nessee, where  his  newspaper  took  the 
title  of  The  Emancipator.  Lundy 
removed,  as  he  had  purposed,  to 
Mount  Pleasant,  and  there  started, 
in  January,  1821,  a  monthly  entitled 
The  Genius  of  Universal  Emanci- 
pation. He  commenced  it  with  six 
subscribers ;  himself  ignorant  of  print- 
ing and  without  materials;  having 
his  work  done  at  Steuben ville,  twenty 
miles  distant;  traveling  thither  fre- 
quently on  foot,  and  returning  with 
his  edition  on  his  back.  Four  months 
later,  he  had  a  very  considerable  sub- 
scription list.  About  this  time,  Elihu 
Embree,  who  had  started  The  Eman- 


ABOLITION  SOCIETIES  IN  THE  SOUTH. 


113 


cipator  in  Tennessee,  died,  and  Lundy 
was  urged  to  go  thither,  unite  the 
two  journals,  and  print  them  himself 
from  the  materials  of  The  Emancipa- 
tor. He  consented,  and  made  the 
journey  of  eight  hundred  miles,  one- 
half  on  foot  and  the  rest  by  water. 
At  Jonesborough,  he  learned  the  art 
of  printing,  and  was  soon  issuing  a 
weekly  newspaper  beside  The  Genius, 
and  a  monthly  agricultural  work.  He 
removed  his  family  a  few  months  later, 
and  East  Tennessee  was  thencefor- 
ward his  home  for  nearly  three  years, 
during  which  The  Genius  of  Univer- 
sal Eman  cipation  was  the  only  distinc- 
tively and  exclusively  anti-Slavery  pe- 
riodical issued  in  the  United  States, 
constantly  increasing  in  circulation 
and  influence.  And,  though  often 
threatened  with  personal  assault,  and 
once  shut  up  in  a  private  room  writh 
two  ruffians,  who  undertook  to  bully 
him  into  some  concession  by  a  flour- 
ish of  deadly  weapons,  he  was  at  no 
time  subjected  to  mob  violence  or 
legal  prosecution. 

In  the  winter  of  1823-4,  the  first 
American  Convention  for  the  Aboli- 
tion of  Slavery  was  held  in  Philadel- 
phia ;  and  Lundy  made  the  journey 
of  six  hundred  miles  and  back  on 
purpose  to  attend  it.  During  his 
tour,  he  decided  on  transferring  his 
establishment  to  Baltimore ;  and,  in 
the  summer  of  1824,  knapsack  on 
shoulder,  he  set  out  on  foot  for  that 
city.  On  the  way,  he  delivered,  at 
Deep  Creek,  North  Carolina,  his  first 
public  address  against  Slavery.  He 
spoke  in  a  beautiful  grove,  near  the 
Friends'  meeting-house  at  that  place, 
directly  after  divine  worship ;  and  the 
audience  were  so  well  satisfied  that 
they  invited  him  to  speak  again,  in 
their  place  of  worship.  Before  this 
8 


second  meeting  adjourned,  an  anti- 
Slavery  society  was  formed  ;  and  he 
proceeded  to  hold  fifteen  or  twenty 
similar  meetings  at  other  places  with- 
in that  State.  In  one  instance,  he 
spoke  at  a  house-raising ;  in  another, 
at  a  militia  muster.  Here  an  anti- 
Slavery  society  of  fourteen  members 
was  thereupon  formed,  with  the  cap- 
tain of  the  militia  company  for  its 
President.  One  of  his  meetings  was 
held  at  Raleigh,  the  capital.  Before 
he  had  left  the  State,  he  had  organ- 
ized twelve  or  fourteen  Abolition  So- 
cieties. He  continued  his  journey 
through  Yirginia,  holding  several 
meetings,  and  organizing  societies — 
of  course,  not  very  numerous,  nor 
composed  of  the  most  influential  per- 
sons. It  is  probable  that  his  Quaker 
brethren  supplied  him  with  introduc- 
tions from  place  to  place,  and  that 
his  meetings  were  held  at  the  points 
where  violent  opposition  was  least 
likely  to  be  offered. 

He  reached  Baltimore  about  the  1st 
of  October,  and  issued  on  the  10th 
No.  1  of  Yolume  IY.  of  the  "  Ge- 
nius," which  continued  to  be  well  sup- 
ported, though  receiving  little  encou- 
ragement from  Baltimore  itself.  A 
year  afterward,  it  began  to  be  issued 
weekly. 

Lundy  visited  Hayti  in  the  latter 
part  of  1825,  in  order  to  make  ar- 
rangements there  foi  the  reception  of 
a  number  of  slaves,  whose  masters 
were  willing  to  emancipate  them  on 
condition  of  their  removal  from  the 
country — in  fact,  were  not  allowed, 
by  the  laws  of  their  respective  States, 
to  free  them  otherwise.  Being  de- 
tained longer  than  he  had  expected, 
he  was  met,  on  his  return  to  Balti- 
more, with  tidings  of  the  death  of  his 
wife,  after  giving  birth  to  twins,,  and 


114  THE  AMERICA 

hastened  to  his  dwelling  to  find  it  en- 
tirely deserted,  his  five  children  hav- 
ing been  distributed  among  his 
friends.  In  that  hour  of  intense  af- 
fliction, he  renewed  his  solemn  vow 
to  devote  his  entire  energies  to  the 
cause  of  the  slave,  and  to  efforts  de- 
signed to  awaken  his  countrymen  to  a 
sense  of  their  responsibility  and  their 
danger.  In  1828,  he  traveled  east- 
ward, lecturing  and  soliciting  sub- 
scribers to  his  "  Genius,"  and  calling, 
in  New  York,  on  Arthur  Tappan, 
William  Groodell,  and  other  anti- 
Slavery  men.  At  Boston,  he  could 
hear  of  no  Abolitionists,  but  made 
the  acquaintance,  at  his  boarding- 
house,  of  William  Lloyd  Garrison, 
a  fellow-boarder,  whose  attention  had 
not  previously  been  drawn  to  the 
Slavery  question,  but  who  readily 
embraced  his  views.  He  visited  suc- 
cessively most  of  the  clergymen  of 
Boston,  and  induced  eight  of  them, 
belonging  to  various  sects,  to  meet 
him.  All  of  them,  on  explanation, 
approved  his  labors,  and  subscribed 
for  his  periodical ;  and,  in  the  course 
of  a  few  days,  they  aided  him  to  hold 
an  anti-Slavery  meeting,  which  was 
largely  attended.  At  the  close  of  his 
remarks,  several  clergymen  expressed 
a  general  concurrence  in  his  views. 
He  extended  his  journey  to  New 
Hampshire  and  Maine,  lecturing 
wThere  he  could,  and  obtaining  some 
encouragement.  He  spoke  also  in 
the  principal  towns  of  Massachusetts, 
Khode  Island,  and  Connecticut ;  and, 
on  his  homeward  route,  traversed  the 
State  of  New   York,  speaking  at 

9  Lundy's  brief  journal  of  this  tour  has  been 
preserved;  and,  next  to  an  entry  running — l,0n 
the  25th  I  arrived  at  Northampton,  Mass.,  after 
9  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  called  at  three 
taverns  before  I  could  get  lodgings  or  polite 
treatment1' — we  find  the  following : 


N  CONFLICT. 

Poughkeepsie,  Albany,9  Lockport, 
Utica,  and  Buffalo,  reaching  Balti- 
more late  in  October. 

Lundy  made  at  least  one  other 
visit  to  Hayti,  to  colonize  emancipat- 
ed slaves  ;  was  beaten  nearly  to  death 
in  Baltimore  by  a  slave-trader,  on 
whose  conduct  he  had  commented  in 
terms  which  seemed  disrespectful  to 
the  profession ;  was  flattered  by  the 
judge's  assurance,  when  the  trader 
came  to  be  tried  for  the  assault,  that 
"  he  [L.]  had  got  nothing  more  than 
he  deserved  ;"  and  he  made  two  long 
journeys  through  Texas,  to  the  Mexi- 
can departments  across  the  Rio 
Grande,  in  quest  of  a  suitable  lo- 
cation on  which  to  plant  a  colony 
of  freed  blacks  from  the  United 
States,  but  without  success.  He 
traveled  in  good  part  on  foot,  ob- 
serving the  strictest  economy,  and 
supporting  himself  by  working  at 
saddlery  and  harness-mending,  from 
place  to  place,  as  circumstances  re- 
quired. Meantime,  he  had  been 
compelled  to  remove  his  paper  from 
Baltimore  to  Washington;  and  final- 
ly (in  1836),  to  Philadelphia,  where 
it  was  entitled  The  National  In- 
quirer, and  at  last  merged  into  The 
Pennsylvania  Freeman.  His  colo- 
nizing enterprise  took  him  to  Mon- 
clova,  Comargo,  Monterey,  Matamo- 
ras,  and  Victoria,  in  Mexico,  and  con- 
sumed the  better  part  of  several 
years,  closing  in  1835.  He  also  made 
a  visit  to  the  settlements  in  Canada, 
of  fugitives  from  American  Slavery, 
to  inquire  into  the  welfare  of  their 
inhabitants.     On  the  17th  of  May, 

" September  6th — At  Albany,  I  made  some  ac- 
quaintances. Philanthropists  are  the  slowest  crea- 
tures breathing.  They  think  forty  times  before  they 
act." 

There  is  reason  to  fear  that  the  little  Quaker 
was  a  '  fanatic' 


WILLIAM  LLO 


YD  GARRISON. 


115 


1838,  at  the  burning  by  a  mob  of 
Pennsylvania  Hall — built  by  Aboli- 
tionists, because  they  could  be  heard 
in  no  other — his  little  property,  con- 
sisting mainly  of  papers,  books, 
clothes,  etc.,  which  had  been  collected 
in  one  of  the  rooms  of  that  Hall, 
with  a  view  to  his  migration  west- 
ward, was  totally  destroyed.  In  July, 
he  started  for  Illinois,  where  his  chil- 
dren then  resided,  and  reached  them 
in  the  September  following.  He 
planted  himself  at  Lowell,  La  Salle 
county,  gathered  his  offspring  about 
him,  purchased  a  printing-office,  and 
renewed  the  issues  of  his  "  Genius." 
But  in  August,  1839,  he  was  attacked 
by  a  prevailing  fever,  of  which  he 
died  on  the  22d  of  that  month,  in  the 
51st  year  of  his  age.  Thus  closed 
the  record  of  one  of  the  most  heroic, 
devoted,  unselfish,  courageous  lives, 
that  has  ever  been  lived  on  this  con- 
tinent.10 


William  Lloyd  Garrison,  born  in 
obscurity  and  indigence,  at  Newbury- 
port,  Massachusetts,  in  1805,  and 
educated  a  printer,  after  having  tried 
his  boyish  hand  at  shoe-making,  wood- 
sawing,  and  cabinet-making,  started 
The  Free  Press,  in  his  native  place, 
directly  upon  attaining  his  majority ; 
but  Kewburyport  was  even  then  a 
slow  old  town,  and  his  enterprise  soon 
proved  unsuccessful.  He  migrated 
to  Boston,  worked  a  few  months  as 
a  journeyman  printer,  and  then  be- 
came editor  of  The  National  Philan- 
thropist, an  organ  of  the  Temperance 
movement.  He  left  this  early  in  1828, 
to  become  editor,  at  Bennington,  Ver- 
mont, of  The  Journal  of  the  Times,  a 
"  National  Republican"  gazette,  and 
about  the  ablest  and  most  interesting 


newspaper  ever  issued  in  that  State. 
Though  earnestly  devoted  to  the  re- 
election of  John  Quincy  Adams,  as 
President,  it  gave  a  hearty  support 
to  the  Temperance,  Anti-Slavery,  and 
other  Reform  projects,  and  promoted 
the  extensive  circulation  and  signa- 
ture of  memorials  to  Congress,  urging 
the  banishment  of  Slavery  from  the 
District  of  Columbia.  But  its  pa- 
tronage was  unequal  to  its  merits ; 
and,  Mr.  Adams  having  been  defeat- 
ed, its  publication  was  soon  afterward 
discontinued. 

Mr.  Garrison  was,  about  this  time, 
visited  by  Lundy,  and  induced  to 
join  him  in  the  editorship  of  The 
Genius  at  Baltimore,  whither  he  ac- 
cordingly proceeded  in  the  Autumn 
of  1829.  Lundy  had  been  a  zealous 
supporter  of  Adams ;  and,  under  his 
auspices,  a  single  Emancipation  can- 
didate for  the  Legislature  had  been 
repeatedly  presented  in  Baltimore, 
receiving,  at  one  election,  more  than 
nine  hundred  votes.  Garrison,  in 
his  first  issue,  insisted  on  immediate 
and  unconditional  Emancipation  as 
the  right  of  the  slave  and  the  duty  of 
the  master,  and  disclaimed  all  tem- 
porizing, all  make-shifts,  all  com- 
promises, condemning  Colonization, 
and  everything  else  that  involved 
or  implied  affiliation  or  sympathy 
with  slaveholders.  Having,  at 
length,  denounced  the  coastwise 
slave-trade  between  Baltimore  and 
New  Orleans  as  "  domestic  piracy," 
and  stigmatized  by  name  certain 
Baltimoreans  concerned  therein,  he 
was  indicted  for  "  a  gross  and  mali- 
cious libel"  on  those  worthies,  con- 
victed, sentenced  to  pay  fifty  dollars' 
fine  and  costs,  and,  in  default  there- 
of, committed  to  jail.    A  judgment 


10  Condensed  from  the  "  Life  of  Benjamin  Lundy,"  by  Thomas  Earle. 


116 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


in  behalf  of  one  of  these  aggrieved 
persons  of  $1,000  and  costs  was  like- 
wise obtained  against  him  on  a  civil 
suit,  but  never  enforced.  He  remain- 
ed forty-nine  days  in  prison,  during 
which  his  case  excited  much  sympa- 
thy, a  protest  against  his  incarcera- 
tion having  been  issued  by  the  Manu- 
mission Society  of  North  Carolina. 
At  length,  the  fine  and  costs  were 
paid  by  Arthur  Tappan,  then  a 
wealthy  and  generous  ~New  York 
merchant,  who  anticipated,  by  a  few 
days,  a  similar  act  meditated  by  Hen- 
ry Clay.  Separating  himself  from 
Lundy  and  The  Genius,  Mr.  Garri- 
son now  proposed  the  publication  of 
an  anti-Slavery  organ  in  Washington 
City ;  but,  after  traveling  and  lec- 
turing through  the  great  cities,  and 
being  prevented  by  violence  from 
speaking  in  Baltimore,  he  concluded 
to  issue  his  journal  from  Boston  in- 
stead of  Washington ;  and  the  first 
number  of  The  Liberator  appeared 
accordingly  on  the  1st  of  January, 
1830.  It  was,  from  the  outset,  as 
thorough-going  as  its  editor ;  and  its 
motto — "  Our  Country  is  the  World 
— Our  Countrymen  are  all  Mankind" 
— truly  denoted  its  character  and 
spirit.  "  No  Union  with  slaveholders" 

11  "  The  broadest  and  most  far-sighted  intellect 
is  utterly  unable  to  see  the  ultimate  consequen- 
ces of  any  great  social  change.  Ask  yourself, 
on  all  such  occasions,  if  there  be  any  element  of 
right  or  wrong  in  the  question,  any  principle  of 
clear,  natural  justice,  that  turns  the  scale.  If 
so,  take  your  part  with  the  perfect  and  abstract 
right,  and  trust  God  to  see  that  it  shall  prove 
the  expedient," — Wendell  Phillips' 's  Speeches  and 
Lectures,  p.  18. 

"  The  time  has  been  when  it  was  the  duty  of 
the  reformer  to  show  cause  why  he  offered  to 
disturb  the  quiet  of  the  world.  But,  during  the 
discussion  of  the  many  reforms  which  have  been 
advocated,  and  which  have  more  or  less  succeed- 
ed, one  after  another — freedom  of  the  lower 
classes,  freedom  of  food,  freedom  of  the  press, 
freedom  of  thought,  reform  in  penal  legislation, 
and  a  thousand  other  matters — it  seems  to  me 
to  have  been  proved  conclusively,  that  govern- 


was  adopted  as  a  principle  some 
years  later  ;  as  was  the  doctrine  that 
"  The  [Federal]  Constitution  is  a 
covenant  with  death,  and  an  agree- 
ment with  hell."  To  wage  against 
Slavery  an  uncompromising,  unre- 
lenting war,  asking  no  quarter  and 
giving  none — to  regard  and  proclaim 
the  equal  and  inalienable  rights  of 
every  innocent  human  being  as  infe- 
rior or  subordinate  to  those  of  no 
other,  and  to  repudiate  all  creeds,  all 
alleged  revelations,  rituals,  constitu- 
tions, governments,  parties,  politics, 
that  reject,  defy,  or  ignore  this  fun- 
damental truth — such  is  and  has  been 
the  distinctive  idea  of  the  numerical- 
ly small,  but  able  and  thoroughly 
earnest  class,  known  as  "  Garrisoni- 
ans."11  They  for  many  years  gener- 
ally declined,  and  some  of  them  still 
decline,  to  vote,  deeming  the  Gov- 
ernment and  all  parties  so  profoundly 
corrupted  by  Slavery,  that  no  one 
could  do  so  without  dereliction  from 
principle  and  moral  defilement.  And, 
though  the  formal  and  definitive  sep- 
aration did  not  take  place  till  1839, 
the  alienation  between  the  Garrisoni- 
ans  and  the  larger  number  of  Anti- 
Slavery  men  had  long  been  decided 
and  irremediable.    A  very  few  years, 

ment  commenced  in  usurpation  and  oppression; 
that  liberty  and  civilization,  at  present,  are  noth- 
ing else  than  the  fragments  of  rights  which  the 
scaffold  and  the  stake  have  wrung  from  the 
strong  hands  of  the  usurpers.  Every  step  of 
progress  the  world  has  made  has  been  from 
scaffold  to  scaffold,  and  from  stake  to  stake.  It 
would  hardly  be  exaggeration  to  say,  that  all  the 
great  truths  relating  to  society  and  government 
have  been  first  heard  in  the  solemn  protests  of 
martyred  patriotism,  or  the  loud  cries  of  crushed 
and  starving  labor.  The  law  has  been  always 
wrong." — Ibid.,  p.  14. 

"An  intelligent  democracy  says  of  Slavery  as 
of  a  church,  'This  is  justice  and  that  iniquity.' 
The  track  of  God's  thunderbolt  is  a  straight  line 
from  one  to  the  other,  and  the  Church  or  State 
that  cannot  stand  it,  must  get  out  of  the  way."— 
Ibid.,  p.  267. 


THE  CHURCHES 


AND  SLAVERY. 


117 


dating  from  1832-3,  when  the  New 
England  and  the  American  Anti- 
Slavery  Societies  were  formed  re- 
spectively, sufficed  to  segregate  the 
American  opponents  of  Slavery  into 
four  general  divisions,  as  follows : 

1.  The  "  Garrisonians"  aforesaid. 

2.  The  members  of  the  "Liberty 
party,"  12  who,  regarding  the  Federal 
Constitution  as  essentially  an ti- Slave- 
ry, swore  with  good  conscience  to 
uphold  it,  and  supported  only  can- 
didates who  were  distinctively,  deter- 
minedly, pre-eminently,  champions  of 
"  Liberty  for  all." 

3.  Various  small  sects  and  parties, 
which  occupied  a  middle  ground  be- 
tween the  above  positions ;  some  of 
the  sects  agreeing  with  the  latter  in 
interpreting  and  revering  the  Bible 
as  consistently  anti-Slavery,  while  re- 
fusing, with  the  former,  to  vote. 

4.  A  large  and  steadily  increas- 
ing class  who,  though  decidedly  anti- 


Slavery,  refused  either  to  withhold 
their  votes,  or  to  throw  them  away 
on  candidates  whose  election  was  im- 
possible, but  persisted  in  voting,  at 
nearly  every  election,  so  as  to  effect 
good  and  prevent  evil  to  the  extent 
of  their  power. 

An  artful  and  persistent  ignoring 
of  all  distinction  between  these  class- 
es, and  thus  covering  Abolitionists  in- 
discriminately with  odium,  as  hostile 
to  Christianity  and  to  the  Constitu- 
tion, was  long  the  most  effective 
weapon  in  the  armory  of  their  com-  , 
mon  foes.  Thousands,  whose  con- 
sciences and  hearts  would  naturally 
have  drawn  them  to  the  side  of  hu- 
manity and  justice,  were  repelled  by 
vociferous  representations  that  to  do 
so  would  identify  them  with  the  "  dis- 
union" of  Wendell  Phillips,  the 
"  radicalism"  of  Henry  C.  "Wright, 
and  the  "infidelity"  of  Pillsbury, 
Theodore  Parker,  and  Garrison. 


X. 

THE  CHUKCHES  AND  SLAYEEY. 


We  have  seen  that  the  Revolution- 
ary era  and  the  Revolutionary  spirit 
of  our  country  were  profoundly  hos- 
tile to  Slavery,  and  that  they  were 
not  content  with  mere  protests 
against  an  evil  which  positive  efforts, 
determined  acts,  were  required  to 
remove.    Before  the  Revolution,  in- 

12 Sundry  differences  respecting  ""Woman's 
Rights"— whereof  the  Garrisonians  were  stanch 
asserters — and  other  incidental  questions,  were 
the  immediate  causes  of  the  rupture  between 
the  Garrisonians  and  the  political  Abolitionists, 
whereby  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society  was 
convulsed  by  the  secession  of  the  latter  in  1840; 


deed,  a  religious  opposition  to  Slave- 
ry, whereof  the  society  of  Christian 
Friends  or  Quakers  were  the  pio- 
neers, had  been  developed  both  in 
the  mother  country  and  in  her  colo- 
nies. George  Fox,  the  first  Quaker, 
bore  earnest  testimony,  so  early  as 
1671,  on  the  occasion  of  his  visit  to 

but  the  ultimate  causes  of  the  rupture  were 
deeper  than  these.  As  a  body,  the  Garrisonians 
were  regarded  as  radical  in  politics  and  heterodox 
in  theology ;  and  the  more  Orthodox,  conserva- 
tive, and  especially  the  clerical  Abolitionists,  in- 
creasingly disliked  the  odium  incited  by  the 
sweeping  utterances  of  the  Garrisonian  leaders. 


113 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Barbadoes,  against  the  prevalent  cru- 
elty and  inhumanity  with  which  ne- 
gro slaves  were  then  treated  in  that 
island,  and  urged  their  gradual  eman- 
cipation. His  letter  implies  that  some 
of  his  disciples  were  slaveholders..  Yet 
it  was  not  till  1727  that  the  yearly 
meeting  of  the  whole  society  in  Lon- 
don declared  "the  importing  of  ne- 
groes from  their  native  country  and 
relations,  by  Friends,  not  a  commend- 
able or  allowable  practice."  Nearly 
thirty  years  before,  the  yearly  meet- 
ing in  Philadelphia  (1696)  took  a 
step  in  advance  of  this,  admonishing 
their  members  to  be  careful  not  to 
encourage  the  bringing  in  of  any 
more  negroes,  and  that  those  who 
have  negroes  be  careful  of  them, 
bring  them  to  meeting,  etc.,  etc.  It 
thus  appears  that  Quakers,  like  other 
Christians,  were  then  not  only  slave- 
holders, but  engaged  in  the  Slave- 
Trade.  In  1754,  the  American  Qua- 
kers had  advanced  to  the  point  of 
publicly  recommending  their  socie- 
ties to  "  advise  and  deal  with  such  as 
engage  in"  the  Slave-Trade.  Again  : 
slaveholding  Quakers  were  urged — 
not  to  emancipate  their  slaves — but 
to  care  for  their  morals,  and  treat 
them  humanely.  The  British  Qua- 
kers came  up  to  this  mark  in  1758 — 
four  vears  later ;  and  more  decidedly 
in  1761  and  1763.  In  1774,  the  Phil- 
adelphia meeting  directed  that  all 
persons  engaged  in  any  form  of  slave- 
trading  be  "disowned ;"  and  in  1776 
took  the  decisive  and  final  step  by  di- 
recting "  that  the  owners  of  slaves,  who 
refused  to  execute  the  proper  instru- 
ments for  giving  them  their  freedom, 
be  disowned  likewise."  This  blow 
hit  the  nail  on  the  head.  In  1781, 
but  "one  case"  requiring  discipline 


under  this  head  was  reported ;  and 
in  1783,  it  duly  appeared  that  there 
were  no  slaves  owned  by  its  mem- 
bers.1 The  coincidence  of  these  later 
dates  with  the  origin,  progress,  and 
close  of  our  Revolutionary  struggle, 
is  noteworthy.  The  New  York  and 
Rhode  Island  yearly  meetings  passed 
almost  simultaneously  through  the 
same  stages  to  like  results;  that  of 
Yirginia  pursued  a  like  course ;  but, 
meeting  greater  obstacles,  was  longer 
in  overcoming  them.  It  discouraged 
the  purchasing  of  slaves  in  1766  ;  ur- 
gently recommended  manumission  in 
1773;  yet,  so  late  as  1787,  its  annual 
reports  stated  that  some  members  still 
held  slaves.  But  it  is  understood  that 
Slavery  and  Quakerism,  throughout 
the  South,  had  very  little  communion 
or  sympathy  after  the  Revolution, 
and  were  gradually  and  finally  di- 
vorced so  early  as  1800.  Hence,  as 
Slavery  grew  stronger  and  more  in- 
tolerant there,  Quakerism  gradually 
faded  out ;  so  that  its  adherents  were 
probably  fewer  in  that  section  in 
1860  than  they  had  been  eighty  years 
before. 

Of  other  religious  denominations, 
none  of  the  more  important  and  popu- 
lar, which  date  back  to  the  earlier 
periods  of  our  colonial  history,  can 
show  even  so  fair  a  record  as  the 
above.  By  the  Roman  Catholics  and 
Protestant  Episcopalians,  generally, 
Slaveholding  has  never  been,  and  is 
not  yet,  considered  inconsistent  with 
piety,  and  a  blameless,  exemplary, 
Christian  life.  Individuals  in  these, 
as  in  other  communions,  have  con- 
spicuously condemned  and  earnestly 
opposed  Human  Slavery;  but  the 
general  influence  of  these  churches  in 
our  country,  and  especially  of  their 


1  Clarkson's  History. 


THE   PRESBYTERIANS   AXD  SLAVERY. 


119 


hierarchies,  has  been  adverse  to  the 
practical  recognition  of  every  inno- 
cent man's  right  to  his  own  limbs  and 
sinews,  and  to  sell  or  employ  his  own 
labor  as  to  himself  shall  seem  best. 

The  Presbyterian,  Congregational, 
Baptist,  and  kindred  "  Orthodox" 
denominations,  have  no  very  consist- 
ent or  luminous  record  on  this  sub- 
ject. Thus,  the  Presbyterian  Gen- 
eral Assembly  did,  at  its  session  in 
1794 — long  before  its  division  into 
"Old  School"  and  "  New  School"— 
adopt  a  note  to  one  of  the  questions 
in  its  longer  Catechism,  wherein,  ex- 
pounding and  applying  the  Eighth 
Commandment,  it  affirmed  that  the 
Biblical  condemnation  of  "  man- 
stealers" 

"  comprehends  all  who  are  concerned  in 
bringing  any  of  the  human  race  into  Slavery, 
or  retaining  them  therein.  Stealers  of  men 
are  those  who  bring  off  slaves  or  freemen, 
and  Jceep,  sell,  or  buy  them.  To  steal  a 
freeman,  says  Grotius,  is  the  highest  kind 
of  theft,"  etc.,  etc. 

But  this  note  was  directed  to  be 
erased  by  the  General  Assembly  of 
1816,  in  a  resolve  which  characterizes 
Slavery  as  a  "  mournful  evil,"  but 
does  not  direct  that  the  churches  be 
purged  of  it.  In  1S18,  a  fresh  As- 
sembly adopted  an  "Expression  of 
Yiews,"  wherein  Slavery  is  reprobat- 
ed as  a 

"gross  violation  of  the  most  precious  and 
sacred  rights  of  human  nature,  utterly  incon- 
sistent with  the  law  of  God,  which  requires 
us  to  love  our  neighbor  as  ourselves,  and  to- 
tally irreconcilable  with  the  spirit  and  prin- 
ciples of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  which  enjoin 
that  '  all  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that 
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  also  to  them.'  " 

But,  instead  of  requiring  its  mem- 
bers to  clear  themselves,  and  keep 
clear,  of  slaveholding,  the  Assembly 
exhorted  them  to  "  continue  and  in- 
crease their  exertions  to  effect  a  total 
abolition  of  Slavery,  with  no  greater 


delay  than  a  regard  for  the  public 
welfare  demands  /"  and  recommend- 
ed that,  if  "a  Christian  professor 
shall  sell  a  slave,  who  is  also  in  com- 
munion with  our  Church" — said  slave 
not  being  a  consenting  party  to  the 
sale — the  seller  be  "  suspended  till  he 
shall  repent  and  make  reparation !" 
It  need  hardly  be  added  that,  with 
few  and  spasmodic  exceptions,  the 
Presbyterian  Church  thenceforth  was 
found  apologizing  for  Slavery,  and 
censuring  its  determined  assailants 
far  oftener  than  doing  or  devising 
anything  to  hasten  that  "  total  aboli- 
tion," which  it  had  solemnly  pro- 
nounced a  requirement  of  Christian- 
ity. And,  though  the  Synod  of  Ken- 
tucky, in  1835,  adopted  a  report  on 
Slavery,  which  condemned  slave- 
holding  broadly  and  thoroughly,  and 
reprobated  the  domestic  slave-trade 
as  revolting,  even  horrible,  in  its 
cruelty,  the  same  report  admits  that 
"  those  who  hold  to  our  communion, 
are  involved  in  it;"  and  no  action 
was  taken  whereby  they  should  be 
required  to  choose  between  their  con- 
nection with  the  Church  and  persist- 
I  ence  in  buying,  holding,  and  selling 
|  men,  women,  and  children,  as  slaves. 

Is  or  did  the  division  of  this  Church, 
I  which  occurred  not  long  afterward, 
work  any  improvement  in  this  re- 
spect. A  majority  of  the  slaveholding 
members,  doubtless,  adhered  to  the 
"Old    School;"    but    the  "ISTew 
School"  did  not   see  fit  to  make 
slaveholding  a  bar  to  its  communion. 
On  the  contrary,  certain  Presbyteries 
having  done  so,  the  General  Assem- 
bly of  1843  cen sirred  their  action,  and 
required  that  it  be  rescinded.  And 
though,  in  1846,  the  next  General 
|  Assembly  reiterated,  in  substance, 
|  the  broad  condemnation  of  Slavery 


120 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


contained  in  the  Expression  of  Views 
in  1818,  and  in  1849  proclaimed  that 

"  there  has  been  no  information  before  this 
Assembly  to  prove  that  the  members  of  our 
Church,  in  the  Slave  States,  are  not  doing 
all  they  can  (situated  as  they  are,  ,in  the 
providence  of  God)  to  bring  about  the  pos- 
session and  enjoyment  of  liberty  by  the  en- 
slaved," 

it  is  as  certain  as  that  "  fine  words 
butter  no  parsnips,"  that  slaves  con- 
tinued to  be  bought,  held,  and  sold 
by  members  of  the  "  Xew,"  as  well 
as  of  the  "Old  School"  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  that,  while  Abolitionists 
were  subject  to  continued  and  un- 
sparing denunciation  in  the  common 
as  well  as  the  special  organs  and 
utterances  of  these  rival  sects,  slave- 
holders often  filled  the  highest  seats 
in  their  respective  synagogues,  and 
Slavery  regarded  their  aimless  denun- 
ciations and  practical  tolerance  with 
serene  complacency. 

"With  the  Baptists  and  Methodists 
— two  very  numerous  and  important 
denominations — the  case  was  some- 
what different.  Each  of  these 
churches  was  originally  anti-Slavery. 
The  Methodists,  in  the  infancy  of 
their  communion,  were  gathered 
mainly  from  among  the  poor  and 
despised  classes,  and  had  much  more 
affiliation  with  slaves  than  with  their 
masters.  Their  discipline  could  with 
great  difficulty  be  reconciled  with 
slaveholding  by  their  laity,  while  it 
decidedly  could  not  be  made  to  per- 
mit slaveholding  on  the  part  of  their 
Bishops ;  and  this  impelled  the  seces- 
sion, some  twenty  years  since,  of  the 
"  Methodist  Church  South,  carrying 
off  most,  but  not  all,  of  the  churches 
located  in  the  Slave  States.  The 
General  Conference  held  at  Cincin- 
nati in  1836   solemnly  disclaimed 


"  any  right,  wish,  or  intention,  to  in- 
terfere with  the  civil  and  political 
relation  between  master  and  slave,  as 
it  exists  in  the  slaveholding  States  of 
this  Union,"  condemned  two  minis- 
ters who  had  delivered  Abolition  lec- 
tures, and  declared  the  opponents 
of  Abolition  "true  friends  to  the 
Church,  to  the  slaves  of  the  South, 
and  to  the  Constitution  of  our  Coun- 

toy." 

The  Baptists  of  Virginia,  in  Gen- 
eral Assembly,  1789,  upon  a  reference 
from  the  session  of  the  preceding 
year,  on  motion  of  Elder  John  Le- 
land, 

"  Resolved,  That  Slavery  is  a  violent  de- 
privation of  the  rights  of  nature,  and  incon- 
sistent with  republican  government ;  and 
therefore  we  recommend  it  to  our  brethren 
to  make  use  of  every  measure  to  extirpate 
this  horrid  evil  from  the  land ;  and  pray  Al- 
mighty God  that  our  honorable  Legislature 
may  have  it  in  their  power  to  proclaim  the 
great  jubilee,  consistent  with  the  principles 
of  good  policy." 

But  no  similar  declaration  has 
been  made  by  any  Southern  Baptist 
State  Convention  since  field-hands 
rose  to  $1,000  each,  and  black  in- 
fants, at  birth,  were  accounted  worth 
$100.  On  the  contrary,  the  South- 
ern Baptists  have  for  thirty  years 
been  among  the  foremost  champions 
of  slaveholding  as  righteous  and 
Christian,  and  the  Savannah  Eiver 
Baptist  Association  in  1835  gravely 
decided  that  slave  husbands  and 
wives,  separated  by  sale,  should  be 
at  liberty  to  take  new  partners ;  be- 
cause i 

"such  separation,  among  persons  situated  as 
our  slaves  are,  is  civilly  a  separation  by 
death,  and  they  believe  that,  in  the  sight  of 
God,  it  would  be  so  viewed.  To  forbid 
second  marriages,  in  such  cases,  would  be 
to  expose  the  parties  not  only  to  greater 
hardships  and  stronger  temptations,  but  to 
church  censure  for  acting  in  obedience  to 
their  masters"  etc.,  etc. 


THE    CHURCHES    AND  ABOLITION. 


121 


Thus  adapting  Christianity  to 
Slavery,  instead  of  requiring  that 
Slavery  be  made  to  square  with  the 
requirements  of  Christianity.  And 
this  is  a  fair  specimen  of  what  has 
passed  for  religion  at  the  South  for 
the  last  thirty  or  forty  years. 

In  full  view  of  these  facts,  the 
^Northern  and  Southern  Baptists  met 
for  thirty  years  in  Triennial  Conven- 
tion, over  which  slaveholders  usually 
presided,  and  wherein  the  righteous- 
ness of  slaveholding  could  not,  there- 
fore, without  seeming  rudeness,  be 
questioned.  Abolition  might  be  free- 
ly stigmatized ;  slaveholding  was  ta- 
citly admitted  to  be  just  and  proper 
by  the  very  constitution  of  the  body. 
And  by  no  sect  or  class  have  anti- 
Slavery  inculcations  been  more  viru- 
lently reprobated  than  by  the  Bap- 
tists of  the  South. 

The  Free-Will  Baptists,  several 
bodies  of  Scottish  Covenanters,  and 
other  offsets  from  the  original  Pres- 
byterian stock,  with  certain  of  the 
Methodist  dissenters  or  seceders  from 
the  great  Methodist  Episcopal  organ- 
ization, have  generally  maintained  an 
attitude  of  hostility  to  Slavery.  So, 
of  late  years,  have  the  greater  num- 
ber of  Unitarian  and  Universalist  con- 
ventions. But  all  these  together  are 
a  decided  minority  of  the  American 
People,  or  even  of  the  professing 
Christians  among  them  ;  and  they 
do  not  at  all  shake  the  general  truth 
that  the  anti- Slavery  cause,  through- 
out the  years  of  its  arduous  and  per- 
ilous struggle  up  from  contempt  and 
odium  to  respect  and  power,  received 


far  more  of  hindrance  than  of  help 
from  our  ecclesiastical  organizations. 
And  this  fact  explains,  if  it  does  not 
excuse,  the  un-Orthodox,"  irreverent, 
and  ''infidel"  tendencies  which  have 
been  so  freely,  and  not  always  unrea- 
sonably, ascribed  to  the  apostles  of 
!  Abolition.  These  have  justly  felt  that 
j  the  organized  and  recognized  religion 
I  of  the  country  has  not  treated  their 
cause  as  it  deserved  and  as  they  had  a 
right  to  expect.  The  pioneers  of  "  mod- 
ern Abolition"  were  almost  uniformly 
devout,  pious,  church-nurtured  men, 
who,  at  the  outset  of  their  enterprise, 
took  the  cause  of  the  slave  s  to  the 
Clergy  and  the  Church,  with  un doubt- 
ing faith  that  it  would  there  be  rec- 
ognized and  by  them  adopted  as  the 
cause  of  vital  Christianity.  Speaking 
generally,  they  were  repulsed  and  re- 
sisted, quite  as  much  to  their  aston- 
ishment as  their  mortification  ;  and 
the  resulting  estrangement  and  hos- 
tility were  proportioned  to  the  full- 
ness of  their  trust,  the  bitterness  of 
their  disappointment.3  It  would  have 
been  wiser,  doubtless,  to  have  for- 
borne, and  trusted,  and  reasoned,  and 
remonstrated,  and  supplicated;  but 
patience  and  policy  are  not  the  vir- 
tues for  which  reformers  are  apt  to 
be  distinguished ;  since,  were  they 
prudent  and  politic,  they  would  choose 
some  safer  and  sunnier  path.  !N"o  in- 
surance company  that  had  taken  a 
large  risk  on  the  life  of  John  the 
Baptist  would  have  counseled  or  ap- 
proved his  freedom  of  speech  with 
regard  to  the  domestic  relations  of 
Herod. 


s  Witness  Lundy  and  Garrison  at  Boston,  1S28. 

3  M  Alas !  they  had  been  friends  in  youth  ; 
But  whispering  tongues  can  poison  truth, 
And  constancy  lives  in  realms  above ; 


And  life  is  thorny  and  youth  is  vain : 

And  to  be  wroth  with  one  we  love, 
Doth  work  like  madness  on  the  brain." 

— Coleridge's  ChristabeL 


122 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


XL 

THE  PKO-SLAYEEY  KEACTIOK 


The  Liberator,  by  its  uncompro- 
mising spirit  and  unsparing  denunci- 
ations, soon  challenged  and  secured, 
to  an  extent  quite  unprecedented,  the 
attention  of  adversaries.  Treating 
Slavery  uniformly  as  a  crime  to  be  re- 
pented, a  wrong  to  be  righted  at  the 
earliest  moment,  if  it  did  not  convince 
the  understanding  of  slaveholders,  it 
at  least  excited  their  wrath.  Before  it 
had  been  issued  a  year,  while  it  had 
probably  less  than  a  thousand  subscri- 
bers, and  while  its  editor  and  his  part- 
ner were  still  working  all  day  as  jour- 
neymen printers,  sleeping,  after  some 
hours'  editorial  labor,  at  night  on  the 
floor  of  their  little  sky-parlor  office, 
and  dreaming  rather  of  how  or  where 
to  get  money  or  credit  for  the  paper 
required  for  next  week's  issue  than 
of  troubling  the  repose  of  States,  they 
were  flattered  by  an  act  of  the  Legis- 
lature of  Georgia,  unanimously  pass- 
ed, and  duly  approved  by  Governor 
Lumpkin,  offering  the  liberal  reward 
of  $5,000  to  whomsoever  should  ar- 
rest, bring  to  trial,  and  prosecute  to 
conviction,  either  of  them  under  the 
laws  of  that  State — the  arrest  be- 
ing the  only  difficult  matter.1  There 
was  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  prof- 
fer was  made  in  good  faith,  and  that 
the  stipulated  reward  would  have 
been  more  promptly  and  cheerfully 
paid  than  Southern  debts  are  apt  to 

1  Harrison  Gray  Otis,  the  wealthy  and  aristo- 
cratic Mayor  of  Boston,  being  required  by  a 
Southern  magistrate  to  suppress  The  Liberator — 
which  was  probably  the  first  he  had  heard  of  it 
— in  due  season  reported  that  his  officers  had 
"ferreted  out  the  paper  and  its  editor,  whose 
office  was  an  obscure  hole,  his  only  visible  aux- 


be.  Other  such  rewards  of  $10,000, 
$50,000,  and  even  $100,000,  for  the 
bodies  or  the  heads  of  prominent 
Abolitionists,  were  from  time  to  time 
advertised;  but  these  plagiarisms  were 
seldom  responsibly  backed,  and  "prov- 
ed only  the  anxiety  of  the  offerers 
to  distinguish  themselves  and  cheaply 
win  a  local  popularity.  Their  aspect 
was  not  business-like.  In  several  in- 
stances, Southern  grand  juries  grave- 
ly indicted  Northern  "  agitators"  for 
offenses  against  the  peace  and  dig- 
nity of  their  respective  States  ;  and  in 
at  least  one  case  a  formal  requisition 
was  made  upon  the  Governor  of  New 
York  for  the  surrender  of  an  Aboli- 
tionist who  had  never  trod  the  soil  of 
the  offended  State ;  but  the  Governor 
(Marcy),  though  ready  to  do  what  he 
lawfully  could  to  propitiate  Southern 
favor,  was  constrained  respectfully  to 
decline. 

That  "  error  of  opinion  may  be  safe- 
ly tolerated  where  reason  is  left  free 
to  combat  it," 2  is  a  truth  that  does 
not  seem  to  have  occurred  either  to 
the  Southern  or  Northern  contemners 
of  the  Garrisonian  ultras.  In  fact,  it 
does  not  seem  to  have  irradiated  the 
minds  of  the  chief  priests,  scribes  and 
Pharisees  of  Christ's  day,  nor  those 
of  the  hereditary  champions  of  estab- 
lished institutions  and  gainful  tradi- 
tions at  almost  any  time.  The  South- 

iliary  a  negro  boy,  his  supporters  a  few  insignif- 
icant persons  of  all  colors" — whence  the  said 
Otis  concluded  that  his  paper  ought  not  to  dis- 
turb the  slumbers  of  the  quite  significant  and 
potent  Southrons.  The  superficial,  purblind 
Mayor ! 

2  Jefferson's  Inaugural  Address. 


GEN.   JACKSON  FOR  PENAL  LEGISLATION. 


123 


ern  journals  and  other  oracles  im- 
periously, wathfully,  demanded  the 
instant  suppression  and  extinction  of 
the  "incendiaries"  and  "fanatics," 
under  the  usual  penalty  of  a  dissolu- 
tion of  the  Union  ; 3  to  which  was  now 
added  the  annihilation  of  Northern 
prosperity  and  consequence  through 
a  retributive  withdrawal  of  Southern 
trade.4  The  commercial  and  polit- 
ical interests  at  the  North,  which 
regarded  Southern  favor  as  the  sheet- 
anchor  of  their  hopes,  eagerly  re- 
sponded to  these  overtures,  clamoring 
for  penal  enactments  and  popular 
proofs  of  Northern  fidelity  to  Consti- 
tutional obligations.  The  former  were 
not  forthcoming;  in  fact,  the  most 
adroit  and  skillful  draftsman  would 
have  found  it  difficult  to  frame  any 
such  law  as  was  required — any  one 
that  would  have  subserved  the  end 
in  view — that  would  not  have  directly 
and  glaringly  contravened  the  consti- 
tution or  bill  of  rights  of  even  the 
I  most "  conservative"  State.  Yet  Pres- 
ident Jackson  did  not  hesitate,  in 
his  Annual  Message  of  December  2, 
1835,  to  say : 

"  I  must  also  invite  your  attention  to  the 
painful  excitement  produced  in  the  South 
by  attempts  to  circulate,  through  the  mails, 
inflammatory  appeals  addressed  to  the  pas- 
sions of  the  slaves,  in  prints,  and  in  various 

3  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  Augusta 
(Ga.)  Chronicle  of  October,  1833. 

"  We  firmly  believe  that,  if  the  Southern  States 

do  not  quickly  unite,  and  declare  to  the  North,  if 
;  the  question  of  Slavery  be  longer  discussed  in  any 

shape,  they  will  instantly  secede  from  the  Union, 
;  that  the  question  must  be  settled,  and  very  soon, 

by  the  sword,  as  the  only  possible  means  of 

self-preservation." 

February  16,  1836,  both  houses  of  the  Vir- 
ginia Legislature  agreed  to  the  following : 

"Resolved,  That  the  non-slaveholding  States 
of  the  Union  are  respectfully  but  earnestly  re- 
i  quested  promptly  to  adopt  penal  enactments,  or 
such  other  measures  as  will  effectually  suppress 
|-  all  associations  within  their  respective  limits  pur- 
!  porting  to  be,  or  having  the  character  of,  Aboli- 
tion societies." 


sorts  of  publications,  calculated  to  stimulate 
them  to  insurrection,  and  to  produce  all  the 
horrors  of  a  servile  war. 

"  There  is,  doubtless,  no  respectable  por- 
tion of  our  fellow-countrymen  who  can  bo 
so  far  misled  as  to  feel  any  other  sentiment 
than  that  of  indignant  regret  at  conduct  so 
destructive  of  the  harmony  and  peace  of 
the  country,  and  so  repugnant  to  the  princi- 
ples of  our  national  compact,  and  to  the  dic- 
tates of  humanity  and  religion.  Our  happi- 
ness and  prosperity  essentially  depend  upon 
peace  within  our  borders — and  peace  de- 
pends upon  the  maintenance,  in  good  faith, 
of  those  compromises  of  the  Constitution 
upon  which  the  Union  is  founded.  It  is  for- 
tunate for  the  country  that  the  good  sense, 
the  generous  feeling,  and  the  deep-rooted 
attachment  of  the  people  of  the  non-slave- 
holding  States  to  the  Union,  and  to  their 
fellow-citizens  of  the  same  blood  in  the 
South,  have  given  so  strong  and  impressive 
a  tone  to  the  sentiments  entertained  against 
the  proceedings  of  the  misguided  persons 
who  have  engaged  in  these  unconstitutional 
and  wicked  attempts,  and  especially  against 
the  emissaries  from  foreign  parts  who  have 
dared  to  interfere  in  this  matter,  as  to  au- 
thorize the  hope  that  those  attempts  will  no 
longer  be  persisted  in.  But,  if  these  expres- 
sions of  the  public  will  shall  not  be  sufficient 
to  effect  so  desirable  a  result,  not  a  doubt 
can  be  entertained  that  the  non-slaveholding 
States,  so  far  from  countenancing  the  slight- 
est interference  with  the  constitutional 
rights  of  the  South,  will  be  prompt  to  exer- 
cise their  authority  in  suppressing,  so  far  as 
in  them  lies,  whatever  is  calculated  to  pro- 
duce the  evil. 

"  In  leaving  the  care  of  other  branches  of 
this  interesting  subject  to  the  State  authori- 
ties, to  whom  they  properly  belong,  it  is 
nevertheless  proper  for  Congress  to  take 
such  measures  as  will  prevent  the  Post- 
Office  Department,  which  was  designed  to 

Resolutions,  similar  in  spirit  and  demand,  were 
adopted  by  the  Legislatures  of  South  Carolina, 
North  Carolina,  Alabama,  and  doubtless  other 
Slave  States. 

4  The  Richmond  Whig,  in  the  course  of  a  ful- 
mination  against  the  Abolitionists,  said  : 

"The  people  of  the  North  must  go  to  hanging 
these  fanatics  if  they  would  not  lose  the  benefit  of 
the  Southern  trade,  and  they  will  do  it.  *  *  *  De- 
pend upon  it,  the  Northern  people  will  never  sac- 
rifice  their  present  lucrative  trade  with  the  South, 
so  long  as  the  hanging  of  a  few  thousands  will  pre- 
vent it. " 

Not  a  bad  calculation,  provided  11  the  Northern 
people"  and  the  enjoyers  of  "  the  lucrative  trade" 
aforesaid  had  been  identical ;  but  they  were  not. 


124 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


foster  an  amicable  intercourse  and  corre- 
spondence between  all  the  members  of  the 
confederacy,  from  being  used  as  an  instru- 
ment of  an  opposite  character. ,  The  Gen- 
eral Government,  to  which  the  great  trust  is 
confided  of  preserving  inviolate  the  relations 
created  among  the  States  by  the  Constitu- 
tion, is  especially  bound  to  avoid,  in'its  own 
action,  any  thing  that  may  disturb  them.  I 
would  therefore  call  the  special  attention  of 
Congress  to  the  subject,  and  respectfully 
suggest  the  propriety  of  passing  such  a  law 
as  will  prohibit,  under  severe  penalties,  the 
circulation  in  the  Southern  States,  through 
the  mail,  of  incendiary  publications  intended 
to  instigate  the  slaves  to  insurrection." 

Had  the  President  been  asked  to 
justify  his  charges  against  his  fellow- 
citizens  of  having  "  attempted  to 
circulate,  through  the  mails,  inflam- 
matory appeals,  addressed  to  the  pas- 
sions of  slaves,  in  prints"  etc.,  etc., 
he  must  have  answered  that  he  had 
heard  or  read  charges  to  this  effect, 
and  had  believed  them.  But  it  was 
in  vain  that  the  Abolitionists  remon- 
strated, and  protested,  and  called  for 
proofs.  The  slaveholding  interest 
detested  and  feared  them ;  the  mob 
was  in  full  cry  at  their  heels ;  and  it 
was  the  seeming  interest  of  the  great 
majority  of  speakers  and  writers  to 
join  in  the  hunt.5 

Governor  Marcy  followed  in  the 
footsteps  of  his  party  chief.  In  his 
Annual  Message  of  January  5,  1836 
— five  weeks  later  than  the  foregoing 
— he  said : 

"  Relying  on  the  influence  of  a  sound  and 
enlightened  public  opinion  to  restrain  and 
control  the  misconduct  of  the  citizens  of  a 
free  government,  especially  when  directed, 
as  it  has  been  in  this  case,  with  unexampled 
energy  and  unanimity,  to  the  particular  evils 
under  consideration,  and  perceiving  that  its 
operations  have  been  thus  far  salutary,  I  en- 
tertain the  best  hopes  that  this  remedy,  of 
itself,  will  entirely  remove  these  evils,  or 
render  them  comparatively  harmless.  But, 
if  these  reasonable  expectations  should,  un- 


5  "Now  we  tell  them  [the  Abolitionists]  that 
when  they  openly  and  publicly  promulgate  doc- 
trines which  outrage  public  feeling,  they  have 
no  right  to  demand  protection  of  the  people  they 
insult.    Ought  not,  we  ask,  our  city  authorities 


happily,  be  disappointed;  if,  in  the  face  of 
numerous  and  striking  exhibitions  of  public 
reprobation,  elicited  from  our  constituents 
by  a  just  fear  of  the  fatal  issues  in  which 
the  uncurbed  efforts  of  the  Abolitionists 
may  ultimately  end,  any  considerable  portion 
of  these  misguided  men  shall  persist  in  push- : 
ing  them  forward  to  disastrous  consequen- 
ces, then  a  question,  new  to  our  confeder- 
acy, will  necessarily  arise,  and  must  be  met. 
It  must  then  be  determined  how  far  the 
several  States  can  provide,  within  the  proper 
exercise  of  their  constitutional  powers,  and! 
how  far,  in  fulfillment  of  the  obligations  re- 
sulting from  their  federal  relations,  they? 
ought  to  provide,  by  their  own  laws,  for  the 
trial  and  punishment  by  their  own  judica- 
tories, of  residents  within  their  limits,  guilty 
of  acts  therein,  which  are  calculated  and 
intended  to  excite  insurrection  and  rebellion 
in  a  sister  State.    *    *    *    I  cannot  doubtl 
that  the  Legislature  possesses  the  power  to; 
pass  such  penal  laws  as  will  have  the  effect! 
of  preventing  the  citizens  of  this  State  and 
residents  within  it  from  availing  themselves, 
with  impunity,  of  the  protection  of  its  sover- 
eignty and  laws,  while  they  are  actually  em- 
ployed in  exciting  insurrection  and  sedition 
in  a  sister  State,  or  engaged  in  treasonable 
enterprises,  intended  to  be  executed  therein." 

A  legislative  Report  responsive  to  i 
these  recommendations  was  made  in 
Mdy  following,  just  at  the  close  of 
the  session,  which  assumed  to  pledge 
the  faith  of  the  State  to  pass  such 
laws  as  were  suggested  by  the  Gov- 
ernor,  whenever  they  shall  he  requi- 
site !  This  report  was  duly  forwarded 
to  the  Southern  Governors,  but  not 
circulated  at  large,  nor  was  any  such 
action  as  it  proposed  ever  taken — 
or  meant  to  be.  Governor  Edward 
Everett  (Whig),  of  Massachusetts, 
sent 6  a  Message  to  the  Legislature  of 
his  State,  communicating  the  de- 
mands of  certain  Southern  States 
that  anti-Slavery  inculcations  in  the 
Free  States  should  be  legally  sup- 
pressed, and  saying: 

"  Whatever  by  direct  and  necessary  ope- 
to  make  them  understand  this — to  tell  them  that 
they  prosecute  their  treasonable  and  beastly 
plans  at  their  own  peril?" — New  York  Courier 
and  Enquirer,  11th  July,  1834  . 

•  January  6,  1836. 


'ATTEMPTS  TO  STI 


FLE  DISCUSSION". 


125 


I  ration  is  calculated  to  excite  an  insurrection 
among  the  slaves,  has  been  held,  by  highly 
respectable  legal  authority,  an  offense  against 
the  peace  of  this  commonwealth,  which  may 
be  prosecuted  as  a  misdemeanor  at  common 
law." 

The  Legislature  referred  the  sub- 
ject to  a  joint  Committee,  whereof 
a  conspicuous  champion  of  Slavery 
was  Chairman.  The  Abolitionists 
perceived  and  eagerly  embraced  their 
opportunity.  They  demanded  a  hear- 
ing before  this  Committee — they  be- 
ing accused  of  grave  misdemeanors 
in  the  documents  whereon  it  was  to 
act — and  their  request  was  tardily 
acceded  to.  On  the  3d  of  March, 
1836,  they  were  apprised  that  they 
would  be  heard  next  clay.  They  were 
duly  present  accordingly — the  Com- 
mittee sitting  in  the  spacious  Repre- 
sentatives' Hall,  neither  House  being 
in  session.  Brief  addresses  in  their 
behalf  were  heard  from  Rev.  Samuel 
J.  May  and  Ellis  Gray  Loring,  who 
were  followed  by  Professor  Charles 
Follen,  who,  in  the  course  of  his  re- 
marks, alluded  to  the  mob  outrages 
to  which  the  Abolitionists  had  re- 
cently been  subjected,  remarking 
that  any  legislative  enactment  to 
their  prejudice  would  tend  to  encour- 
age their  adversaries  to  repeat  those 
outrages.  The  Chairman  treated  this 
remark  as  disrespectful  to  the  Com- 
mittee, and  abruptly  terminated  the 
hearing.  The  Abolitionists  thereupon 
completed  promptly  their  defense,  and 
issued  it  in  a  pamphlet,  wThich  natu- 
rally attracted  public  attention,  and 
a  popular  conviction  that  fair  play 
had  not  been  accorded  them  was 
manifested.  The  Legislature  shared 
it,  and  directed  its  Committee  to  allow 
them  a  full  hearing.  Monday,  the 
8th,  was  accordingly  appointed  for 
the  purpose.  By  this  time,  the  public 


interest  had  become  diffused  and  in- 
tensified, and  the  Hall  was  crowded 
with  earnest  auditors.  The  Rev. 
William  E.  Channing,  then  the  most 
eminent  clergyman  in  JSTew  England, 
appeared  among  the  champions  of 
Free  Speech.  Professor  Pollen  con- 
cluded, and  was  followed  by  Samuel 
E.  Sewali,  William  Lloyd  Garrison, 
and  William  Goodell — the  last-named 
stigmatizing  the  demand  of  the  South 
and  its  backers  as  an  assault  on  the 
liberties  of  the  North.  Mr.  Bond,  a 
Boston  ,  merchant,  and  Dr.  Bradley, 
from  Plymouth,  were  prompted  by 
the  impulse  of  the  hour  to  add 
their  unpremeditated  remonstrances 
against  the  contemplated  invasion  of 
time-honored  rights.  Darkness  had 
set  in  when  the  Committee  rose,  and 
a  low  murmur  of  approving  multi- 
tudes gave  token  that  the  cause  of 
liberty  had  triumphed.  The  Com- 
mittee reported  adversely  to  the  "  agi- 
tators" and  "  fanatics"  at  the  heel  of 
the  session,  but  in  evident  despair  of 
any  accordant  action  ;  and  none  was 
ever  had.  Massachusetts  refused  to 
manacle  her  own  people  in  order  to 
rivet  more  securely  the  shackles  of 
others. 

Rhode  Island  was  the  theatre  of 
a  similar  attempt,  ending  in  a  similar 
failure.  And  if,  in  any  other  State, 
like  efforts  wTere  made,  they  were 
likewise  defeated.  No  nominally  Free 
State,  however  hostile  to  Abolition, 
consented  to  make  it  a  crime  on  the 
part  of  her  people  to  "  preach  deliv- 
erance to  the  captive." 

But  the  systematic  suppression  of 
anti-Slavery  teaching  by  riot  and 
mob-violence  was,  for  a  time,  well- 
nigh  universal.  In  New  York,  a 
meeting  at  Clinton  Hall,  to  organize 
a  City  Anti-Slavery  Society,  having 


126  THE  AMEEICA 

been  called  for  the  evening  of  Octo- 
ber 2, 1833,  there  appeared  a  counter- 
call  from  "Many  Southrons"  for  a 
meeting  at  the  same  time  and  place. 
In  apprehension  of  a  riot,  Clinton 
Hall  was  not  opened  ;  bnt  snch  of  the 
Abolitionists  as  conld  be  notified  on 
the  instant  repaired  to  the  Chatham- 
street  Chapel.  Their  opponents  met 
in  Tammany  Hall,  and,  after  making 
their  speeches  and  passing  their  re- 
solves unquestioned,  were  about  to 
adjourn,  when  they  were  apprised  of 
the  meeting  in  the  Chapel.  "  Let  us 
rout  them !"  was  the  general  cry ; 
and  they  rushed  noisily  to  the  Chapel 
only  to  find  that  the  Abolitionists  had 
departed.  "  Ten  thousand  dollars  for 
Arthur  Tappan !"  was  shouted ;  but 
no  one  was  molested,  and  the  crowd 
dissolved  in  the  comforting  assurance 
that  the  Union  was  safe. 

But  on  the  4th  of  July,  1834,  an  at- 
tempt to  hold  an  anti-Slavery  celebra- 
tion in  Chatham-street  Chapel  was 
the  signal  for  a  furious  and  alarming 
riot.  The  prayer,  the  singing,  and 
the  reading  of  the  Declaration,  were 
endured  with  tolerable  patience ;  but 
a  Declaration  of  the  Sentiments  of 
the  Anti-Slavery  Society  by  Lewis 
Tappan  was  interrupted  by  hisses ; 
and  when  David  Paul  Brown,  of 
Philadelphia,  commenced  his  oration, 
it  was  soon  manifest  that  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  audience  had  come  ex- 
pressly not  to  hear  him,  nor  let  any 
one  else.  Pev.  Samuel  H.  Cox  in- 
terposed in  behalf  of  Free  Speech; 
but  both  were  clamored  down  with 
cries  of  "  Treason  !  Treason !  Hur- 
rah for  the  Union !"  and  the  meeting 
quietly  dispersed,  without  awaiting 
or  provoking  further  violence. 

The  leading  commercial  journals 
having  commended  this  experiment 


N  CONFLICT. 

in  Union-saving,  the  actors  were  nat- 
urally impelled  to  extend  it.    At  1 
midnight  on  the  9th,  the  dwelling  of 
Lewis  Tappan  was  broken  open  by  a  ; 
mob,  his  furniture  carried  into  the 
street,  and  consigned  to  the  flames. 
The  burning  of  the  house  was  then  I 
proposed;  but  the  Mayor  remonstra-  j 
ted,  and  it  was  forborne.    The  riots  i 
were  continued  through  the  next 
day ;  the  doors  and  windows  of  Dr. 
Cox's  (Presbyterian)  church  being 
broken,  with  those  of  Dr.  Ludlow's 
church ;  while  a  Baptist,  a  Methodist, 
and  a  Protestant  Episcopal  church, 
belonging  to  colored  congregations, 
were  badly  shattered,  and  one  of 
them  nearly   destroyed,  as  was  a 
school-house  for  colored  children,  and 
many  dwellings  inhabited  by  negroes, 
while  others  were  seriously  injured. 
Many  rioters  were  arrested  during 
these  days  by  the  police,  but  none  of 
them  was  ever  punished. 

Newark,  New  Jersey,  imitated  this 
riot  on  the  11th,  but  with  indifferent 
success.  A  church  was  somewhat  in- 
jured. 

Philadelphia  followed  on  the  13th 
of  August.  Her  riots  lasted  three 
nights,  and  the  harmless  and  power- 
less blacks  were  mainly  their  vic- 
tims. Forty-four  houses  (mostly  small) 
were  destroyed  or  seriously  injured. 
Among  them  was  a  colored  Presby- 
terian church.  Several  of  the  blacks 
were  chased  and  assaulted,  one  of 
them  being  beaten  to  death,  and  an- 
other losing  his  life  in  attempting  to 
swim  the  Schuylkill  to  escape  his 
pursuers. 

At  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  Au- 
gust 10, 1835,  the  Eev.  Orange  Scott, 
who  was  lecturing  against  Slavery, 
was  assaulted,  his  notes  torn  up,  and 
personal  violence  attempted. 


ANTI-ABOLI' 

At  Concord,  New  Hampshire,  on 
the  same  day,  a  mob  demolished  an 
academy,  because  colored  boys  were 
admitted  as  pnpils. 

At  Canterbury,  Connecticut,  Miss 
Prudence  Crandall  having  attempt- 
ed, in  1833,  to  open  a  school  for 
colored  children,  an  act  was  passed 
by  the  Legislature  forbidding  any 
teaching  within  that  State  of  colored 
youth  from  other  States.  She  per- 
sisted, and  was  imprisoned  for  it  as  a 
malefactor.  Having  been  liberated, 
she  resumed  her  school ;  when  it  was 
broken  up  by  mob-violence. 

The  riots  whereof  the  foregoing  are 
specimens  were  too  numerous  and 
wide-spread  to  be  even  glanced  at  sev- 
erally. They  were,  doubtless,  multi- 
plied and  intensified  by  the  presence 
in  our  country  of  George  Thompson, 
an  eminent  and  ardent  English  Aboli- 
tionist, who — now  that  the  triumph 
of  Emancipation  in  the  British  West 
Indies  was  secured — came  over  to  aid 
the  kindred  struggle  in  this  country. 
That  a  Briton  should  presume  to 
plead  for  Liberty  in  this  free  and 
enlightened  country  Was  not  to  be 
endured;  and  Mr.  Thompson's  elo- 
quence, fervor,  and  thoroughness,  in- 
creased the  hostility  excited  by  his 
presence,  which,  of  itself,  was  held 
an  ample  excuse  for  mobs.  He  was 
finally  induced  to  desist  and  return 
to  England,  from  a  conviction  that 
the  prejudice  aroused  by  his  interfe- 
rence in  what  was  esteemed  a  domes- 
tic difference  overbalanced  the  good 
effect  of  his  lectures.  The  close  of 
this  year  (1835)  was  signalized  by  the 
conversion  of  Gerrit  Smith — hitherto 
a  leading  and  zealous  Colonizationist 
— to  the  principles  of  the  Abolitionists. 

In  Northfield,  New  Hampshire, 
December  14,  1835,  Kev.  George 


TION  RIOTS.  127 

Storrs  attempted  to  deliver  an  anti- 
Slavery  lecture,  but  was  dragged 
from  his  knees  while  at  prayer,  pre- 
liminary to  his  address,  by  a  deputy 
sheriff,  on  the  strength  of  a  warrant 
issued  by  a  justice,  on  a  complaint 
charging  him  with  being  "  a  common 
rioter  and  brawler,"  "  an  idle  and  dis- 
orderly person,  going  about  the  town 
and  county  disturbing  the  public 
peace."  On  trial,  he  was  acquitted ; 
but,  on  the  31st  of  March  following, 
after  having  lectured  at  Pittsfield, 
New  Hampshire,  he  was  again  ar- 
rested while  at  prayer,  on  a  writ 
issued  by  one  who  afterward  became 
a  Member  of  Congress,  tried  the 
same  day,  convicted,  and  sentenced 
to  three  months'  imprisonment  in  the 
House  of  Correction.  He  appealed, 
and  that  was  probably  the  end  of  the 
matter. 

At  Boston,  October  21,  1835,  a 
large  and  most  respectable  mob,  com- 
posed in  good  part  of  merchants,  as- 
sailed a  meeting  of  the  Female  Anti- 
Slavery  Society,  while  its  President 
was  at  prayer,  and  dispersed  it. 
William  Lloyd  Garrison,  having  es- 
caped, was  found  concealed  in  a  cabi- 
net-maker's shop,  seized  and  dragged 
through  the  streets  with  a  rope  around 
his  body,  threatened  with  tar  and 
feathers,  but  finally  conducted  to  the 
Mayor,  who  lodged  him  in  jail  till 
the  next  day,  to  protect  him  from 
further  violence.  At  the  earnest  re- 
quest of  the  authorities,  he  left  town 
for  a  time. 

At  Utica,  New  York,  the  same 
day,  a  meeting,  convened  to  form  a 
State  Anti-Slavery  Society,  was  bro- 
ken up  by  a  most  respectable  Com- 
mittee, appointed  by  a  large  meeting 
of  citizens.  The  office  of  a  Demo- 
cratic journal  that  had  spoken  kindly 


128 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


of  the  Abolitionists  was  assailed  and 
its  press  thrown  down.  The  disci- 
pline proved  effective.  No  Demo- 
cratic journal  issued  in  that  city  has 
since  ventured  to  speak  a  word  for 
Freedom  or  Humanity.  The  Aboli- 
tionists, at  Gerrit  Smith's  invitation, 
adjourned  to  his  home  at  Peterbo- 
rough, Madison  County,  and  there 
completed  their  organization. 

At  the  South,  there  was  but  one 
mode  of  dealing  with  Abolitionists — 
that  described  by  Henry  A.  Wise  as 
made  up  of  "  Dupont's  best  [gun- 
powder], and  cold  steel."  "Let  your 
emissaries  cross  the  Potomac,"  writes 
the  Rev.  T.  S.  Witherspoon  from 
Alabama  to  The  Emancipator,  "  and 
I  can  promise  you  that  your  fate 
will  be  no  less  than  Hainan's." 7  Says 
the  Eev.  "William  Plummer,  D.  D., 
of  Richmond,  Virginia,  in  response 
(July,  1835)  to  a  call  for  a  meeting 
of  the  clergy  to  take  action  on  the 

7  At  a  public  meeting  convened  in  the  church  in 
the  town  of  Clinton,  Mississippi,  September  5, 
1835,  it  was 

"  Resolved,  That  it  is  our  decided  opinion,  that 
any  individual  who  dares  to  circulate,  with  a 
view  to  effectuate  the  designs  of  the  Abolition- 
ists, any  of  the  incendiary  tracts  or  newspapers 
now  in  the  course  of  transmission  to  this  country, 
is  justly  worthy,  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man,  of 
immediate  death :  and  we  doubt  not  that  such 
would  be  the  punishment  of  any  such  offender, 
in  any  part  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  where  he 
may  be  found." 

8  "The  cry  of  the  whole  South  should  be  death 
— instant  death — to  the  abolitionist,  wherever 
he  is  caught." — Augusta  (Ga.)  Chronicle. 

"  We  can  assure  the  Bostonians,  one  and  all, 
who  have  embarked  in  the  nefarious  scheme  of 
abolishing  Slavery  at  the  South,  that  lashes  will 
hereafter  be  spared  the  backs  of  their  emissaries. 
Let  them  send  out  their  men  to  Louisiana;  they 
will  never  return  to  tell  their  sufferings,  but  they 
shall  expiate  the  crime  of  interfering  with  our 
domestic  institutions,  by  being  burned  at  the 
stake." — New  Orleans  True  American. 

"Abolition  editors  in  Slave  States  will  not 
dare  to  avow  their  opinions.  It  would  be  in- 
stant death  to  them." — Missouri  Argus. 

And  Mr.  Preston,  of  South  Carolina,  who  once 


exciting  topic,  "  Let  the  Abolitionists 
understand  that  they  will  he  caught 
if  they  come  among  us,  and  they  will 
take  good  care  to  stay  away."8  The 
calculation  was  a  tolerably  sound 
one ;  yet  it  did  not  save  quite  a 
number  of  persons — mainly  of  North- 
ern birth — who  were  seized  at  vari- 
ous points  throughout  the  South  on 
suspicion  of  being  anti-Slavery,  and 
very  summarily  put  to  death — some 
with,  and  some  without,  a  mob  trial. 
Had  there  been  any  proof9  against 
them,  they  would  doubtless  have  been 
left  to  the  operation  of  the  laws  for 
such  cases  made  and  provided;  for 
these  were  certainly  harsh  enough  to 
satisfy  even  Wise  himself. 

At  Charleston,  S.  C,  July  29, 
1835,  it  was  noised  about  that  the 
mails  just  arrived  from  the  North 
contained  a  quantity  of  Abolition 
periodicals  and  documents.  A  pub- 
lic meeting  was  thereupon  called, 
which  the  Reverend  Clergy  of  the 

delivered  a  speech  at  Columbia  in  reference  to  a 
proposed  railroad,  in  which  he  despondingly 
drew  a  forcible  contrast  between  the  energy,  en- 
terprise, knowledge,  and  happiness  of  the  North, 
and  the  inertia,  indigence,  and  decay  of  the 
South,  in  the  U.  S.  Senate  afterward  declared : 

"Let  an  abolitionist  come  within  the  borders 
of  South  Carolina,  if  we  can  catch  we  will  try 
him,  and,  notwithstanding  all  the  interference  of 
all  the  governments  of  the  earth,  including  the 
Federal  Government,  we  will  hang  him." — See 
"  N  Y.  Journal  of  Commerce,''''  June  6,  1838. 

9  In  1835,  a  suspicion  was  aroused  in  Madison 
County,  Mississippi,  that  a  conspiracy  for  a  slave 
insurrection  existed.  Five  negroes  were  first 
hung ;  then  five  white  men.  The  pamphlet  put 
forth  by  their  mob-murderers  shows  that  there 
was  no  real  evidence  against  any  of  them — that 
their  lives  were  sacrificed  to  a  cowardly  panic, 
which  would  not  be  appeased  without  blood- 
shed. The  whites  were  hung  at  an  hour's  no- 
tice, protesting  their  innocence  to  the  last.  And 
this  is  but  one  case  out  of  many  such.  In  a 
panic  of  this  kind,  every  non-slaveholder  who 
ever  said  a  kind  word  or  did  a  humane  act  for  a 
negro  is  a  doomed  man. 


RIFLING  THE  MAILS 


129 


city  attended  in  a  body,  "lending," 
says  The  Courier  of  next  morning, 
"  their  sanction  to  the  proceedings, 
and  adding,  by  their  presence,  to  the 
impressive  character  of  the  scene." 
This  meeting  unanimously  resolved 
that  all  the  mail  matter  in  question 
should  be  burnt,  and  it  was  burnt 
accordingly — the  mails  being  search- 
ed and  rifled  for  the  purpose ;  "al- 
though,"  (says  The  Courier),  "ar- 
rangements   had    previously  been 
made  at  the  Post-office  to  arrest  the 
circulation  of  incendiary  matter,  until 
instructions  could  be  received  from 
the  Department   at   Washington ;" 
and  "  it  might  have  been  better,  per- 
,  haps,  to  have  awaited  the  answer  be- 
'  fore  proceeding  to  extremities."  But 
I  Mr.  Amos  Kendall,  then  Postmaster- 
General,  was  not  the  man  to  "  hint  a 
:  fault,  or  hesitate  dislike,"  with  regard 
I  to  such  mail  robbery,  though  obliged 
t  to  confess  that  it  was  not  strictly  ac- 
I  cording  to  act  of  Congress. 

"I  am  satisfied,"  he  replied  to  the  Post- 
•  master's  application,  "  that  the  Postmaster- 
!  General  has  no  legal  authority  to  exclude 
newspapers  from  the  mail,  nor  to  prohibit 
their  carriage  or  delivery  on  account  of  their 
character  or  tendency,  real  or  supposed." 
"But  I  am  not  prepared  to  direct  you  to 
forward  or  deliver  the  papers  of  which  you 
speak."  "  By  no  act  or  direction  of  mine, 
official  or  private,  could  I  be  induced  to  aid, 
'  knowingly,  in  giving  circulation  to  papers 
of  this  description,  directly  or  indirectly. 
"We  owe  an  obligation  to  the  laws,  but  a 
higher  one  to  the  communities  in  which  we 
live ;  and,  if  the  former  be  permitted  to  de- 
stroy the  latter,  it  is  patriotism  to  disregard 
them.  Entertaining  these  views,  I  cannot 
sanction,  and  will  not  condemn,  the  step  you 
have  taken.  Your  justification  must  be 
looked  for  in  the  character  of  the  papers 
detained,  and  the  circumstances  by  which 
you  are  surrounded." 

Governor  Seward  has  been  widely 
charged  and  credited  with  the  author- 
ship of  the  "  higher  law  "  doctrine  ; 
>  but  here  we  find  it  clearly  set  forth 


in  a  grave  Democratic  State  paper, 
fifteen  years  before  he  uttered  it. 
And  it  is  yet  far  older  than  this. 

General  Jackson's  recommendation 
of  repression  by  law  of  the  circula- 
tion of  "incendiary"  matter  through 
the  mails,  was  referred  by  the  Senate 
to  a  Select  Committee,  whereof  J ohn 
C.  Calhoun  was  Chairman.  The 
perilous  scope  of  any  such  legislation 
was  at  once  clear  to  the  keen  intel- 
lect of  that  statesman,  who  had  by 
this  time  learned  to  dread  "  Consoli- 
dation" as  intensely  as  he  detested 
"Abolition."  He  reported  (Febru- 
ary 4,  1836),  that  the  measure  pro- 
posed by  the  President  would  violate 
the  Constitution,  and  imperil  public 
liberty. 

"  Nothing  is  more  clear,"  says  the  Report, 
"than  that  the  admission  of  the  right  of 
Congress  to  determine  what  papers  are  in- 
cendiary, and,  as  such,  to  prohibit  their  cir- 
culation through  the  mail,  necessarily  in- 
volves the  eight  to  determine  what  are  not 
incendiary,  and  enforce  their  circulation. 
*  *  '  *  If  Congress  may  this  year  decide 
what  incendiary  publications  are,  they  may, 
next  year,  decide  what  they  are  kot,  and 
thus  laden  their  mails  with  real  or  covert 
abolitionism.  *  *  *  It  belongs  to  the 
States,  and  not  to  Congress,  to  determine 
what  is  or  is  not  calculated  to  disturb  their 
security." 

He  proposed,  therefore,  that  e&eb 
State  should  determine  for  itself  what 
kind  of  reading  it  would  deem  "  in- 
cendiary," and  that  Congress  should 
thereupon  prohibit  the  transmission 
by  mail  of  such  matter  to  that  State. 
He  concluded  with  a  bill,  which  con- 
tained this  provision : 

"  Be  it  enacted,  etc.,  That  it  shall  not  be- 
lawful  for  any  deputy  postmaster,  in  any 
State,  Territory,  or  District,  of  the  United 
States,  knowingly,  to  deliver  to  any  person 
whatsoever,  any  pamphlet,  newspaper,  hand- 
bill, or  other  printed  paper  or  pictorial  rep- 
resentation, touching  the  subject  of  Sla- 
very, where,  by  the  laws  of  the  said  States 
Territory,  or  District,  their  circulation  is> 


130 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


prohibited ;  and  any  deputy  postmaster  who 
shall  be  guilty  thereof,  shall  be  forthwith 
removed  from  office." 

This  bill  was  ordered  to  a  third 
reading  by  18  Yeas  to  18  Nays — Mr. 
Yan  Buren,  then  Yice-Presiderrt,  giv- 
ing the  casting  vote  in  the  affirma- 
tive. It  failed,  however,  to  pass ;  and 
that  ended  the  matter. 


Elijah  P.  Lovejoy,  son  of  Rev. 
Daniel  Lovejoy,  and  the  eldest  of 
seven  children,  was  born  at  Albion, 
Maine,  November  9,  1S02.  His  an- 
cestors, partly  English  and  partly 
Scotch,  all  of  the  industrious  middle 
class,  had  been  citizens  of  New  Hamp- 
shire and  of  Maine  for  several  genera- 
tions. He  was  distinguished,  from 
early  youth,  alike  for  diligence  in 
labor  and  for  zeal  and  success  in  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge.  He  grad- 
uated with  high  honors  at  AYater- 
ville  College,  Maine,  in  September, 
1826.  In  May  following,  he  turned 
his  face  westward,  and  in  the  autumn 
of  that  year  found  employment  as  a 
teacher  in  St.  Louis.  In  1828,  he 
became  editor  of  a  political  journal, 
of  the  "  National  Republican"  faith, 
and  was  thence  actively  engaged  in 
politics  of  the  Clay  and  AYebster 
school,  until  January,  1832,  when 
he  was  brought  under  deep  religious 
impressions,  and  the  next  month 
united  with  the  Presbyterian  Church. 
Relinquishing  his  political  pursuits 
and  prospects,  he  engaged  in  a  course 
of  study  preparatory  for  the  ministry, 
entering  the  Theological  Seminary 
at  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  on  the 
24th  of  March.  He  received,  next 
Spring,  a  license  to  preach  from  the 
second  Presbytery  of  Philadelphia, 
.and  spent  the  Summer  as  an  evange- 


list in  Newport,  R.  I.,  and  in  New 
York.  He  left  the  last-named  city 
in  the  autumn  of  that  year,  and  re- 
turned to  St.  Louis,  at  the  urgent  in- 
vitation of  a  circle  of  fellow-Chris- 
tians, who  desired  him  to  establish 
and,  edit  a  religious  newspaper  in  that 
city — furnishing  a  capital  of  twelve 
hundred  dollars  for  the  purpose,  and 
guaranteeing  him,  in  writing,  the  en- 
tire control  of  the  concern.  The  St. 
Louis  Obse-Tver,  weekly,  was  accord- 
ingly first  issued  on  the  22d  of  No- 
vember. It  was  of  the  "Evangeli- 
cal" or  Orthodox  Protestant  school, 
but  had  no  controversv,  save  with 
wickedness,  and  no  purpose,  but  to 
quicken  the  zeal  and  enlarge  the  use- 
fulness of  professing  Christians,  while 
adding,  if  possible,  to  their  number. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  it  was  com- 
menced with  any  intent  to  war  on 
Slavery,  or  with  any  expectation  of 
exciting  the  special  hostility  of  any 
interest  but  that  of  Satan.  Its  first 
exhibition  of  a  combative  or  belliger- 
ent tendency  had  for  its  object  the 
Roman  Catholics  and  their  dogmas ; 
but  this,  though  it  naturally  provok- 
ed some  resentment  in  a  city  so 
largely  Catholic  as  St.  Louis,  excited 
no  tumult  or  violence.  Its  first  arti- 
cles concerning  Slavery  were  exceed- 
ingly moderate  in  their  tone,  and  fa- 
vorable rather  to  Colonization  than 
to  immediate  Abolition.  Even  when 
the  editor  first  took  decided  ground 
against  Slavery,10  he  still  affirmed  his 
hostility  to  immediate,  unconditional 
emancipation.  This  article  was,  in 
part,  based  on  an  editorial  in  The  St. 
Louis  Republican,  of  the  preceding 
week,  which — discussing  a  proposed 
Convention  to  revise  the  Constitution 
of  that  State — said : 


10  April  16,  1835. 


ATTEMPT  TO  GAG  A  RELIGIOUS  JOURNAL. 


131 


"  We  look  to  the  Convention  as  a  happy 
means  of  relieving  the  State,  at  some  future 
day.  of  an  evil  which  is  destroying  all  our 
wholesome  energies,  and  leaving  us,  in 
morals,  in  enterprise,  and  in  wealth,  behind 
the  neighboring  States.  We  mean,  of 
course,  the  curse  of  Slavery.  We  are  not 
about  to  make  any  attack  upon  the  rights 
of  those  who  at  present  hold  this  description 
of  property.  They  ought  to  be  respected  to 
the  letter.  We  only  propose  that"  measures 
shall  now  be  taken  for  the  Abolition  of 
Shivery,  at  such  distant  period  of  time  as 
may  be  thought  expedient,  and  eventually 
for  ridding  the  country  altogether  of  a  color- 
ed population." 

Mr.  Lovejoy,  commenting  on  the 
foregoing,  wished  that  some  South- 
ern-born man,  of  high  character,  de- 
cided ability,  and  fervent  piety, 
would  take  up  the  subject  of  Slavery 
in  a  proper  spirit,  and,  being  fami- 
liar, experimentally,  with  all  its  evils 
and  its  difficulties,  would  show  the 
people,  practically,  what  they  ought 
to  do  with  regard  to  it.  He  con- 
tinued : 

u  To  such  a  man,  a  golden  opportunity  of 
doing  good  is  offered.  We  believe  the  minds 
of  the  good  people  of  this  State  are  fully 
prepared  to  listen  to  him — to  give  a  dispas- 
sionate consideration  to  the  facts  and  rea- 
sonings he  might  present  connected  with 
the  subject  of  Slavery.    Public  sentiment, 


11  St.  Louis,  October  5,  1835. 

To  the  Rev.  E.  P.  Lovejoy,  Editor  of  The  Observer: 

Sir: — The  undersigned,  friends  and  support- 
ers of  the  "Observer,"  beg  leave  to  suggest, 
that  the  present  temper  of  the  times  requires  a 
change  in  the  manner  of  conducting  that  print 
in  relation  to  the  subject  of  domestic  Slavery. 

The  public  mind  is  greatly  excited,  and.  owing 
to  the  unjustifiable  interference  of  our  Northern 
brethren  with  our  social  relations,  the  commu- 
nity are,  perhaps,  not  in  a  situation  to  endure 
sound  doctrine  in  relation  to  tins  subject.  In- 
deed, we  have  reason  to  believe,  that  violence 
is  even  now  meditated  against  the  "Observer 
Office  ;"  and  we  do  believe  that  true  policy  and 
the  interests  of  religion  require  that  the  discus- 
sion of  this  exciting  question  should  be  at  least 
postponed  in  this  State. 

Although  we  do  not  claim  the  right  to  pre- 
scribe your  course  as  an  Editor,  we  hope  that 
the  concurring  opinions  of  so  many  persons, 
having  the  interest  of  your  paper  and  of  reli- 
gion both  at  heart,  may  induce  you  to  distrust 
your  own  judgment,  and  so  far  change  the  char- 
acter of  the  "Observer,"  as  to  pass  over  in 


amongst  us,  is  already  moving  in  this  great 
matter— it  now  wants  to  be  directed  in  some 
defined  channel,  to  some  definite  end. 

"  Taken  all  in  all,  there  is  not  a  State  in 
this  Union  possessing  superior  natural  ad- 
vantages to  our  own.  At  present,  Slavery, 
like  an  incubus,  is  paralyzing  our  energies, 
and,  like  a  cloud  of  evil  poftent,  darkening 
all  our  prospects.  Let  this  be  removed,  and 
Missouri  would  at  once  start  forward  in  the 
race  of  improvement,  with  an  energy  and 
rapidity  of  movement  that  would  soon  place 
her  in  the  front  rank  along  with  the  most 
favored  of  her  sister  States." 

He  continued  to  speak  of  Slavery 

at  intervals,  through  that  summer, 

leaving  his  post  in  October  to  attend 

a  regular  meeting  of  the  Presbyterian 

Synod. 

Directly  after  his  departure,  an  ex- 
citement commenced  with  regard  to 
his  strictures  on  Slavery;  and  the 
proprietors  of  The  Observer,  alarmed 
by  threats  of  mob-violence,  issued  a 
card,  promising  that  nothing  should 
be  said  on  the  exciting  subject  until 
the  editor's  return ;  and,  this  not 
proving  satisfactory,  they  issued  a  fur- 
ther card  on  the  21st,  declaring  them- 
selves, "  one  and  all,"  opposed  to  the 
mad  schemes  of  the  Abolitionists. 
Before  this,  a  letter11  had  been  written 

silence  everything  connected  with  the  subject 
of  Slavery.  We  would  like  that  you  announce 
in  your  paper,  your  intention  so  to  do. 

We  shall  be  glad  to  be  informed  of  your  de- 
termination in  relation  to  this  matter. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servants, 
Archibald  Gamble,       G.  W.  Call, 
Nathan  Ranney,  H.  R.  Gamble, 

William  S.  Potts,         Hezekiah  King, 
Jno.  Kerr. 

I  concur  in  the  object  intended  by  this  com-  * 
munication. 

Beverly  Allen. 

I  concur  in  the  foregoing. 

J.  B.  Bryant. 
This  document  is  indorsed  as  follows : 
"  I  did  not  yield  to  the  wishes  here  expressed, 
and  in  consequeuce  have  been  persecuted  ever 
since.  But  I  have  kept  a  good  conscience  in 
the  matter,  and  that  more  than  repays  me  for  all 
I  have  suffered,  or  can  suffer.  I  have  sworn 
eternal  opposition  to  Slavery,  and,  by  the  bless- 
ing of  God,  I  will  never  go  back.  Amen. 

"  E.  P.  L. 

"  October  24,  1837." 


132 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


to  the  editor  by  nine  eminent  citizens 
of  St.  Louis  (including  H.  R.  Gam- 
ble, her  present  provisional  Gover- 
nor), urging  him  "to  pass  over  in 
silence  everything  connected  with 
the  subject  Slavery which,  in 
due  time,  he  respectfully  declined. 

The  immediate  cause  of  the  excite- 
ment here  alleged  was  the  illegal  and 
violent  seizure,  in  Illinois,  of  two 
white  men  suspected  of  having  de- 
coyed slaves  away  from  Saint  Louis. 
The  suspected  persons,  having  been 
forcibly  brought  to  St.  Louis,  and 
there  tried  and  convicted  by  a  mob, 
which  voted,  40  to  20,  to  whip, 
rather  than  hang  them,  were  accord- 
ingly taken  two  miles  back  of  the 
city,  and  there  whipped  between  one 
and  two  hundred  lashes — the  sixty 
wealthy  and  respectable  citizens  tak- 
ing turns  in  applying  the  lash.  A 
public  meeting  was  thereupon  held, 
wherein  it  was  gravely 

"  2.  Resolved,  That  the  right  of  free  dis- 
cussion and  freedom  of  speech  exists  under 
the  Constitution  ;  but  that,  being  a  conven- 
tional reservation  made  by  the  people  in 
their  sovereign  capacity,  does  not  imply  a 
moral  right,  on  the  part  of  the  Abolitionists, 
to  freely  discuss  the  subject  of  Slavery, 
either  orally  or  through  the  medium  of  the 
press.  It  is  the  agitation  of  a  question  too 
nearly  allied  to  the  vital  interests  of  the 
slaveholding  States  to  admit  of  public  dispu- 
tation ;  and  so  far  from  the  fact,  that  the 
movements  of  the  Abolitionists  are  constitu- 
tional, they  are  in  the  greatest  degree  sedi- 
tious, and  calculated  to  excite  insurrection 
and  anarchy,  and,  ultimately,  a  dissever- 
ment  of  our  prosperous  Union. 

u3.  Resolved,  That  we  consider  the  course 
pursued  by  the  Abolitionists,  as  one  calcu- 
lated to  paralyze  every  social  tie  by  which 
we  are  now  united  to  our  fellow-man.  and 
that,  if  persisted  in,  it  must  eventually  be 
the  cause  of  the  disseverment  of  these  United 
States;  and  that  the  doctrine  of  amalgama- 
tion is  peculiarly  baneful  to  $he  interests 
and  happiness  of  society.  The  union  of 
black  and  white,  in  a  moral  point  of  view, 
we  consider  as  the  most  preposterous  and 
impudent  doctrine  advanced  by  the  infatua- 
ted Abolitionists — as  repugnant  to  judgment 


and  science,  as  it  is  degrading  to  the  feelings 
of  all  sensitive  minds — as  destructive  to  the 
intellect  of  after  generations,  as  the  advance 
of  science  and  literature  has  contributed  to 
the  improvement  of  our  own.  In  short,  its 
practice  would  reduce  the  high  intellectual 
standard  of  the  American  mind  to  a  level  with 
the  Hottentot;  and  the  United  States,  now 
second  to  no  nation  on  earth,  would,  in  a 
few  years,  be  what  Europe  was  in  the  dark- 
est ages. 

"4.  Resolved,  That  the  Sacred  Writings 
furnish  abundant  evidence  of  the  existence 
of  Slavery  from  the  earliest  periods.  The 
patriarchs  and  prophets  possessed  slaves — 
our  Saviour  recognized  the  relation  between 
master  and  slave,  and  deprecated  it  not : 
hence,  we  know  that  He  did  not  condemn 
that  relation;  on  the  contrary,  His  disci- 
ples, in  all  countries,  designated  their  re- 
spective duties  to  each  other. 

u  Therefore,  Resolved.  That  we  consider 
Slavery,  as  it  now  exists  in  the  United  States, 
as  sanctioned  by  the  sacred  Scriptures." 

Mr.  Lovejoy,  on  his  return  to  the 
city,  put  forth  an  address  to  "  My 
Fellow-Citizens,"  wherein  he  said  : 

"  Of  the  first  resolution  passed  at  the 
meeting  of  the  24th  October,  I  have  nothing 
to  say.  except  that  1  perfectly  agree  with 
the  sentiment,  that  the  citizens  of  the  non- 
slaveholding  States  have  no  right  to  inter- 
fere with  the  domestic  relations  between 
master  and  slave. 

"The  second  resolution,  strictly  speaking, 
neither  affirms  nor  denies  anything  in  refer- 
ence to  the  matter  in  hand.  No  man  has  a 
moral  right  to  do  anything  improper.  Whe- 
ther, therefore,  he  has  the  moral  right  to 
discuss  the  question  of  Slavery,  is  a  point 
with  which  human  legislation  or  resolutions 
have  nothing  to  do.  The  true  issue  to  be 
decided  is,  whether  he  has  the  civil,  the 
political  right,  to  discuss  it,  or  not.  And 
this  is  a  mere  question  of  fact.  In  Russia, 
in  Turkey,  in  Austria,  nay,  even  in  France, 
this  right  most  certainly  does  not  exist.  But 
does  it  exist  in  Missouri?  We  decide  this 
question  by  turning  to  the  Constitution  of 
the  State.  The  sixteenth  section,  article 
thirteenth,  of  the  Constitution  of  Missouri, 
reads  as  follows : 

"  '  That  the  free  communication  of  thoughts 
1  and  opinions  is  one  of  the  invaluable  rights 
1  of  man,  and  that  every  person  may  freely 
'  speak,  write,  and  print  ox  any  subject, 
•  being  responsible  for  the  abuse  of  that  liber- 
'ty.' 

"  Here,  then,  I  find  my  warrant  for  using, 
as  Paul  did,  all  freedom  of  speech.  If  I 
abuse  that  right,  1  freely  acknowledge  my- 


MR.  LOVEJOY 

self  amenable  to  the  laws.  But  it  is  said 
that  the  right  to  hold  slaves  is  a  constitu- 
tional one,  and  therefore  not  to  be  called  in 
question.  I  admit  the  premise,  but  deny 
the  conclusion. 

Mr.  Lovejoy  proceeded  to  set  forth 
that  Robert  Dale  Owen  and  Frances 
Wright  had  recently  landed  on  our 
shores  from  Great  Britain,  and  had 
traversed  our  country,  publicly  prop- 
agating doctrines  respecting  Divorce 
which  were  generally  regarded  as 
utterly  destructive  to  the  institution 
of  Marriage,  yet  they  were  nowhere 
mobbed  nor  assaulted  for  so  doing. 
"  And  yet,  most  surely,  the  institutions 
"  of  Slavery  are  not  more  interwoven 
"  with  the  structure  of  our  society 
"than  those  of  Marriage."  He  con- 
tinued : 

li  See  the  danger,  and  the  natural  and  in- 
evitable result,  to  which  the  first  step  here 
will  lead.  To-day,  a  public  meeting  declares 
that  you  shall  not  discuss  the  subject  of 
Slavery  in  any  of  its  bearings,  civil  or  re- 
ligious. Right  or  wrong,  the  press  must  be 
silent.  To-morrow,  another  meeting  de- 
cides that  it  is  against  the  peace  of  society 
that  the  principles  of  Popery  shall  be  dis- 
cussed, and  the  edict  goes  forth  to  muzzle 
the  press.  The  next  day  it  is,  in  a  similar 
manner,  declared  that  not  a  word  must  be 
said  against  distilleries,  dram-shops,  or 
drunkenness :  and  so  on  to  the  end  of  the 
chapter.  The  truth  is,  my  fellow-citizens, 
if  you  give  ground  a  single  inch,  there  is  no 
stopping-place.  ■  I  deem  it,  therefore,  my 
duty  to  take  my  stand  upon  the  Constitu- 
tion. Here  is  firm  ground — I  feel  it  to  be 
such.  And  I  do,  most  respectfully,  yet  de- 
cidedly, declare  to  you  my  fixed  determina- 
tion to  maintain  this  ground.  We  have 
slaves,  it  is  true ;  but  /  am  not  one.  I  am  a 
citizen  of  these  United  States,  a  citizen  of 
Missouri,  free-born  ;  and,  having  never  for- 
feited the  inestimable  privileges  attached  to 
such  a  condition,  I  cannot  consent  to  sur- 
render them.  But,  while  I  maintain  them, 
I  hope  to  do  it  with  all  that  meekness  and 
humility  that  become  a  Christian,  and  espe- 
cially a  Christian  minister.  I  am  ready,  not 
to  fight,  but  to  suffer,  and,  if  need  be,  to  die 
for  them.  Kindred  blood  to  that  which 
flows  in  my  veins  flowed  freely  to  water  the 
tree  of  Christian  liberty,  planted  by  the 


IN  ST.  LOUIS.  133 

Puritans  on  the  rugged  soil  of  New  Eng- 
land. It  flowed  as  freely  on  the  plains  of 
Lexington,  the  nights  of  Bunker  Hill,  and 
the  fields  of  Saratoga.  And  freely,  too,  shall 
mine  flow — yea,  as  freely  as  if  it  were  so 
much  water — ere  I  surrender  my  right  to 
plead  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
before  my  fellow-citizens,  and  in  the  face  of 
all  their  opposers." 

He  continued  in  this  strain  to  re- 
view and  refute  all  the  positions  and 
doctrines  of  these  resolutions,  and, 
toward  the  close  of  his  appeal,  said  : 

"If  in  anything  I  have  offended  against 
the  laws  of  my  country,  or  its  Constitution, 
I  stand  ready  to  answer.  If  I  have  not, 
then  I  Call  upon  those  laws  and  that  Consti- 
tution, and  those  who  revere  them,  to  pro- 
tect me. 

"I  do.  therefore,  as  an  American  citizen, 
and  Christian  patriot,  and  in  the  name  of 
Liberty,  and  Law,  and  Religion,  solemnly 
protest  against  all  these  attempts,  howso- 
ever or  by  whomsoever  made,  to  frown 
down  the  liberty  of  the  press,  and  forbid 
the  free  expression  of  opinion.  Under  a 
deep  sense  of  my  obligations  to  my  country, 
the  Church,  and  my  God,  I  declare  it  to  be 
my  fixed  purpose  to  submit  to  no  such  dic- 
tation. And  I  am  prepared  to  abide  the  con- 
sequences. I  have  appealed  to  the  Constitu- 
tion and  laws  of  my  country  ;  if  they  fail  to 
protect  me,  I  appeal  to  God,  and  with 
Him  I  cheerfully  rest  my  cause." 

The  Observer  failed  for  one  week 
to  appear,  but  was  issued  regularly 
thereafter.  On  the  request  of  its 
proprietors,  Mr.  Lovejoy  gave  up  the 
establishment  to  them,  intending  to 
leave  St.  Louis  ;  but  they  handed  it 
over  in  payment  of  a  debt  of  five 
hundred  dollars,  and  the  new  owner 
immediately  presented  it  to  Mr. 
Lovejoy,  telling  him  to  go  on  with 
the  paper  as  before.  He  had  gone 
to  Alton,  Illinois,  expecting  to  re- 
move it  to  that  city;  but,  while 
there,  a  letter  reached  him  from  St. 
Louis,  urging  him  to  return  and  re- 
main, which  he  did. 

On  the  28th  of  April,  1836,  a 
quarrel  occurred  between  two  sailors, 
or  boatmen,  at  the  steamboat  landing 


134 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


in  St.  Louis.  When  the  civil  offi- 
cers attempted  to  arrest  them  for  a 
breach  of  the  peace,  a  mulatto 
named  Francis  J.  Mcintosh  interfer- 
ed, and  enabled  the  boatmen  to  es- 
cape, for  which  he  was  very  properly 
arrested,  carried  before  a  justice  of 
the  peace,  and  committed  to  jail. 
On  his  way  thither,  being  informed 
that  his  punishment  would  be  not 
less  than  five  years  in  the  State 
Prison,  he  immediately  broke  loose 
from  the  officers,  drew  a  knife,  and 
stabbed  one  of  them  fatally,  severely 
wounding  the  other.  He  was  in- 
stantly secured  and  lodged  in  jail. 
A  mob  thereupon  collected,  broke 
open  the  jail,  tore  him  from  his  cell, 
carried  him  out  of  town,  and  chained 
him  to  a  tree,  around  which  they 
piled  rails,  plank,  shavings,  etc.,  to 
the  hight  of  his  knees,  and  then  ap- 
plied fire.  He  \vas  burning  in  fear- 
ful agony  about  twenty  minutes  be- 
fore life  became  extinct.  When  the 
fire  had  nearly  died  out,  a  rabble  of 
boys  amused  themselves  by  throwing 
stones  at  the  black  and  disfigured 
corpse,  each  endeavoring  to  be  first 
in  breaking  the  skull. 

This  horrible  affair  came  in  due 
course  before  the  grand  jury  of  St. 
Louis  for  investigation,  and  a  Judge, 
who  bore  the  apposite  name  of  Law- 
less, was  required  to  charge  said  jury 
with  regard  to  it.  Here  is  a  speci- 
men of  his  charge : 

"If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  destruction 
of  the  murderer  of  Hammond  was  the  act, 
as  I  have  said,  of  the  many — of  the  multi- 
tude, in  the  ordinary  sense  of  these  words — 
not  the  act  of  numerable  and  ascertainable 
malefactors,  but  of  congregated  thousands, 
seized  upon  and  impelled  by  that  mysterious, 
metaphysical,  and  almost  electric  frenzy, 
which,  in  all  ages  and  nations,  has  hurried 


on  the  infuriated  multitude  to  deeds  of  death 
and  destruction — then,  I  say,  act  not  at  all 
in  the  matter ;  the  case  then  transcends 18 
your  jurisdiction — it  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
human  law1' !  !  ! 

On  this  charge,  Mr.  Lovejoy  com- 
mented with  entire  unreserve ; 
whereupon  a  mob  surrounded  and 
tore  down  his  office — although,  in 
the  issue  which  contained  his  stric- 
tures, he  had  announced  his  decision 
to  remove  the  paper  to  Alton,  be- 
lieving that  it  would  be  there  more 
useful  and  better  supported  than  at 
St.  Louis.  His  first  issue  at  Alton  is 
dated  September  8th. 

Meantime,  his  press  was  taken 
from  St.  Louis,  by  steamboat,  to 
Alton,  and  landed  on  the  bank  about 
daylight  on  Sunday  morning.  It 
lay  there  in  safety  through  the  Sab- 
bath ;  but,  before  the  next  morning, 
it  had  been  destroyed  by  some  five 
or  six  individuals.  On  Monday,  a 
meeting  of  citizens  was  held,  and  a 
pledge  voluntarily  given  to  make 
good  to  Mr.  Lovejoy  his  loss.  The 
meeting  passed  some  resolutions  con- 
demnatory of  Abolitionism,  and  Mr. 
Lovejoy  assured  them  that  he  had 
not  come  to  Alton  to  establish  an 
abolition,  but  a  religious,  journal; 
that  he  was  not  an  Abolitionist,  as 
they  understood  the  term,  but  was 
an  uncompromising  enemy  of  Slave- 
ry, and  so  expected  to  live  and  die. 

He  started  for  Cincinnati  to  pro- 
cure new  printing  materials,  was 
taken  sick  on  the  way,  and,  upon 
reaching  Louisville,  on  his  return, 
was  impelled  by  increasing  illness  to 
stop.  He  remained  there  sick,  in 
the  house  of  a  friend,  for  a  week,  and 
was  still  quite  ill  after  his  return. 

The  Observer  was  issued  regularly 


12  "  Higher  law"  again— fourteen  years  ahead  of  Gov.  Seward. 


LOVEJOY  REFUSES  TO  BE  MUZZLED. 


135 


at  Alton  until  the  17th  of  August, 
1837  —  discussing  Slavery  among 
other  topics,  but  occasionally,  and  in 
a  spirit  of  decided  moderation.  But 
no  moderation  could-  satisfy  those 
who  had  determined  that  the  subject 
should  not  be  discussed  at  all.  On 
the  11th  of  July,  an  anonymous  hand- 
bill appeared,  calling  a  meeting  at 
the  market-place  for  the  next  Thurs- 
day, at  which  time  a  large  concourse 
assembled.  Dr.  J.  A.  Halderman13 
presided,  and  Mr.  J.  P.  Jordon  was 
Secretary.  This  meeting  passed  the 
following  resolves : 

"1.  Resolved,  That  the  Rev.  E.  P.  Love- 
jo  y  has  again  taken  up  and  advocated  the 
principles  of  Abolitionism  through  his 
paper,  the  '  Observer,'  contrary  to  the  dis- 
position and  will  of  a  majority  of  the  citizens 
of  Alton,  and  in  direct  violation  of  a  sacred 
pledge  and  assurance  that  this  paper,  when 
established  in  Alton,  should  not  be  devoted 
to  Abolitionism. 

"2.  Resolved,  That  we  disapprove  of  the 
course  of  the  '  Observer,'  in  publishing  any 
articles  favorable  to  Abolitionism,  and  that 
we  censure  Mr.  Lovejoy  for  permitting  such 
publications  to  appear  in  his  paper,  when  a 
pledge  or  assurance  has  been  given  to  this 
community,  by  him,  that  such  doctrines 
should  not  be  advocated. 

"  3.  Resolved,  That  a  committee  of  five 
citizens  be  appointed  by  this  meeting  to 
wait  upon  and  confer  with  Mr.  Lovejoy,  and 
ascertain  from  him  whether  he  intends,  in 
future,  to  disseminate,  through  the  columns 
of  the  '  Observer,'  the  doctrines  of  Aboli- 
tionism, and  report  the  result  of  their  con- 
ference to  the  public." 

The  only  point  requiring  comment 
in  these  resolves  is  the  allegation  that 
Mr.  Lovejoy  had  pledged  himself  not 
to  discuss  the  subject  of  Slavery  or 
its  Abolition.  This  point  was  an- 
swered by  ten  respectable  citizens  of 
Alton,  who  united  in  the  following 
statement : 

"Whereas  it  has  been  frequently  repre- 
sented that  the  Rev.  Elijah  P.  Lovejoy,  late 
Editor  of  the  '  Alton  Observer,'  solemnly 


pledged  himself  at  a  public  meeting,  called 
for  the  purpose  of  taking  measures  to  bring 
to  justice  the  persons  engaged  in  the  de- 
struction of  the  first  press  brought  to  Alton 
by  said  Lovejoy,  not  to  discuss  the  subject 
of  Slavery ;  we,  the  undersigned,  declare 
the  following  to  be  his  language,  in  sub- 
stance: '  My  principal  object  in  coming  to 
this  place  is  to  establish  a  religious  paper. 
When  I  was  in  St.  Louis,  I  felt  myself  called 
upon  to  treat  at  large  upon  the  subject  of 
Slavery,  as  I  was  in  a  State  where  the  evil 
existed,  and  as  a  citizen  of  that  State  I  felt 
it  my  duty  to  devote  a  part  of  my  columns 
to  that  subject;  but,  gentlemen,  I  am  not, 
and  never  was,  in  full  fellowship  with 
the  Abolitionists;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
have  had  some  spirited  discussions  with 
some  of  the  leading  Abolitionists  of  the 
East,  and  am  not  now  considered  by  them 
as  one  of  them.  And  now,  having  come 
into  a  Free  State,  where  the  evil  does  not 
exist,  I  feel  myself  less  called  upon  to  dis- 
cuss the  subject  than  when  I  was  in  St. 
Louis.'  The  above,  as  we  have  stated,  was 
his  language  in  substance.  The  following, 
we  are  willing  to  testify,  to  be  his  words  in 
conclusion : 

"  '  But,  gentlemen,  so  long  as  I  am  an 
American  citizen,  so  long  as  American 
blood  runs  in  these  veins,  I  shall  hold  my- 
self at  liberty  to  speak,  to  write,  and  to 
publish,  whatever  I  please  on  any  subject, 
being  amenable  to  the  laws  of  my  country 
for  the  same.' " 

On  the  24th,  a  Committee  from 
the  meeting  aforesaid  presented  its 
resolves  to  Mr.  Lovejoy,  asking  a 
response  thereto.  That  response 
was  given  on  the  26th,  and  its  ma- 
terial portion  is  as  follows : 

"You  will,  therefore,  permit  me  to  say 
that,  with  the  most  respectful  feelings  to- 
ward you  individually,  I  cannot  consent,  in 
this  answer,  to  recognize  you  as  the  official 
organ  of  a  public  meeting,  convened  to  dis- 
cuss the  question,  whether  certain  senti- 
ments should,  or  should  not,  be  discussed  in 
the  public  newspaper,  of  which  I  am  the 
Editor.  By  doing  so,  I  should  virtually  ad- 
mit that  the  liberty  of  the  press,  and  the  free- 
dom of  speech,  were  rightfully  subject  to 
other  supervision  and  control  than  those  of 
the  law.  But  this*  I  cannot  admit.  On  the 
contrary,  in  the  language  of  one  of  the 
speakers  at  the  meeting,  I  believe  that  '  the 
valor  of  our  forefathers  has  won  for  us  the 
liberty  of  speech,'  and  that  it  is  '  our  duty 


13  This  name  reappears  in  the  "  Border  Ruffian"  trials  of  Kansas.  1856-8. 


13G 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  our  high  privilege  to  act  and  speak  on 
all  questions  touching  this  great  common- 
wealth.' I  am  happy,  gentlemen,  in  being 
able  to  concur  in  the  above  sentiments, 
which,  I  perceive,  were  uttered  by  one  of 
your  own  members,  and  in  which,  I  cannot 
doubt,  you  all  agree.  I  would  only  add, 
that  I  consider  this  '  liberty'  was  ascertain- 
ed, but  never  originated,  by  our  forefathers. 
It  comes  to  us,  as  I  conceive,  from  our 
Maker,  and  is,  in  its  nature,  inalienable,  be- 
longing to  man  as  man. 

"  Believing,  therefore,  that  everything 
having  a  tendency  to  bring  this  right  into 
jeopardy  is  eminently  dangerous  as  a  prece- 
dent, I  "cannot  admit  that  it  can  be  called 
into  question  by  any  man,  or  body  of  men, 
or  that  they  can,  with  any  propriety,  ques- 
tion me  as  to  my  exercise  of  it." 

These  proceedings  attracted  atten- 
tion from  abroad,  especially  in  St. 
Louis,  to  whose  pro-Slavery  politi- 
cians the  publication  of  The  Observer, 
though  not  in  their  city  or  State,  was 
still  an  eyesore.  On  the  17th  of 
August,  The  Missouri  Republican, 
in  an  article  entitled  "Abolition," 
said : 

"  "We  perceive  that  an  Anti-Slavery  Soci- 
ety has  been  formed  at  Upper  Alton,  and 
many  others,  doubtless,  will  shortly  spring 
up  in  different  parts  of  the  State.  We 
had  hoped  that  our  neighbors  would  have 
ejected  from  amongst  them  that  minister  of 
mischief,  the  'Observer,'  or  at  least  correct- 
ed its  course.  Something  must  be  done  in 
this  matter,  and  that  speedily!  The  good 
people  of  Illinois  must  either  put  a  stop  to 
the  efforts  of  these  fanatics,  or  expel  them 
from  their  community.  If  this  is  not  done, 
the  travel  of  emigrants  through  their  State, 
and  the  trade  of  the  slaveholding  States,  and 
particularly  Missouri,  must  stop.  Every  one 
who  desires  the  harmony  of  the  country,  and 
the  peace  and  prosperity  of  all,  should  unite 
to  put  them  down.  They  can  do  no  positive 
good,  and  may  do  much  irreparable  harm. 
"We  would  not  desire  to  see  this  done  at  the 
expense  of  public  order  or  legal  restraint; 
but  there  is  a  moral  indignation  which  the 
virtuous  portion  of  a  community  may  exert, 
which  is  sufficient  to  crush  this  faction  and 
forever  disgrace  its  fanatic  instigators.  It  is 
to  this  we  appeal,  and  hope  that  the  appeal 
will  not  be  unheeded." 

These  recommendations  and  incite- 


ments were  not  unfruitf ol.  Four  days 
thereafter — two  unsuccessful  attempts 
having  already  been  made — the  office 
of  The  Observer  was  entered  between 
the  hours  of  ten  and  eleven,  p.  m., 
by  a  band  of  fifteen  or  twenty  per- 
sons, and  the  press,  type,  etc.,  utterly 
destroyed.    The  mob  commenced,  as 
usual,  by  throwing  stones  at  the  build- 
ing, whereby  one  man  was  hit  on  the 
head  and  severely  wounded ;  where- 
upon the  office  was  deserted,  and  the 
destroyers  finished  their  work  with- 
out opposition,  while  a  large  con- 
course were  "  looking  on  and  consent- 
ing."   The  authorities  did  nothing 
most  rigorously.    Mr.  Lovejoy  was 
absent  at  the  time,  but  was  met  in 
the  street  by  the  mob,  who  stopped 
him,  threatened  him,  and  assailed 
him  with  vile  language,  but  did  him 
no  serious  harm.    In  The  Observer 
of  the  preceding  day,  he  had  made 
an  explicit  and  effective  response  to 
the  question — "What  are  the  doc- 
trines of  Anti-Slavery  men  ?"  where- 
in he  had  succeeded  in  being  at 
once  moderate  and  forcible — affirm- 
ing most  explicitly  the  flagrant  wrong 
of  slaveholding,  with  the  right  and 
policy  of  immediate  emancipation, 
but  explaining  that  such  an  emanci- 
pation was  to  be  effected  "by  the 
masters  themselves,  and  no  others," 
who  were  to  be  persuaded  to  it,  ex- 
actly as  a  distiller  is  to  be  dissuaded 
from  making  intoxicating  liquors,  or 
a  tippler  from  drinking  them.  But, 
though  his  doctrines  were  peaceful 
and  his  language  mild  and  depreca- 
tory, he  doubtless  irritated  and  an- 
noyed his  adversaries  by  pointing  to 
the  fact — in  refuting  their  slang  about 
amalgamation — that  the  then  14Vice- 


14  Col.  Richard  M.  Johnson. 


MR.   LOVEJOY  MOBBE 


D  AT  ST.  CHARLES'. 


137 


President  of  the  United  States  "  has 
been,  if  he  is  not  now,  the  father  of 
slaves.  And  thousands  have  voted 
to  elevate  him  to  his  present  condi-1 
tion,  who  would  crucify  an  Aboli- 
tionist on  the  bare  suspicion  of 
favoring,  though  only  in  theory, 
such  an  amalgamation.  How  shall 
we  account  for  such  inconsistency?" 
On  the  24th  of  August,  he  issued  an 
appeal  to  the  friends  of  law  and  order 
for  aid  in  reestablishing  The  Observ- 
er ;  and  this  appeal  was  promptly 
and  generously  responded  to.  Hav- 
ing obtained  a  sufficient  amount  in 
Alton  and  Quincy  alone,  he  sent  to 
Cincinnati  to  purchase  new  printing 
materials.  Meantime,  he  issued  an 
address,  submitting  "  To  the  Friends 
of  the  Redeemer  in  Alton"  his  resig- 
nation of  the  editorship  of  the  paper, 
offering  to  hand  over  to  them  the 
subscription-list,  now  exceeding  two 
thousand  names,  on  condition  that 
they  pay  the  debts  of  the  concern, 
receive  all  dues  and  assets,  and  fur- 
nish him  sufficient  means  to  remove 
himself  and  family  to  another  field 
of  labor.  A  meeting  was  accordingly 
held,  which  resolved  that  The  Ob- 
server ought  to  be  continued,  while 
the  question  of  retaining  Mr.  Lovejoy 
as  its  editor  was  discussed  through 
two  or  three  evenings,  but  left  unde- 
cided. Meantime,  while  he  was  ab- 
sent, attending  a  meeting  of  the 
Presbytery,  his  new  press — the  third 
which  he  had  brought  to  Alton  within 
a  little  more  than  a  year — arrived  on 
the  21st  of  September,  was  landed 
about  sunset,  and  immediately  con- 
veyed by  his  friends  to  the  warehouse 
of  Geary  &  Weller.  As  it  passed 
along  the  streets — "  There  goes  the 
Abolition  press  !  stop  it !  stop  it !" 
was  cried,  but  no  violence  was  at- 


tempted. The  Mayor,  apprised  of 
its  arrival  and  also  of  its  peril,  gave 
assurance  that  it  should  be  protected, 
and  asked  its  friends  to  leave  the 
matter  entirely  in  his  hands,  which 
they  did.  A  constable  was  posted  by 
the  Mayor  at  the  door  of  the  ware- 
house, with  orders  to  remain  until  a 
certain  hour.  He  left  at  that  hour; 
and  immediately  ten  or  twenty  ruf- 
fians, with  handkerchiefs  tied  over 
their  faces,  broke  open  the  store, 
rolled  the  press  across  the  street  to 
the  river-bank,  broke  it  into  pieces, 
and  threw  it  in.  Before  they  had 
finished  the  job,  the  Mayor  was  on 
hand,  and  ordered  them  to  disperse. 
They  replied,  that  they  would,  so 
soon  as  they  got  through,  and  were 
as  good  as  their  word.  The  Mayor 
declared  that  he  had  never  witnessed 
a  more  quiet  and  gentlemanly  mob  ! 

Mr.  Lovejoy  preached  at  St. 
Charles,  Missouri,  the  home  of  his 
wife's  relatives,  a  few  days  after — 
October  1st — and  was  mobbed  at  the 
house  of  his  mother-in-law,  directly 
after  his  return  from  evening  church. 
The  mob  attempted,  with  oaths  and 
blows,  to  drag  him  from  the  house, 
but  were  defeated,  mainly  through 
the  courageous  efforts  of  his  wife  and 
one  or  two  friends.  Three  times  the 
house  was  broken  into  and  a  rush 
made  up  stairs ;  and,  finally,  Mr.  L. 
was  induced,  through  the  entreaties 
of  his  wife,  to  leave  it  clandestinely 
and  take  refuge  with  a  friend,  a  mile 
distant,  whence  he  and  his  wife  made 
their  way  back  to  Alton  next  day. 
Nearly  the  first  person  they  met  there 
was  one  of  those  who  had  first  broken 
into  the  house  at  St.  Charles;  and 
the  hunted  clergyman  had  the  cold 
comfort  of  hearing,  from  many  of  his 
religious  brethren,  that  he  had  no 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


138 

one  to  tliank  but  himself  for  his  per- 
secutions, and  that,  if  The  Observer 
were  reestablished,  they  would  do 
nothing  to  protect  it.  During  the 
following  month,  Mr.  Lovejoy  at- 
tended the  meeting  of  the  Presby- 
terian Synod  of  Illinois,  at  Spring- 
field, as  also  meetings  of  an  anti- 
Slavery  Convention  in  Upper  Alton, 
and  one  or  two  meetings  held  at  the 
Court  House  in  Alton,  to  discuss  and 
determine  the  propriety  of  allowing 
him  to  continue  the  publication  of 
The  Observer.  At  the  last  of  these 
meetings  (November  3d),  having  ob- 
tained the  floor,  he  said : 

"Mr.  Chairman:  It  is  not  true,  as  has 
been  charged  upon  me,  that  I  hold  in  con- 
tempt the  feelings  and  sentiments  of  this 
community,  in  reference  to  the  question 
which  is  now  agitating  it.  I  respect  and 
appreciate  the  feelings  of  my  fellow-citizens ; 
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  painful  and  un- 
pleasant duties  of  my  life,  that  I  am  called 
upon  to  act  in  opposition  to  them.  If  you 
suppose,  Sir,  that  I  have  published  senti- 
ments contrary  to  those  generally  held  in 
this  community,  because  I  delighted  in  dif- 
fering from  them,  you  have  entirely  misap- 
prehended me.  But,  Sir,  while  I  value  the 
good  opinion  of  my  fellow-citizens  as  highly 
as  any  one,  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  that 
I  am  governed  by  higher  considerations  than 
either  the  favor  or  the  fear  of  man.  I  am 
impelled  to  the  course  I  have  taken,  because 
I  fear  God.  As  I  shall  answer  it  to  my  God 
in  the  great  day,  I  dare  not  abandon  my  sen- 
timents, nor  cease  in  all  proper  ways  to  prop- 
agate them. 

"  I,  Mr.  Chairman,  have  not  desired  nor 
asked  any  compromise.  I  have  asked  for 
nothing  but  to  be  protected  in  my  rights  as 
a  citizen — rights  which  God  has  given  me, 
and  which  are  guaranteed  to  me  by  the  Con- 
stitution of  my  country.  Have  I,  Sir,  been 
guilty  of  any  infraction  of  the  laws  ?  Whose 
good  name  have  I  injured  ?  When  and  where 
have  I  published  anything  injurious  to  the 
reputation  of  Alton"?  Have  I  not,  on  the 
other  hand,  labored,  in  common  with  the  rest 
of  my  fellow-citizens,  to  promote  the  reputa- 
tion and  interests  of  this  city  ?  What,  Sir,  I 
ask,  has  been  my  offense  ?  Put  your  finger  up- 
on it — define  it — and  I  stand  ready  to  answer 
for  it.  If  I  have  committed  any  crime,  you 
can  easily  convict  me.  You  have  public  sen- 
timent in  your  favor.  You  have  your  juries, 


and  you  have  your  attorney  (looking  at  the 
Attorney -General),  and  I  have  no  doubt  you 
can  convict  me.  But  if  I  have  been  guilty 
of  no  violation  of  law,  why  am  I  hunted  up 
and  down  continually  like  a  partridge  upon 
the  mountains  ?  Why  am  I  threatened  with 
the  tar-barrel?  Why  am  I  waylaid  every 
day,  and  from  night  to  night?  and  why  is 
my  life  in  jeopardy  every  hour? 

"  You  have,  Sir,  made  up,  as  the  lawyers 
say,  a  false  issue ;  there  are  not  two  parties 
between  whom  there  can  be  a  compromise. 
I  plant  myself,  Sir,  down  on  my  unquestion- 
able rights  ;  and  the  question  to  be  decided 
is,  whether  I  shall  be  protected  in  the  exer- 
cise and  enjoyment  of  those  rights — that  is 
the  question,  Sir; — whether  my  property 
shall  be  protected — whether  I  shall  be  suf- 
fered to  go  home  to  my  family  at  night  with- 
out being  assailed,  and  threatened  with  tar 
and  feathers,  and  assassination ;  whether  my 
afflicted  wife,  whose  life  has  been  in  jeopardy 
from  continued  alarm  and  excitement,  shall 
night  after  night  be  driven  from  a  sick-bed 
into  the  garret  to  save  her  life  from  the  brick- 
bats and  violence  of  the  mob;  that,  Sir,  is 
the  question."  Here,  much  affected  and 
overcome  by  his  feelings,  he  burst  into  tears. 
Many,  not  excepting  even  his  enemies,  wept 
— several  sobbed  aloud,  and  the  sympathies 
of  the  whole  meeting  were  deeply  excited. 
He  continued :  "  Forgive  me,  Sir,  that  I  have 
thus  betrayed  my  weakness.  It  was  the  allu- 
sion to  my  family  that  overcame  my  feelings. 
Not,  Sir,  I  assure  you,  from  any  fears  on  my 
part.  I  have  no  personal  fears.  Not  that  I 
feel  able  to  contest  the  matter  with  the 
whole  community ;  I  know  perfectly  well 
that  I  am  not.  I  know,  Sir,  that  you  can  tar 
and  feather  me,  hang  me  up,  or  put  me  into 
the  Mississippi,  without  the  least  difficulty. 
But  what  then  ?  Where  shall  I  go  ?  I  have 
been  made  to  feel  that,  if  I  am  not  safe  at  Al- 
ton, I  shall  not  be  safe  anywhere.  I  recently 
visited  St.  Charles  to  bring  home  my  family, 
and  was  torn  from  their  frantic  embrace  by  a 
mob.  I  have  been  beset  night  and  day  at  Al- 
ton. And  now,  if  I  leave  here  and  go  else- 
where, violence  may  overtake  me  in  my  re- 
treat, and  I  have  no  more  claim  upon  the  pro- 
tection of  another  community  than  I  have  up- 
on this ;  and  I  have  concluded,  after  consulta- 
tion with  my  friends,  and  earnestly  seeking 
counsel  of  God.  to  remain  at  Alton,  and  here 
to  insist  on  protection  in  the  exercise  of  my 
rights.  If  the  civil  authorities  refuse  to  protect 
me,  I  must  look  to  God ;  and,  if  i  die,  I  have 
determined  to  make  my  grave  in  Alton.1' 

It  was  known  in  Alton  that  a  new 

press  was  now  on  the  way  to  Mr. 

Lovejoy,  and  might  arrive  at  any 

time.     Great  excitement  pervaded 


ATTACK  ON  LOVEJOT'S  LAST  PRESS. 


139 


the  community.  Friends  were  on 
the  alert  to  protect  it  on  its  arrival, 
and  enemies  to  insure  its  destruction. 
It  finally  reached  St.  Louis  on  the 
night  of  the  5th,  and  an  arrangement 
was  made  to  have  it  landed  at  Alton 
at  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  7th.  Meantime,  Mr.  Lovejoy 
and  a  friend  went  to  the  Mayor  and 
notified  him  of  its  expected  arrival, 
and  of  the  threats  that  it  should  be 
destroyed,  requesting  the  appoint- 
ment of  special  constables  to  protect 
it.  A  meeting  of  the  City  Council 
was  held,  and  some  discussion  had ; 
but  the  subject  was  laid  on  the  table 
and  nothing  done. 

On  that  evening  (INTovember  6), 
between  forty  and  fifty  citizens  met 
in  the  warehouse  of  Godfrey,  Gilman 
&  Co.,  where  the  press  was  to  be 
stored,  to  organize  a  volunteer  com- 
pany to  aid  in  the  defense  of  law  and 
order.  At  ten  o'clock,  several  left ; 
but  about  thirty  remained  in  the 
building,  with  one  city  constable  to 
command  them.  They  were  armed. 
Mr.  Lovejoy  was  not  among  them. 
His  dwelling  had  been  attacked  but 
a  few  nights  before,  when  he  and  a 
sister  narrowly  escaped  a  brick-bat, 
thrown  with  sufficient  force  to  have 
done  mortal  injury.  Expecting  an 
assault,  his  wife  in  very  delicate 
health,  and  in  a  state  of  nervous 
alarm  from  her  recent  experience  at 
St.  Charles,  Mr.  Lovejoy  had  ar- 
ranged with  a  brother  that  they 
should  watch  alternate  nights  at 
home  and  at  the  store.  At  three  in 
the  morning,  a  steamboat  brought 
the  expected  press.  A  sentinel  of 
the  mob  was  watching  for  it,  and 
immediately  gave  the  alarm,  when 
horns  were  blown  throughout  the 
city.    The  Mayor  had  already  been 


called,  and  was  in  the  building.  He 
requested  those  who  guarded  there, 
to  remain  and  keep  quiet  till  he 
called  for  them,  saying  that  he  would 
attend  to  the  storing  of  the  press, 
which  he  did.  A  few  stones  were 
thrown,  but  no  serious  damage 
effected,  and  the  press  was  safely  de- 
posited in  the  garret  of  a  strong  stone 
warehouse,  where  it  was  thought  to 
be  safe. 

Throughout  the  following  day, 
general  quiet  prevailed,  though  it 
was  well  known  that  "  the  Abolition 
press"  had  been  received,  and  was 
stored  in  Godfrey  &  Gilman's  ware- 
house. The  Mayor  made  inquiries 
at  several  points,  and  was  satisfied 
that  no  further  violence  was  intend- 
ed. At  evening,  the  volunteer  de- 
fenders of  Mr.  Lovejoy 's  rights  drop- 
ped in  at  the  warehouse,  and  remain- 
ed until  nine  o'clock;  when,  there 
being  no  signs  of  trouble,  all  but 
twelve  went  away.  Mr.  Lovejoy  re- 
mained, with  one  or  two  others  who 
were  called  Abolitionists.  The  resi- 
due were  simply  citizens,  opposed  to 
burglary  and  robbery,  and  willing  to 
risk  their  lives  in  defense  of  the 
rights  of  property  and  the  freedom 
of  the  press. 

About  ten  o'clock,  some  thirty  per- 
sons, as  if  by  preconcert,  suddenly 
emerged  from  a  neighboring  grog- 
shop— a  few  of  them  with  arms,  but 
the  majority  with  only  stones  in  their 
hands — formed  a  line  at  the  south 
end  of  the  store,  next  the  river, 
knocked  and  hailed.  Mr.  Gilman, 
from  the  garret  door,  asked  what 
they  wanted.  Their  leader  replied  : 
"The  press."  Mr.  Gilman  assured 
them  that  it  would  not  be  given  up ; 
adding,  "  We  have  no  ill  feelings  to- 
ward any  of  you,  and  should  much 


140 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


regret  to  do  you  any  injury ;  but  we 
are  authorized  by  the  Mayor  to  de- 
fend our  property,  and  shall  do  so 
with  our  lives."  The  leader  replied 
that  they  were  resolved  to  have  the 
press  at  any  sacrifice,  and  pres'ented 
a  pistol,  whereupon  Mr.  G.  retired 
into  the  building.  The  mob  then 
passed  around  to  the  opposite  end  of 
the  warehouse,  and  commenced 
throwing  stones,  which  soon  demol- 
ished several  of  the  windows.  No 
resistance  was  offered  ;  the  inmates 
having  agreed  not  to  fire  unless  their 
lives  were  in  danger.  The  ware- 
house being  of  stone,  and  solidly 
built,  no  further  impression  was 
made  on  it  by  this  assault.  Finding 
their  missiles  ineffectual,  the  mob 
fired  two  or  three  guns  into  the 
building,  by  which  no  one  was  hit. 
The  fire  was  then  returned,  and  sev- 
eral of  the  rioters  wounded,  one  of 
them  mortally.  Hereupon,  the  mob 
recoiled,  carrying  off  their  wounded. 
But  they  soon  returned  with  ladders, 
and  other  preparations  for  firing  the 
roof  of  the  warehouse,  cursing  and 
shouting.  "  Burn  them  out !  burn 
them  out !"  They  kept  carefully  on 
the  side  of  the  building  where  there 
were  no  windows,  so  that  they  could 
not  be  injured  or  repelled  by  its  de- 
fenders. The  Mayor  and  a  justice 
were  now  deputed  by  the  mob  to 
bear  a  message  to  the  inmates  of  the 
building,  proposing  that,  on  condition 
the  press  were  given  up,  no  one 
should  be  further  molested,  and  no 
more  property  destroyed.  The  pro- 
position was  quietly  declined.  Mr. 
Gilman,  in  turn,  requested  the  Mayor 
to  call  on  certain  citizens  to  save  his 
store  from  the  threatened  destruction 
by  fire.  The  Mayor  replied  that  the 
mob  was  so  strong  and  so  determined 


that  he  could  do  nothing — that  he 
had  already  tried  to  command  and 
persuade  them  to  desist,  but  without 
success.  He  was  asked  if  those  in 
the  building  should  defend  their  pro- 
perty with  arms;  to  which  he  re- 
plied, as  he  had  repeatedly  done  be- 
fore, that  they  had  a  perfect  right  to 
do  so,  and  that  the  law  justified  them 
in  that  course.  He  then  left  the 
building,  and  reported  the  result  of 
his  mission,  which  was  received  with 
yells  of  "  Fire  the  building  !"  "  Fire 
the  building!"  "Burn  'em  out!" 
"Burn  'em   out!"     "Shoot  every 

d  d  Abolitionist  as  he  leaves  !" 

It  was  now  near  midnight,  and  the 
bells  had  been  rung,  collecting  a 
large  concourse,  who  stood  passive 
spectators  of  what  followed. 

The  mob  now  raised  their  ladders 
against  the  building,  mounted  to  the 
roof,  and  kindled  a  fire  there,  which 
burned  rather  slowly.  Five  of  the 
defenders  hereupon  volunteered  to 
sally  out  and  drive  them  away.  They 
left  by  the  south  door,  passed  around 
the  corner  to  the  east  side  of  the 
building,  and  fired  upon  the  man 
who  guarded  the  foot  of  the  ladder, 
drove  him  off,  and  dispersed  his  im- 
mediate comrades,  returning  to  the 
store  to  reload.  Mr.  Lovejoy  and 
two  others  stepped  again  to  the  door, 
and  stood  looking  around  just  with- 
out the  building — Mr.  L.  in  advance 
of  the  others.  Several  of  the  rioters 
were  concealed  from  their  view  be- 
hind a  pile  of  lumber  a  few  rods  in 
their  front.  One  of  these  had  a  two- 
barreled  gun,  which  he  fired.  Mr. 
Lovejoy  received  five  balls,  three  of 
them  in  his  breast,  probably  each 
mortal.  He  turned  quickly,  ran 
into  the  store,  and  up  a  flight  of 
stairs  into  the  counting-room,  where 


LOVEJOT'S  MURDERERS  ACQUITTED. 


141 


I  he  fell,  exclaiming,  "  Oh  God,  I  am 
I  shot !  I  am  shot !"  and  almost  in- 
j  stantly  expired.  One  of  his  friends 
j  received  at  the  same  time  a  ball  in 
i  his  leg,  of  which  he  recovered.  Those 
I  remaining  alive  in  the  building  now 
held  a  consultation,  and  concluded 
I  to  surrender.  One  of  their  number 
went  up  to  the  scuttle  and  apprised 
the  mob  that  Mr.  Lovejoy  was  dead, 
and  that  the  press  would  now  be 
given  up.  A  jell  of  exultation  was 
sent  up  by  the  rioters,  and  the  pro- 
posed surrender  declined.  Another 
of  the  inmates  now  resolved  to  go 
out  and  make  some  terms,  if  possi- 
ble ;  but  he  had  hardly  opened  the 
door  when  he  was  fired  upon  and 
severely  wounded.  A  citizen  now 
came  to  the  door  at  the  opposite  end, 
and  begged  those  within  to  leave  the 
building,  as  it  was  on  fire,  and  their 
remaining  would  be  utterly  useless. 
All  but  two  or  three  hereupon  laid 
down  their  arms,  left  the  building, 
and  fled,  being  fired  upon  by  the 
mob  as  they  escaped.  The  rioters 
then  rushed  into  the  building,  threw 
the  press  out  of  the  window,  broke  it 
up,  and  pitched  the  pieces  into  the 
river.  They  destroyed  no  other  pro- 
perty, save  a  few  guns.  One  of 
them — a  doctor — offered  to  extract 
the  ball  from  the  wounded  man's  leg  ; 
but  he  declined  their  assistance.  At 
two  o'clock,  they  had  dispersed,  and 
all  was  again  quiet. 

Mr.  Lovejoy's  remains  were  borne 
away  next  morning  to  his  dwelling, 
amid  the  jeers  and  scoffs  of  his  mur- 
derers. He  was  buried  the  day  fol- 
lowing—  Thursday,  November  9 — 
the  day  which,  had  he  been  living, 
would  have  completed  his  thirty- 
fifth  year.  His  wife,  who,  on  ac- 
count of  the  critical  state  of  her 


health,  had  been  sent  away  from 
Alton,  was  unable  to  attend  his  fu- 
neral. Of  their  two  children,  one 
was  born  after  his  death. 

The  defenders  of  the  warehouse, 
as  well  as  the  recognized  leaders  of 
their  assailants,  were  respectively  in- 
dicted for  riot,  and  tried,  or  rather, 
Mr.  Gilman  alone  of  the  defenders 
was  tried;  and  upon  his  acquittal 
the  City  Attorney  entered  a  nolle 
prosequi  as  to  the  other  defendants. 
The  leading  rioters  were  next  placed 
on  trial,  and  were  likewise  acquitted. 
The  testimony  of  the  Mayor,  John 
M.  Krum,  was  much  relied  on  by 
the  defenders  of  the  press,  who  ex- 
pected to  prove  by  it  that  they  acted 
throughout  under  his  authority,  as 
ministers  of  the  law  and  official 
guardians  of  the  rights  of  property. 
His  testimony,  however,  did  not  sus- 
tain this  assumption.  The  Mayor 
fully  admitted  that  he  had  repeated- 
ly and  freely  consulted  with  them  as 
to  their  course  in  the  premises,  and 
had  advised  them  that  they  would 
be  entirely  justified  in  defending 
their  rights  by  arms,  if  necessary. 
But,  he  said,  he  had  given  this  advice 
as  a  lawyer,  a  neighbor,  and  citizen  ; 
not  as  Mayor. 

The  details  of  this  tragedy  are  im- 
portant, as  they  serve  to  silence  two 
cavils,  which  have  been  most  famil- 
iar in  the  mouths  of  the  champions 
of  Slavery.  "  If  you  want  to  oppose 
Slavery,  why  do  n't  you  go  where  it 
is?"  has  been  triumphantly  asked 
many  thousands  of  times.  Mr.  Love- 
joy  did  exactly  this — as  Lundy,  and 
Garrison,  and  many  others  had  done 
before  him — and  only  left  a  Slave  for 
a  Free  State  when  such  removal  was 


142 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


imperatively  demanded.  "  Why 
do  n't  you  keep  clear  of  the  fanatical 
Abolitionists,  and  discuss  the  ques- 
tion in  moderation  and  good  tem- 
per ?"  Mr.  Lovejoy  did  exactly  this, 
also.  He  was  not  the  advocate  of 
Garrisonism ;  on  the  contrary,  he  con- 
demned it.  He  was  not  the  cham- 
pion of  any  political  party,  nor  of  any 
peculiar  line  of  anti-Slavery  action. 
He  did  not  publish  an  Abolition 
journal.  His  was  simply  and  purely 
a  religious  newspaper,  in  which 
Slavery  was  from  time  to  time  dis- 
cussed, and  its  evils  exposed,  like 
those  of  intemperance,  or  any  other 
immorality.  But  this  he  was  not 
permitted  to  do,  whether  in  a  Slave 
or  in  a  Free  State.  He  was  pro- 
scribed, hunted,  persecuted,  assaulted, 
plundered,  and  finally  killed — not 
because  he  persisted  in  opposing 
Slavery  in  the  wrong  place,  or  in  a 
peculiarly  objectionable  manner,  but 
because  he  would  not  desist  from  op- 
posing it  at  all.15 

The  District  of  Columbia  was  orig- 
inally composed  of  a  hundred  square 
miles  of  territory,  lying  on  both  sides 
of  the  river  Potomac,  at  the  head  of 
navigation  on  that  stream.  The  forty 
square  miles  south  of  that  river,  form- 
ing the  county  and  including  the  city 
of  Alexandria,  were  ceded  to  the  Union 
in  1789  by  Yirginia,  and  retroceded 
to  that  State  in  1846 — the  move- 
ment for  retrocession  having,  doubt- 
less, some  covert  reference  to  the 
probability  or  prospect  of  disunion. 
The  sixty  square  miles  lying  north  of 
the  Potomac — forming  the  county  of 

15  Wendell  Phillips,  then  a  young  Whig 
lawyer,  first  conspicuously  identified  himself 
with  the  anti-Slavery  movement,  at  a  meeting 
held  in  Boston  (December  8,  1837),  at  the  old 


Washington,  and  including  the  cities 
of  Washington  and  Georgetown — ■ 
were  ceded  by  Maryland  in  1788, 
and  now  compose  the  entire  District ; 
so  that  Washington  is  commanded, 
within  easy  shelling  distance,  by 
hights  which,  in  case  the  separation 
of  Yirginia  from  the  Union  were  con- 
ceded, would  be  part  and  parcel  of 
a  foreign  country. 

The  Federal  Constitution  (Art.  I., 
Section  8)  provides  that,  "  The  Con- 
gress shall  have  power  to  exercise 
exclusive  legislation  in  all  cases  what- 
soever, over  such  District  (not  ex- 
ceeding ten  miles  square)  as  may,  by 
cession  of  particular  States,  and  the 
acceptance  of  Congress,  become  the 
seat  of  the  Government  of  the  United 
States."  The  cession  by  Maryland 
was  without  qualification.  But  Con- 
gress proceeded,  soon  after,  to  pass 
an  act,  apparently  without  much  con- 
sideration or  forecast,  whereby  the 
then  existing  laws  of  Maryland  and 
Yirginia  were  to  continue  in  full 
force  and  effect  over  those  portions 
of  the  Federal  District  ceded  by  them 
respectively,  until  Congress  should 
otherwise  enact ;  and,  as  those  States 
were  undoubtedly  Slave  States,  their 
slave  laws  continued  operative  here- 
in, with  little  or  no  modification  or 
improvement,  down  to  the  passage  of 
the  Compromise  measures  of  1850. 

Yery  naturally,  the  creation  out 
of  nothing  of  such  a  city  as  Wash- 
ington, with  its  adoption  as  the  capi- 
tal of  the  Republic,  combined  with 
its  favorable  location,  served  to  ren- 
der it  an  extensive  mart  for  the  pros- 
ecution of  the  domestic  Slave- Trade. 

Court  House — Faneuil  Hall  having  been  asked 
for,  and  refused,  to  a  petition  headed  by  Rev. 
William  E.  Channing — to  consider  the  circum- 
stances attending  the  death  of  Mr.  Lovejoy. 


SLAVERY  IN  THE  F 


EDERAL  DISTRICT. 


143 


Some  of  the  largest  purchasers  in 
Maryland  and  Virginia  for  the  cotton 
and  sugar  region  located  themselves 
at  this  point,  fitted  up  their  slave- 
pens,  and  advertised  in  the  leading 
journals  of  the  Capital  their  readi- 
ness to  buy  and  sell  young  and  likely 
negroes.  Yessels  were  regularly  dis- 
patched from  Alexandria  to  New  Or- 
leans, laden  with  their  human  mer- 
chandise. So  that,  in  the  absence  of 
manufactures,  and  of  any  but  a  petty 
retail  trade,  slaves  were  long  a  chief 
staple  of  the  commerce,  and  certainly 
the  leading  export,  of  the  American 
metropolis. 

Under  the  slave  laws,  so  hastily 
bolted  by  Congress,  every  negro  or 
mulatto  was  presumptively  a  slave ; 
and,  if  unable  to  indicate  his  master, 
or  to  establish  specially  his  right  to 
freedom,  was  liable  to  be  arrested  and 
imprisoned,  advertised,  and  sold,  in 
default  of  a  claimant,  to  pay  the  costs 
of  this  worse  than  Algerine  proce- 
dure; and,  as  Washington  steadily 
increased  in  population  and  import- 
ance, the  number  of  colored  persons 
drifting  thither  from  all  quarters  in- 
creased wTith  it,  until  the  business  of 
arresting,  detaining,  advertising,  and 
selling  unowned  negroes  became  a 
most  lucrative  perquisite  of  the  Fed- 
eral Marshal  for  the  District,  yield- 
ing him  a  net  profit  of  many  thou- 
sands of  dollars  per  annum.  The  ad- 
vertisements in  The  National  Intel- 
ligencer, United  States  Telegraph, 
Globe,  Union,  etc.,  of  negroes  whom 
he  had  caught  and  caged,  and,  in  de- 
fault of  an  owner,  wTas  about  to  sell, 
were  widely  copied  in  both  hemi- 
spheres, provoking  comments  by  no 
means  flattering  to  our  country  nor 
its  institutions.  The  plumage  of  the 
American  eagle  wTas  often  ruffled  by 


criticisms  and  comparisons  between 
these  legal  proceedings,  under  the 
shadow  of  our  Capitol,  and  the  harsher 
dealings  of  savages  and  heathen  with 
strangers  so  luckless  as  to  fall  into 
their  hands ;  and  the  point  of  these 
invidious  comparisons  was  barbed  by 
their  undeniable  justice. 

Petitions  for  the  Abolition  of  Sla- 
very in  the  Federal  District,  or,  at 
least,  of  the  Slave-Trade  so  flourish- 
ing therein,  had  been  from  time  im- 
memorial presented  to  Congress,  and 
treated  with  no  more  disrespect  or 
disregard  than^etitions  to  legislative 
bodies  usually  encounter.  One  of 
these,  presented  in  1828,  was  signed 
by  United  States  District  Judge 
Cranch,  and  about  one  thousand 
more  of  the  most  respectable  citizens 
of  the  District;  but,  wThile  it  was 
treated  decorously,  no  decisive  step 
was  taken  toward  compliance  with 
its  prayer.  As  the  distinctive  Abo- 
lition movement  gained  strength  in 
the  North,  and  the  excitement  caused 
thereby  rose  higher  in  the  South — 
especially  after  the  Message  of  Gen. 
Jackson,  already  quoted,  urging  that 
anti-Slavery  agitation  be  made  a  pe- 
nal offense — a  more  decisive  hostility 
was  resolved  on  by  the  champions 
of  Slavery,  under  the  lead  of  Mr. 
Calhoun. 

On  the  presentation,  by  Mr.  Fair- 
field, of  Maine  (December  16,  1835), 
of  the  petition  of  one  hundred  and 
seventy-twTo  women,  praying  the  Ab- 
olition of  the  Slave-Trade  in  the 
District,  it  was  decisively  laid  on  the 
table  of  the  House ;  Yeas  180,  Nays 
31— the  Nays  all  from  the  North, 
and  mainly  Whigs. 

On  the  18th,  Mr  Jackson,  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, offered  a  similar  petition 
from  the  citizens  of  the  towrn  of 


144 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"Wrentham;  and  Mr.  Hammond  of 
South  Carolina,  moved  that  it  be  not 
received;  which  was  met  by  a  mo- 
tion to  lay  on  the  table.  This  was 
rejected — Yeas  95,  Nays  121.  But, 
finally,  a  proposition  that  the  peti- 
tion and  all  motions  regarding  it  be 
laid  on  the  table  was  carried — Yeas 
140;  Nays  76. 

Mr.  Buchanan16  presented  a  memo- 
rial of  the  Cain  (Pennsylvania)  quar- 
terly meeting  of  Friends,  asking  for 
the  same  in  substance  as  the  above. 
Though  opposed  to  granting  the 
prayer  of  the  petition,  he  preferred 
its  reference  to  a  Select  Committee 
or  that  on  the  District.  But,  finding 
that  there  were  insurmountable  ob- 
stacles to  such  a  reference,  he  would 
move  that  the  memorial  be  read,  and 
that  the  prayer  of  the  memorialists  be 
rejected.  The  question  being  de- 
manded on  Mr.  Buchanan's  motion, 
it  was  carried  by  the  decisive  vote  of 
34  to  6. 

Mr.  Morris,  of  Ohio,  soon  after 
presented  similar  memorials  from  his 
State ;  whereupon  Mr.  Calhoun  raised 
the  question  of  reception,  declaring 
"  that  the  petitions  just  read  con- 
tained a  gross,  false,  and  malicious 
slander  on  eleven  States  represented 
on  this  floor."  "  That  Congress  had 
no  jurisdiction  over  the  subject,  no 
more  in  this  District  than  in  the 
State  of  South  Carolina."  After  a 
long  and  spirited  debate,  mainly  by 
Southern  senators,  Mr.  Calhoun's  mo- 
tion to  reject  was  defeated  by  a  vote 
to  receive  the  petition — Yeas  35, 
Nays  10,  as  follows : 

11  Yeas  :  Messrs.  Benton,  Brown,  Buchan- 
an, Clay,  Clayton,  Crittenden,  Davis,  Ewing 
of  Illinois,  Ewing  of  Ohio,  Goldsborough, 
Grundy,  Hendricks,  Hill,  Hubbard,  Kent, 


King  of  Alabama,  King  of  Georgia,  Knight, 
Linn,  McKean,  Morris,  Kaudain,  Niles,  Pren- 
tiss, Bobbins,  Robinson,  Buggies,  Shepley, 
Southard,  Swift,  Tallmadge,  Tipton,  Tomlin- 
son,  Wall,  Webster,  Wright.  Nays:  Messrs. 
Black,  Calhoun,  Cuthbert,  Leigh,  Moore, 
Nicholas,  Porter,  Preston,  Walker,  White." 

In  the  House,17  Mr.  Henry  L. 
Pinckney,  of  South  Carolina,  sub- 
mitted the  following  resolve : 

"  JRcsohed,  That  all  the  memorials  which 
have  been  offered,  or  may  hereafter  be  pre- 
sented to  this  House,  praying  for  the  aboli- 
tion of  Slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia, 
and  also  the  resolutions  offered  by  an  honor- 
able member  from  Maine  (Mr.  Jarvis),  with 
the  amendment  thereto,  proposed  by  an  hon- 
orable member  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Wise), 
and  every  other  paper  or  proposition  that 
may  be  submitted  in  relation  to  that  subject, 
be  referred  to  a  Select  Committee,  with  in- 
structions to  report  that  Congress  has  no 
constitutional  authority  to  interfere  in  any 
way  with  the  institution  of  Slavery  in  any 
of  the  States  of  this  confederacy;  and  that, 
in  the  opinion  of  this  House,  Congress  ought 
not  to  interfere  in  any  way  with  Slavery  in 
the  District  of  Columbia,  because  it  would 
be  a  violation  of  the  public  faith,  unwise,  im- 
politic, and  dangerous  to  the  Union ;  as- 
signing such  reasons  for  these  conclusions 
as,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Committee,  may 
be  best  calculated  to  enlighten  the  public 
mind,  to  repress  agitation,  to  allay  excite- 
ment, to  sustain  and  preserve  the  just  rights 
of  the  slave-holding  States,  and  of  the  peo- 
ple of  this  District,  and  to  reestablish  har- 
mony and  tranquillity  amongst  the  various 
sections  of  the  Union." 

After  some  demur  by  Mr.  Ham- 
mond, of  South  Carolina,  and  Mr. 
Wise,  of  Virginia,  the  Previous 
Question  was  ordered  on  this  resolve 
—Yeas  118,  Nays  47.  Mr.  Yinton, 
of  Ohio,  now  demanded  a  division 
of  the  resolve  into  three  parts,  which 
demand  was  sustained  by  the  Chair ; 
and  the  first  proposition,  requiring  a 
reference  of  all  memorials  on  this 
subject  to  a  Select  Committee,  was 
carried — Yeas  174,  Nays  48 :  the 
Nays  all  from  the  South.  The 
second  proposition,  regarding  Slavery 


J6  January  11,  1836. 


17  February  6,  1836. 


CONGRESS    REPRESSING  AGITATION. 


145 


in  the  States,  was  affirmed — Yeas 
201,  Nays  7.x  The  third  proposi- 
tion, affirming  that  "  Congress 
ought  not  to  interfere  in  any  way 
with  Slavery  in  the  District  of 
Columbia,"  prevailed  —  Yeas  163, 
Nays  47 — the  Nays,  of  course,  from 
the  North.  And  the  third  clause, 
being  now  divided,  the  question  was 
taken  on  the  remaining  part — "be- 
cause it  would  be  a  violation  of  the 
public  faith,  unwise,  impolitic,  and 
dangerous  to  the  Union" — and  that 
was  also  affirmed — Yeas  129  ;  Nays 
74:  the  Nays  being  all  from  the 
North,  and  nearly  all  Whigs.  The 
remainder  of  the  proposition  was 
then  affirmed — Yeas  169  ;  Nays  6. 

The  Committee  appointed  under 
the  above  resolution  consisted  of 
Messrs.  Pinckney  of  South  Carolina ; 
Hamer  of  Ohio ;  Pierce  of  New 
Hampshire  ;  Hardin  of  Kentucky  ; 
Jarvis  of  Maine  ;  Owens  of  Georgia  ; 
Muhlenberg  of  Pennsylvania ;  Drom- 
goole  of  Virginia;  and  Turrill  of 
New  York — all  Democrats,  but  Har- 
din, a  Southern  Whig.  This  Com- 
mittee, in  due  season,  reported,  First, 
That  Congress  possesses  no  constitu- 
tional authority  to  interfere,  in  any 
way,  with  the  institution  of  Slavery 
in  any  State  of  this  confederacy. 
Secondly,  That  Congress  ought  not 
to  interfere  in  any  way  with  Slavery 
in  the  District  of  Columbia.  And, 
"  for  the  purpose  of  arresting  agita- 
tion, and  restoring  tranquillity  to  the 
public  mind,"  they  recommended  the 
adoption  of  this  resolve  : 

"That  all  petitions,  memorials,  resolu- 
tions, propositions,  or  papers  relating  in  any- 
way to  the  subject  of  Slavery,  or  the  aboli- 
tion of  Slavery,  shall,  without  either  being 
printed  or  referred,  be  laid  upon  the  table." 


This  resolve  was  adopted — Yeas 
117,  Nays  68 ;  the  Nays  being  sub- 
stantially, but  not  entirely,  ^composed 
of  the  Whig  members  from  the  Free 
States. 

Amazing  as  it  may  seem,  this 
heroic  treatment  was  not  successful 
in  "  arresting  agitation,  and  restoring 
tranquillity  to  the  public  mind  ;"  so 
that,  when  this  Congress  met  for  the 
second  session,  it  was  found  necessary 
to  do  the  work  all  over  again.  Ac- 
cordingly, Mr.  Albert  G.  Hawes, 
(Democrat)  of  Kentucky,1*  offered  a 
resolution,  providing : 

"  That  all  memorials,  etc.,  on  the  subject 
of  the  abolition  of  Slavery,  should  be  laid  on 
the  table,  without  being  referred  or  printed, 
and  that  no  further  action  should  be  had 
thereon." 

Which  was  adopted — Yeas  129 ; 
Nays  69 — the  Nays  mainly  Northern 
Whigs,  as  before.  All  debate  was 
precluded  by  the  Previous  Ques- 
tion. 

And  still  the  agitation  refused  to 
be  controlled  or  allayed ;  so  that,  on 
the  meeting  of  the  next  Congress, 
Mr.  Patton,  of  Virginia,19  offered  the 
following  "as  a  timely  sacrifice  to 
the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  coun- 
try:" 

"  Resolved,  That  all  petitions,  memorials, 
and  papers  touching  the  abolition  of  Slavery, 
or  the  buying,  selling,  or  transferring  of 
slaves  in  any  State,  District,  or  Territory  of 
the  United  States,  be  laid  upon  the  table 
without  being  debated,  printed,  read,  or 
referred ;  and  no  further  action  whatever 
shall  be  had  thereon." 

The  Previous  Question  having 
again  been  ordered,  this  resolve  was 
adopted — Yeas  122;  Nays  74 — the 
Nays,  as  before,  mainly,  if  not  en- 
tirely, the  Whig  members  from  the 
Free  States. 


18  January  18,  1837. 

10 


19  December  21,  1837. 


146 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


At  the  next  session,20  Mr.  Charles 
G.  Atherton,  of  New  Hampshire, 
moved  the  following  resolutions  : 

"  Resolved,  That  this  government  is  a  gov- 
ernment of  limited  powers;  and  that,  by 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  Con- 
gress has  no  jurisdiction  whatever  over  the 
institution  of  Slavery  in  the  several  States 
of  the  confederacy. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  petitions  for  the 
abolition  of  Slavery  in  the  District  of  Co- 
lumbia and  the  Territories  of  the  United 
States,  and  against  the  removal  of  slaves 
from  one  State  to  another,  are  a  part  of  the 
plan  of  operations  set  on  foot  to  affect  the 
institution  of  Slavery  in  the  several  States, 
and  thus  indirectly  to  destroy  that  institu- 
tion within  their  limits. 

"  Resolved,  That  Congress  has  no  right  to 
do  that  indirectly  which  it  cannot  do  direct- 
ly; and  that  the  agitation  of  the  subject  of 
Slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  or  the 
Territories,  as  a  means  or  with  a  view  of 
disturbing  or  overthrowing  that  institution 
in  the  several  States,  is  against  the  true 
spirit  and  meaning  of  the  Constitution,  an 
infringement  of  the  rights  of  the  States 
affected,  and  *  breach  of  the  public  faith  on 
which  they  entered  into  the  confederacy. 

"Resolved,  That  the  Constitution  rests  on 
the  broad  principle  of  equality  among  the 
members  of  this  confederacy  ;  and  that  Con- 
gress, in  the  exercise  of  its  acknowledged 
powers,  has  no  right  to  discriminate  be- 
tween the  institutions  of  one  portion  of  the 
States  and  another,  with  a  view  of  abolish- 
ing the  one  and  promoting  the  other. 

"  Resolved,  therefore,  That  all  attempts  on 
the  part  of  Congress  to  abolish  Slavery  in 
the  District  of  Columbia  or  the  Territories, 
or  to  prohibit  the  removal  of  slaves  from 
State  to  State,  or  to  discriminate  between 
the  institutions  of  one  portion  of  the  coun- 
try and  another  with  the  views  aforesaid, 
are  in  violation  of  the  Constitution,  destruc- 
tive of  the  fundamental  principles  on  which 
the  Union  of  these  States  rests,  and  beyond 
the  jurisdiction  of  Congress;  and  that  every 
petition,  memorial,  resolution,  proposition, 
or  paper,  touching  or  relating  in  any  way, 
or  to  any  extent  whatever,  to  Slavery  as 
aforesaid,  or  the  abolition  thereof,  shall,  on 
the  presentation  thereof,  without  any  further 
action  thereon,  be  laid  on  the  table,  without 
being  debated,  printed,  or  referred." 

Mr.  Cushing,  of  Massachusetts,  ob- 
jecting, on  motion  of  Mr.  Atherton, 
the  rules  were  suspended ;  and  Mr. 

-20  December  11,  1838.    21  January  18,  1840. 
22  The  members  from  the  Free  States,  twenty- 
eight  in  all  (all  Democrats  but  Proffit,  a  Tylerized 


A.'s  resolves  duly  passed,  as  follows : 
No.  1— Yeas  198  ;  Nays  6.  No.  2 
—Yeas  134;  Nays  67— mainly,  if 
not  wholly,  Northern  Whigs.  The 
third  resolution  having  been  divided, 
the  House  first  resolved  "  That  Con- 
gress has  no  right  to  do  that  indi- 
rectly which  it  cannot  do  directly," 
etc.— Yeas  170,  Nays  30.  The  resi- 
due of  the  third  resolve  passed — Yeas 
164,  Nays  39.  The  fourth  resolve 
was  in  like  manner  divided,  and 
passed  in  two  parts,  by  182  and  175 
Yeas  to  26  Nays.  The  last  of  Mr. 
Atherton's  resolves  was  in  like  man- 
ner divided,  and  the  former  part 
adopted  by  Yeas  147  to  Nays  51 ; 
and  the  latter  or  gag  portion  by 
Yeas  127,  Nays  78— Henry  A.  "Wise 
refusing  to  vote. 

This  would  seem  quite  stringent 
enough  ;  but,  two  years  later,21  the 
House,  on  motion  of  William  Cost 
Johnson  (Whig),  of  Maryland,  further 

"Resolved,  That  upon  the  presentation  of 
any  memorial  or  petition,  praying  for  the 
abolition  of  Slavery  or  the  Slave-Trade  in 
any  District,  Territory,  or  State  of  the 
Union,  and  upon  the  presentation  of  any 
resolution  or  other  paper  touching  that  sub- 
ject, the  reception  of  such  memorial,  peti- 
tion, resolution,  or  paper,  shall  be  consider- 
ed as  objected  to,  and  the  question  of  its 
reception  laid  on  the  table,  without  debate 
or  further  action  thereon. 

"Resolved,  That  no  petition,  memorial,  re- 
solution, or  other  paper,  praying  for  the 
abolition  of  Slavery  in  the  District  of  Co- 
lumbia, or  any  State  or  Territory,  or  the 
Slave-Trade  between  the  States  or  Territo- 
ries of  the  United  States,  in  which  it  now 
exists,  shall  be  received  by  this  House,  or 
entertained  in  any  way  whatever." 

On  this  proposition,  the  votes  were 
—  Yeas  114;  Nays  108  —  several 
Northern  Democrats  and  some 
Southern  Whigs  voting  with  all  the 
Northern  Whigs  in  the  minority.22 

In  a  little  more  than  ten  years  | 

Whig),  who  voted  for  this  resolve,  were  as  fol- 
lows: 

Maine. — Yirgil  D.  Parris,  Albert  Smith. —  I 


TEXAS  UNDER  SPAIN". 


147 


after  this,  Congress  prohibited  the 
Slave-Trade  in  the  District ;  and, 
within  twenty-two  years,  Slavery 
itself,  in  that  District,  was  likewise 
abolished  by  a  decided  vote.  Thus 


Congress  at  last  discovered  and  ap- 
plied the  true,  enduring  remedy  for 
'  agitation,'  in  hearing  and  heeding 
the  demands  of  Justice,  Humanity, 
and  Freedom. 


XII. 

TEXAS  AND  HEE  ANNEX  AT  ION. 


The  name  Texas  originally  desig- 
nated an  ill-denned  and  mainly  unin- 
habited region  lying  between  the 
French  possessions  on  the  Mississippi, 
and  the  Spanish  on  the  Rio  Grande, 
but  including  no  portion  of  the  val- 
ley of  either  of  those  great  rivers. 
Though  the  first  European  settle- 
ment on  its  soil  appears  to  have  been 
!  made  by  La  Salle,  a  Frenchman,  who 
|  landed  in  Matagorda  Bay,  and  erected 
fort  St.  Louis  on  the  Lavacca,  prior 
to  1687,  he  is  known  to  have  intend- 
ed to  settle  on  the  Mississippi,  and 
to  have  drifted  so  far  westward  by 
i  mistake.  The  region  since  known 
as  Texas  was,  even  then,  claimed  by 
Spain  as  a  part  of  Mexico ;  and  a 
Spanish  expedition  under  De  Leon 
was  dispatched  to  the  Lavacca  in 
1689  to  expel  La  Salle ;  but,  on  en- 
tering that  river,  learned  that  he  had 
been  assassinated  by  one  of  his  follow- 
ers, and  his  entire  company  dispersed. 
De  Leon  returned  next  year,  and 
founded  the  mission  of  San  Francis- 
co on  the  site  of  the  dismantled  fort 
St.  Louis.  From  that  time,  the 
Spanish  claim  to  the  country  was 

New  Hampshire. — Charles  G.  Atherton,  Edmund 
Burke,  Ira  A.  Eastman,  Tristram  Shaw. — New 
York. — Nehemiah  H.  Earle,  John  Fine,  Na- 
thaniel Jones,  Gouverneur  Kemble,  James  de  la 
Montanya,  John  H.  Prentiss,  Theron  R.  Strong. 
Pennsylvania. — John  Davis,  Joseph  Fornance, 


never  seriously  disputed,  though 
another  French  attempt  to  colonize 
it  was  made  in  1714^  and  proved  as 
futile  as  La  Salle's.  The  cession  of 
Louisiana  by  France  to  Spain  in 
1763,  of  course  foreclosed  all  possi- 
bility of  collision  ;  and  when  Loui- 
siana, having  been  retroceded  by 
Spain  to  France,  was  sold  to  the 
United  States,  we  took  our  grand 
purchase  without  specification  of 
boundaries  or  guaranty  of  title.  For 
a  time,  there  was  apparent  danger 
of  collision  respecting  our  western 
boundary,  between  our  young,  self- 
confident,  and  grasping  republic,  and 
the  feeble,  decaying  monarchy  of 
Spain  ;  but  the  wise  moderation  of 
Mr.  Jefferson  was  manifested  through 
the  action  of  his  subordinates,  so  that 
Gen.  "Wilkinson,  our  military  com- 
mander in  Louisiana,  and  Gen.  Her- 
rera,  who  directed  the  small  Spanish 
force  on  our  frontier,  after  some 
threatening  demonstrations,  came  to 
an  understanding  in  October,  1806, 
w^hereby  the  Sabine  was  practically 
recognized  as  our  western  boundary, 
and  all  peril  of  collision  obviated  by 

James  Gerry,  George  M'Cullough,  David  Petri- 
ken,  William  S.  Ramsay.  Ohio. — D.  P.  Leadbet- 
ter,  William  MedilL  Isaac  Parrish,  George 
Sweeney,  Jonathan  Taylor,  John  B.  Weller. 
Indiana. — John  Davis,  George  H.  Proffit. — 
Illinois. — John  Reynolds. 


148 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


a  withdrawal  of  the  Spanish  troops 
behind  the  Arroyo  Honda,  some 
miles  further  west.  The  weakness 
of  Spain,  the  absorption  of  her  ener- 
gies and  means  in  the  desolating 
wars  for  her  independence  into  which 
she  was  soon  after  forced  by  the  ra- 
pacity of  Napoleon,  and  the  conse- 
quent revolutions  in  her  continental 
American  colonies,  whereby  they 
were  each  and  all  lost  to  her  forever, 
afforded  tempting  opportunities  to 
adventurer  after  adventurer,  from 
Burr  to  Lafitte  and  Long,  to  attempt 
the  conquest  of  Texas,  with  a  view 
to  planting  an  independent  power  on 
her  inviting  prairies,  or  of  annexing 
her  to  the  United  States.  Two  or 
three  of  these  expeditions  seemed*  for 
a  time  on  the  verge  of  success ;  but 
each  in  turn  closed  in  defeat  and  dis- 
aster ;  so  that,  when  Spanish  power 
was  expelled  from  Mexico,  Texas  be- 
came an  undisputed  Mexican  posses- 
sion without  costing  the  new  nation 
a  drop  of  blood.  About  this  time 
(1819),  our  long-standing  differences 
with  Spain  were  settled  by  treaty, 
whereby  Florida  was  ceded  by  her 
to  this  country,  and  the  Sabine  was 
mutually  acknowledged  and  estab- 
lished as  our  western  boundary.  In 
other  words,  it  was  agreed  that  the 
region  known  as  Texas  appertained 
not  to  Louisiana,  but  to  Mexico.  Mr. 
Clay — then  in  quasi  opposition  to 
Mr.  Monroe's  Administration — de- 
murred to  this,  and  there  were  a  few 
others  who  indicated  dissatisfaction 
with  it ;  but  this  stipulation  of  the 
treaty  was  so  clearly  right,  and  the 
course  of  the  Administration  in  ne- 
gotiating it  so  wise  and  proper,  that 
all  dissent  was  speedily  drowned  in 
avowals  of  general  and  hearty  satis- 
faction. 


Mexico  having  practically  vindi- 
cated her  independence,  and  all  at- 
tempts to  grasp  Texas  by  force  hav- 
ing proved  abortive,  Mr.  Moses  Aus- 
tin— a  native  of  Connecticut  settled 
in  Missouri — tried  a  new  tack.  Re- 
presenting  himself  as  a  leader  and 
mouth-piece  of  a  band  of  Roman 
Catholics  suffering  from  Protestant 
intolerance  and  persecution  in  this 
country,  he  petitioned  the  Mexican 
government  for  a  grant  of  land,  and 
permission  to  settle  in  the  then  al- 
most unpeopled  wilderness,  vaguely 
known  as  Texas.  His  prayer  was 
granted,  though  he  did  not  live  to 
profit  by  it.  Returning,  in  the  early 
months  of  1821,  from  western  Texas 
to  Louisiana,  he  was  robbed  and  left 
exposed  to  every  hardship  in  that 
uninhabited  region,  thus  contracting 
a  severe  cold,  whereof  he  died  the 
following  June.  His  son,  Stephen 
F.  Austin,  received  the  grant  for 
which  his  father  had  sued,  and  under 
it  made  a  settlement  on  a  site  which 
now  includes  the  city  of  Austin. 

Swarms  of  like  adventurers,  invit- 
ed by  the  climate,  soil,  and  varied 
natural  resources  of  Texas,  from  this 
time  poured  into  it ;  some  of  them 
on  the  strength  of  real  or  pretended 
concessions  of  territory — others  with- 
out leave  or  license.  They  found 
very  few  Mexicans  to  dispute  or 
share  with  them  the  advantages  it 
presented  ;  of  government  there  was 
very  little,  and  that  not  good ;  Texas 
being  a  portion,  or  rather  appendage, 
of  Coahuila,  a  Mexican  State  situated 
on  the  lower  Rio  Grande,  with  the 
bulk  of  its  population  west  of  that 
river.  Revolutions  succeeded  each 
other  at  short  intervals  in  Mexico,  as 
in  most  Spanish  American  countries  ; 
and  it  was  fairly  a  question  whether 


SAM  HOUSTON  GOES  TO  TEXAS. 


149 


the  allegiance  sworn  to  the  govern- 
ment of  last  year,  was  binding  in 
favor  of  that  whereby  it  had  since 
been  arbitrarily  supplanted. 

In  the  year  1827— Mr.  John  Q. 
Adams  being  President — Mr.  Clay, 
his  Secretary  of  State,  instructed 
Joel  R  Poinsett,  our  Minister  to 
Mexico,  to  offer  one  million  of  dol- 
lars for  the  cession  to  us  by  the  re- 
public of  Mexico  of  her  territory  this 
side  of  the  Rio  Grande.  Mr.  Poin- 
sett did  not  make  the  offer,  perceiv- 
ing that  it  would  only  irritate  and 
alienate  the  Mexicans  to  no  good 
purpose. 

In  1829,  Mr.  Yan  Buren,  as  Gen. 
Jackson's  Secretary  of  State,  in- 
structed our  Minister  at  Mexico  to 
make  a  similar  offer  of  four  or  five 
millions  for  Texas,  including  no  part 
of  the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande,  nor 
of  that  of  the  Nueces,  this  side  of  it, 
and,  of  course,  no  part  of  New  Mexi- 
co.   Still,  Mexico  would  not  sell. 

Sam  Houston,  born  in  Rockbridge 
County,  Virginia,  in  1793,  had  early 
migrated  to  Tennessee,  settling  very 
near  the  reserved  lands  of  the  Chero- 
kee Indians,  to  whom  he  speedily 
|  absconded,  living  three  years  among 

1  In  the  Winter  of  1830,  the  first  year  of  Jack- 
json  rule  at  Washington,  Houston  came  to  that 
i  city  from  the  wilds  of  the  far  West,  in  company 
J  with  a  band  of  Indians,  who  professed  to  have 
I  business  there.  He  remained  some  weeks  or 
months,  ostensibly  attending  to  this  business, 
and  made  or  renewed  the  acquaintance  of  one 
J  Dr.  Robert  Mayo,  with  whom  he  became  inti- 
mate, and  to  whom  he  imparted  his  Texas  pro- 
ject ;  and  by  him  it  was  betrayed  to  President 
i  Jackson,  who,  very  probably,  had  already  heard 
jit  from  Houston  himself. 

!  "I  learned  from  him,"  wrote  Mayo,  "that  he 
was  organizing  an  expedition  against  Texas;  to 
afford  a  cloak  to  which,  he  had  assumed  the 
Indian  costume,  habits,  and  associations,  by  set- 
tling among  them  in  the  neighborhood  of  Texas. 
That  nothing  was  more  easy  to  accomplish  than 


them.  More  than  twenty  years 
later — having,  meantime,  been  a  gal- 
lant soldier  in  the  War  of  1812,  an 
Indian  agent,  a  lawyer,  district  at- 
torney, major-general  of  militia, 
member  of  Congress,  and  Governor 
of  Tennessee — he  abruptly  separated 
from  his  newly-married  wife,  and  re- 
paired again  to  the  Cherokees,  now 
settled  west  of  the  Mississippi,  by 
whom  he  was  welcomed  and  made  a 
chief.  After  living  with  them  three 
years  longer  as  a  savage,  he  suddenly 
left  them  again,  returned  to  civiliza- 
tion— of  the  Arkansas  pattern — set 
out  from  Little  Rock,  with  a  few 
companions  of  like  spirit,  for  the  new 
country  to  which  adventurers  and 
lawless  characters  throughout  the 
Southwest  were  silently  tending.  A 
Little  Hock  journal,  noticing  his  de- 
parture for  Texas,  significantly  said : 
"  We  shall  doubtless  hear  of  his  rais- 
ing his  flag  there  shortly."  The 
guess  was  a  perfectly  safe  one. 

For  the  Slave  Power  had  already 
perceived  its  opportunity,  and  resolv- 
ed to  profit  by  it.  Houston  and 
other  restless  spirits  of  his  sort  were 
pushed  into  Texas  expressly  to  seize 
upon  the  first  opportunity  to  foment 
a  revolution,1  expel  the  Mexican  au- 

the  conquest  and  possession  of  that  extensive 
and  fertile  country,  by  the  cooperation  of  the 
Indians  in  the  Arkansas  Territory,  and  recruits 
among  the  citizens  of  the  United  States.  That, 
in  his  view,  it  would  hardly  be  necessary  to 
strike  a  blow  to  wrest  Texas  from  Mexico. 
That  it  was  ample  for  the  establishment  and 
maintenance  of  a  separate  and  independent  gov- 
ernment from  the  United  States.  That  the  ex- 
pedition would  be  got  ready  with  all  possible 
dispatch.  That  the  demonstration  would  and 
mud  be  made  in  about  twelve  months  from  that 
time.  That  the  event  of  success  opened  the 
most  unbounded  prospects  of  wealth  to  those 
who  would  embark  in  it,"  etc.,  etc. 

Dr.  Mayo  further  learned  from  one  Hunter, 
a  confederate  of  Houston,  that  there  were  then 
secret  agencies  in  all  the  principal  cities  of  the 
Union,  enlisting  men  for  the  Texas  enterprise. 


150 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


thorities,  and  prepare  the  region  for 
speedy  Annexation  to  this  country, 
as  a  new  make-weight  in  Mr.  Cal- 
houn's scheme  of  a  perpetual  balance 
of  power  bet  wen  the  Free  and  the 
Slave  States.  Houston  had  scarcely 
reached  Nacogdoches,  near  the  east- 
ern boundary  of  Texas,  when  he  was 
elected  therefrom  a  delegate  to  a 
Convention  called  to  frame  a  Consti- 
tution for  that  country  as  a  distinct 
State,  which  met  April  1,  1833, 
and  did  its  predestined  work.  Texas 
proclaimed  her  entire  independence 
of  Mexico,  March  2,  1836.  War,  of 
course,  ensued — in  fact,  was  already 

beginning; — and  Houston  soon  SUC- 
fe  o 

ceeded  Austin  in  the  command  of 
the  insurgent  forces.  On  the  10th, 
Houston  repaired  to  the  camp  at 
Gonzales,  where  374  poorly-armed, 
ill-supplied  men,  were  mustered  to 
dispute  the  force,  5,000  strong,  with 
which  Santa  Anna  had  already 
crossed  the  Rio  Grande  and  advanc- 
ed to  the  frontier  fort,  known  as  the 
Alamo,  held  by  Col.  Travis,  with  185 
men,  who  were  captured  and  all  put 
to  death.  Houston,  of  course,  re- 
treated, hoping  to  be  joined  by  Col. 
Fannin,  who  held  Goliad  with  500 
men,  and  several  pieces  of  artillery, 
whereas  Houston  had  not  one.  But 
Fannin,  while  on  his  way  to  join 
Houston,  was  intercepted  and  sur- 
rounded by  a  strong  Mexican  de- 
tachment under  Urrea,  by  whom, 
after  two  days'  fighting,  he  was  cap- 
tured (March  20),  and  all  his  survi- 
vors, 357  men,  treacherously  shot  in 
cold  blood.  Houston,  of  course,  con- 
tinued his  retreat,  pursued  by  Santa 
Anna,  but  having  too  little  to  carry 
to  be  easily  overtaken.  He  received 
some  slight  reinforcements  on  his 
march,  and  at  the  San  Jacinto,  April 


10,  met  two  guns  (six-pounders),  sent 
him  from  Cincinnati — his  first.  Santa 
Anna,  still  eagerly  pressing  on,  had 
burned  Harrisburg,  the  Texan  capi- 
tal, and  crossed  the  San  Jacinto  with 
the  advance  of  his  army,  the  main 
body  being  detained  on  the  other 
side  by  a  freshet.  Houston  perceiv- 
ed his  opportunity,  and  embraced  it. 
Facing  suddenly  about,  he  attacked 
the  Mexican  vanguard  with  great 
fury,  firing  several  rounds  of  grape 
tand  canister  at  short  range,  then 
rushing  to  the  attack  with  clubbed 
muskets  (having  no  bayonets),  and 
yells  of  "  Remember  the  Alamo  !" 
"Remember  Goliad!"  The  Mexi- 
cans were  utterly  routed  and  dis- 
persed— the  return  of  630  hilled  to 
208  wounded,  proving  that  very  lit- 
tle mercy  was  shown  by  the  Texans, 
who  nevertheless  took  730  prisoners 
(about  their  own  number),  who  were 
probably  picked  up  after  the  battle, 
as  their  General  was,  in  the  trees 
and  bushes  among  which  they  had 
sought  safety  in  concealment.  Santa 
Anna's  life  was  barely  saved  by 
Houston,  who  was  among  the  twen- 
ty-five wounded,  who,  with  eight 
killed,  formed  the  sum  total  of  Texan 
loss  in  the  fight.  Houston  made  a 
treaty  with  his  prisoner,  in  obedience 
to  which  the  main  body  of  the  Mexi- 
cans retreated  and  abandoned  the 
country,  as  they  doubtless  would,  at 
any  rate,  have  done.  This  treaty 
further  stipulated  for  the  independ- 
ence of  Texas;  but  no  one  could 
have  seriously  supposed  that  such  a 
stipulation,  wrested  from  a  prisoner 
of  war  in  imminent  and  well-ground- 
ed fear  of  massacre,  would  bind  his 
country,  even  had  he,  when  free,  had 
power  to  make  such  a  treaty.  The 
victory,  not  the  treaty,  was  the  true 


ANNEXATION  DECLINE 


D    BY  MR.  Y AN  BUREN. 


151 


basis  and  assurance  of  Texan  inde- 
pendence. 

Gen.  Houston — who  bad  mean- 
time returned  to  the  United  States 
to  obtain  proper  treatment  for  his 
wounded  ankle,  and  to  confer  with 
Gen.  Jackson  and  other  friends  of 
Texas  —  was  immediately  chosen 
President  of  the  new  republic,  and 
inaugurated,  October  22,  1836.  In 
March  following,  the  United  States 
took  the  lead  in  acknowledging  the 
independence  of  Texas,  and  other 
nations  in  due  time  followed.  Expe- 
ditions, fitted  out  in  western  Texas, 
were  sent  to  Santa  Fe  on  the  north, 
and  to  Mier  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and 
each  badly  handled  by  the  Mexicans, 
who  captured  the  Santa  Fe  party 
entire,  and  sent  them  prisoners  to 
their  capital ;  but,  within  her  original 
boundaries,  no  serious  demonstration 
was  made  against  the  new  republic 
by  Mexico,  subsequently  to  Santa 
Anna's  disastrous  failure  in  1836. 
Meantime,  her  population  steadily 
increased  by  migration  from  the 
United  States,  and,  to  some  extent, 
from  Europe;  so  that,  though  her 
finances  were  in  woeful  disorder,  and 
her  northern  frontier  constantly  ha- 
rassed by  savage  raids,  there  was 
very  little  probability  that  Texas 
would  ever  have  been  reconquered 
by  Mexico. 

In  August,  1837,  Gen.  Memucan 
Hunt,  envoy  of  Texas  at  Washing- 
ton, proposed  to  our  Government 
the  Annexation  of  his  country  to  the 
United  States.  Mr.  Yan  Buren  was 
then  President,  with  John  C.  For- 
syth, of  Georgia — an  extreme  South- 
ron— for  his  Secretary  of  State.  The 
subject  was  fully  considered,  and  a 
decisive    negative    returned.  Mr. 


Forsyth,  in  his  official  reply  to  Gen. 
Hunt's  proffer,  said : 

"So  long  as  Texas  shall  remain  at  war, 
while  the  United  States  are  at  peace  with 
her  adversary,  the  proposition  of  the  Texan 
Minister  Plenipotentiary  necessarily  in- 
volves the  question  of  Avar  with  that  adver- 
sary. The  United  States  are  bound  to  Mexi- 
co by  a  treaty  of  amity  and  commerce, 
which  will  be  scrupulously  observed  on 
their  part  so  long  as  it  can  be  reasonably 
hoped  that  Mexico  will  perform  her  duties 
and  respect  our  rights  under  it.  The  Unit- 
ed States  might  justly  be  suspected  of  a  dis- 
regard of  the  friendly  purposes  of  the  com- 
pact, if  the  overture  of  Gen.  Hunt  were 
to  be  even  reserved  for  future  consideration  ; 
as  this  would  imply  a  disposition  on  our 
part  to  espouse  the  quarrel  of  Texas  with 
.Mexico — a  disposition  wholly  at  variance 
with  the  spirit  of  the  treaty,  and  with  the 
uniform  policy  and  the  obvious  welfare  of 
the  United  States. 

"  The  inducements  mentioned  by  Gen. 
Hunt  for  the  United  States  to  annex  Texas 
to  their  Territory  are  duly  appreciated  ;  but, 
powerful  and  weighty  as  certainly  they  are, 
they  are  light  when  opposed  in  the  scale  of 
reason  to  treaty  obligations,  and  respect  for 
that  integrity  of  character  by  which  the 
United  States  have  sought  to  distinguish 
themselves  since  the  establishment  of  their 
right  to  claim  a  place  in  the  great  family  of 
Nations." 

Gen.  Hunt's  letter  having  inti- 
mated that  Texas  might  be  impelled, 
by  a  discouraging  response  to  her 
advances,  to  grant  special  commercial 
favors  to  other  nations  to  the  preju- 
dice of  this,  Mr.  Forsyth — writing  in 
the  name  and  under  the  immediate 
inspiration  of  the  President  —  re- 
sponded as  follows : 

"  It  is  presumed,  however,  that  the  mo- 
tives by  which  Texas  has  been  governed  in 
making  this  overture,  will  have  equal  force 
in  impelling  her  to  preserve,  as  an  inde- 
pendent power,  the  most  liberal  commercial 
relations  with  the  United  States.  Such  a 
disposition  will  be  cheerfully  met,  in  a  corre- 
sponding spirit,  by  this  Government.  If  the 
answer  which  the  undersigned  has  been  di- 
rected to  give  to  the  proposition  of  Gen. 
Hunt  should,  unfortunately,  evoke  such  a 
change  in  the  sentiments  of  that  Government 
as  to  induce  an  attempt  to  extend  commer- 
cial relations  elsewhere,  upon  terms  preju- 
dicial to  the  United  States,  this  Government 


152  THE  AMERICA 

will  be  consoled  by  the  rectitude  of  its  inten- 
tions, and  a  certainty  that,  although  the  haz- 
ard of  transient  losses  may  be  incurred  by  a 
rigid  adherence  to  just  principles,  no  lasting 
prosperity  can  be  secured  when  they  are 
disregarded." 

This  ended  the  negotiations,  and 
foreclosed  all  discussion  of  the  subject 
by  our  Government  during  Mr.  Van 
Buren's  term.  Yet,  so  early  as  1837, 
it  had  become  evident  to  careful  ob- 
servers among  us,  that  intrigues  were 
then  on  foot  for  the  Annexation  of 
Texas  to  the  United  States,  and  that 
the  chief  impulse  to  this  was  the 
prospect  of  thereby  increasing  the 
influence  and  power  of  Slavery  in 
our  Government.  It  had,  indeed, 
been  notorious  from  the  first,  that  this 
purpose  was  cherished  by  a  large 
portion  of  those  who  had  actively 
contributed  to  colonize  Texas  from 
this  country  and  to  fight  the  battles 
of  her  Independence.  Benjamin 
Lundy  saw  and  reported  this  during 
his  repeated  journeys  through  the 
whole  extent  of  Texas,  in  quest  of  a 
region  whereon  to  found  a  colony  of 
free  blacks.  On  this  ground,  he  was 
a  determined  foe  to  the  whole  scheme 
of  Texan  colonization  and  independ- 
ence, regarding  it  but  as  a  new 
device  of  American  Slavery  for  ex- 
tending and  perpetuating  its  power. 
Earnest  Abolitionists  generally  con- 
templated the  events  transpiring  in 
Texas  with  growing  apprehension; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  slave- 
holding  region  was  unanimous  and 
enthusiastic  in  favor  of  the  new  re- 
public. Men  were  openly  recruited 
throughout  the  valley  of  the  lower 
Mississippi  for  her  slender  armies; 
while  arms  and  munitions  were 
supplied  from  our  South-western 
cities  with  little  disguise  or  pretense 
of  payment.    The  Slave  Power  had 


N  CONFLICT. 

made  sacrifices  to  wrest  Texas  from 
Mexico — with  what  intent?  Mr. 
Webster,  in  his  speech  at  Niblo'a 
Garden,  March  15,  1837,  thus  cau- 
tiously, but  with  majestic  and  impres- 
sive oratory,  gave  utterance  to  the 
more  considerate  Northern  view  of 
the  subject : 

"  Gentlemen,  proposing  to  express  opin- 
ions on  the  principal  subjects  of  interest  at 
the  present  moment,  it  is  impossible  to  over- 
look the  delicate  question  which  has  arisen 
from  events  which  have  happened  in  the  late 
Mexican  province%of  Texas.  The  independ- 
ence of  that  province  has  now  been  recog- 
nized by  the  government  of  the  United  States. 
Congress  gave  the  President  the  means,  to 
be  used  when  he  saw  fit.  of  opening  a  diplo- 
matic intercourse  with  its  government,  and 
the  late  President  immediately  made  use  of 
those  means. 

"  I  saw  no  objection,  under  the  circum- 
stances, to  voting  an  appropriation  to  be  used 
when  the  President  should  think  the  proper 
time  had  come ;  and  he  deemed  —  very 
promptly,  it  is  true, — that  the  time  had 
already  arrived.  Certainly,  gentlemen,  the 
history  of  Texas  is  not  a  little  wonderful.  A 
very  few  people,  in  a  very  short  time,  have 
established  a  government  for  themselves, 
against  the  authority  of  the  parent  state ; 
and  this  government,  it  is  generally  sup- 
posed, there  is  little  probability,  at  the  pres- 
ent moment,  of  the  parent  state  being  able 
to  overturn. 

"  This  government  is,  in  form,  a  copy  of 
our  own.  It  is  an  American  constitution, 
substantially  after  the  great  American  model. 
We  all,  therefore,  must  wish  it  success ;  and 
there  is  no  one  who  will  more  heartily  re- 
joice than  I  shall,  to  see  an  independent 
community,  intelligent,  industrious,  and 
friendly  toward  us,  springing  up  and  rising 
into  happiness,  distinction,  and  power,  upon 
our  own  principles  of  liberty  and  govern- 
ment. 

"  But  it  cannot  be  disguised,  gentlemen, 
that  a  desire,  or  an  intention,  is  already 
manifested  to  annex  Texas  to  the  United 
States.  On  a  subject  of  such  mighty  mag- 
nitude as  this,  and  at  a  moment  when  the 
public  attention  is  drawn  to  it,  I  should 
feel  myself  wanting  in  candor,  if  I  did  not 
express  my  opinion ;  since  all  must  suppose 
that,  on  such  a  question,  it  is  impossible  that 
I  should  be  without  some  opinion. 

"  I  say,  then,  gentlemen,  in  all  frankness, 
that  I  see  objections — I  think  insurmount- 
able objections — to  the  annexation  of  Texas 
to  the  United  States.    When  the  Consti- 


MR.   WEBSTER  A  G  A  I 


NST  ANNEXATION. 


153 


tution  was  formed,  it  is  not  probable  that 
1 1  either  its  framers  or  the  people  ever  looked 
|   to  the  admission  of  any  States  into  the 
Union,  except  such  as  then  already  existed, 
1 1   and  such  as  should  be  formed  out  of  territo- 
I   ries  then  already  belonging  to  the  United 
States.    Fifteen  years  after  the  adoption  of 
the  Constitution,  however,  the  case  of  Lou- 
i     isiana  arose.    Louisiana  was  obtained  by 
treaty  with  France,  who  had  already  ob- 
tained it  from  Spain  ;  but  the  object  of  this 
acquisition,  certainly,  was  not  mere  extension 
of  territory.    Other  great  political  interests 
were  connected  with  it.    Spain,  while  she 
possessed  Louisiana,  had  held  the  mouths  of 
the  great  rivers  which  rise  in  the  "Western 
States,  and  flow  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 
She  had  disputed  our  use  of  these  rivers 
already;  and,  with  a  powerful  nation  in  pos- 
session of  these  outlets  to  the  sea,  it  is  obvi- 
ous that  the  commerce  of  all  the  West  was 
I   in   danger  of   perpetual  vexation.  The 
command  of  these  rivers  to  the  sea  was, 
II   therefore,  the  great  object  aimed  at  in  the 
1    acquisition  of  Louisiana.     But  that  acqui- 
sition  necessarily  brought  territory  along 
with  it ;  and  three  States  now  exist,  formed 
out  of  that  ancient  province. 

"  A  similar  policy,  and  a  similar  necessity, 
though  perhaps  not  entirely  so  urgent,  led 
to  the  acquisition  of  Florida. 

u  Now,  no  such  necessity,  no  such  policy, 
requires  the   annexation  of  Texas.  The 
accession  of  Texas  to  our  territory  is  not 
necessary  to  the  full  and  complete  enjoy- 
ment of  all  which  we  already  possess.  Her 
case,  therefore,  stands  upon  a  footing  en- 
;    tirely  different  from  that  of  Louisiana  and 
■    Florida.     There    being   no   necessity  for 
extending  the  limits  of  the  Union  in  that 
direction,  we  ought.  I  think,  for  numerous 
and  powerful  reasons,  to  be  content  with  our 
J    present  boundaries. 

"  Gentlemen,  we  all  see  that,  by  whomso- 
ever possessed,  Texas  is  likely  to  be  a  slave- 
holding  country;  and  I  frankly  avow  my 
unwillingness  to  do  anything  that  shall 
extend  the  slavery  of  the  African  race  on 
this  continent,  or  add  other  slave-holding 
States  to  the  Union.  When  I  say  that  I  re- 
gard Slavery  in  itself  as  a  great  moral,  so- 
cial, and  political  evil,  I  only  use  language 
which  has  been  adopted  by  distinguished 
men,  themselves  citizens  of  slaveholding 
States.  I  shall  do  nothing,  therefore,  to  fa- 
vor or  encourage  its  further  extension.  We 
have  Slavery  already  amongst  us.  The  Con- 
stitution found  it  in  the  Union;  it  recog- 
nized it,  and  gave  it  solemn  guaranties.  To 
the  full  extent  of  those  guaranties,  we  all  are 
bound,  in  honor,  in  justice,  and  by  the  Con- 
stitution. All  the  stipulations  contained  in 
the  Constitution  in  favor  of  the  slaveholding 
States  which  are  already  in  the  Union,  ought 


to  be  fulfilled,  in  the  fullness  of  their  spirit 
and  to  the  exactness  of  their  letter.  Slavery, 
as  it  exists  in  the  States,  is  beyond  the  read; 
of  Congress.  It  is  a  concern  of  the  States 
themselves ;  they  have  never  submitted  it 
to  Congress,  and  Congress  has  no  .rightful 
power  over  it.  I  shall  concur,  therefore,  in 
no  act,  no  measure,  no  menace,  no  indication 
of  purpose,  which  shall  interfere,  or  threaten 
to  interfere,  with  the  exclusive  authority  of 
the  several  States  over  the  subject  of  Slavery 
as  it  exists  within  their  respective  limits.  All 
this  appears  to  me  to  be  a  matter  of  plain, 
imperative  duty. 

"  But,  when  we  come  to  speak  of  admitting 
new  States,  the  subject  assumes  an  entirely 
different  aspect.  Our  rights  and  our  duties 
are  then  both  different. 

"  The  free  States,  and  all  the  States,  are 
then  at  liberty  to  accept  or  to  reject.  When 
it  is  proposed  to  bring  new  members  into 
this  political  partnership,  the  old  members 
have  a  right  to  say  on  what  terms  such  new 
partners  are  to  come  in,  and  what  they  are 
to  bring  along  with  them.  In  my  opinion, 
the  people  of  the  United  States  will  nok con- 
sent to  bring  into  the  Union  a  new,  vastly 
extensive,  and  slaveholding  country,  large 
enough  for  half  a  dozen  or  a  dozen  States. 
In  my  opinion,  they  ought  not  to  consent  to 
it.  Indeed,  I  am  altogether  at  a  loss  how  to 
conceive  what  possible  benefit  any  part  of 
this  country  can  expect  to  derive  from  such 
annexation.  Any  benefit  to  any  part  is  at 
least  doubtful  and  uncertain  ;  the  objections 
are  obvious,  plain,  and  strong.  On  the  gen- 
eral question  of  Slavery,  a  great  portion  of 
the  community  is  already  strongly  excited. 
The  subject  has  not  only  attracted  attention 
as  a  question  of  politics,  but  it  has  struck  a 
far  deeper-toned  chord.  It  has  arrested  the 
religious  feeling  of  the  country  ;  it  has  taken 
strong  hold  on  the  consciences  of  men.  He 
is  a  rash  man,  indeed,  and  little  conversant 
with  human  nature,  and  especially  has  he  a 
very  erroneous  estimate  of  the  character  of 
the  people  of  this  country,  who  supposes 
that  a  feeling  of  this  kind  is  to  be  trifled 
with  or  despised.  It  will  assuredly  cause 
itself  to  be  respected.  It  may  be  reasoned 
with ;  it  may  be  made  willing — I  believe  it 
is  entirely  willing — to  fulfill  all  existing  en- 
gagements and  all  existing  duties — to  uphold 
and  defend  the  Constitution  as  it  is  estab- 
lished, with  whatever  regrets  about  some 
provisions  which  it  does  actually  contain. 
But  to  coerce  it  into  silence,  to  endeavor  to 
restrain  its  free  expression,  to  seek  to  com- 
press and  confine  it,  warm  as  it  is,  and  more 
heated  as  such  endeavors  would  inevitably 
render  it, — should  this  be  attempted,  I  know 
nothing,  even  in  the  Constitution  or  in  the 
Union  itself,  which  would  not  be  endangered 
by  the  explosion  which  might  follow. 


154  THE  AMERICA 

"  I  see,  therefore,  no  political  necessity  for 
the  annexation  of  Texas  to  the  Union,  no 
advantages  to  be  derived  from  it,  and  objec- 
tions to  it  of  a  strong,  and,  in  my  judgment, 
decisive  character. 

"I  believe  it  to  be  for  the  interest  and  hap- 
piness of  the  whole  Union  to  remain  as  it  is, 
without  diminution,  and  without  addition." 

William  Henry  Harrison  was,  in 
1840,  elected  ninth  President  of  the 
United  States,  after  a  most  animated 
and  vigorous  canvass,  receiving  234 
electoral  votes  to  60  cast  for  his  pre- 
decessor and  rival,  Martin  Yan 
Buren.  Gen.  Harrison  was  the  son 
of  Benjamin  Harrison,,  a  signer  of 
the  Declaration  of  Independence, 
and  was,  like  his  father,  a  native  of 
Virginia ;  but  he  migrated,  while 
still  young,  to  a  point  just  below  the 
site  of  Cincinnati,  and  thereafter  re- 
sided in  some  Free  Territory  or 
State,  mainly  in  Ohio.  While  Gov- 
ernor of  Indiana  Territory,  he  had 
favored  the  temporary  allowance  of 
Slavery  therein ;  and  in  1819,  being 
then  an  applicant  for  office  at  the 
hands  of  President  Monroe,  he  had 
opposed  the  Missouri  Restriction. 
Gen.  Harrison  was,  therefore,  on 
the  whole,  quite  as  acceptable,  per- 
sonally, to  the  Slave  Power  as  Mr. 
Yan  Buren ;  and  he  received  the 
votes  of  Delaware,  Maryland,  North 
Carolina,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Mis- 
sissippi, and  Louisiana.  He  failed, 
however,  to  win  the  favor  of  Mr. 
Calhoun,  and  so  had  no  considerable 
support  in  South  Carolina;  which 
State  gave  its  vote,  without  opposi- 
tion, to  Mr.  Yan  Buren,  though  it 
had  opposed  his  election  as  Yice- 
President  in  '32,  and  as  President  in 
'36.  Yirginia,  Alabama,  and  Mis- 
souri also  supported  Mr.  Yan  Buren. 
Gen.  Harrison  was  inaugurated  on 
the  4th  of  March,  1841,  and  died 
barely  one  month  thereafter. 


N  CONFLICT. 

John  Tyler — son  of  a  revolutionary 
patriot  of  like  name,  who  rose  to  the 
Governorship  of  his  State — was  elect- 
ed Yice-President  with  General  Har- 
rison. He  was  originally  a  Republi- 
can of  the  Yirginia  school,  *and  as 
such  had  supported  Madison,  Mon- 
roe, and,  in  1824,  William  H.  Craw- 
ford. Elected  to  the  Legislature  of 
his  State  in  1811,  when  but  twenty- 
one  years  of  age,  he  had  served  re- 
peatedly in  that  body,  and  in  Con- 
gress, before  he  was,  in  1825,  elected 
to  the  Governorship  of  Yirginia  by 
her  Legislature.  In  March,  1827, 
he  was  chosen  to  the  United  States 
Senate  by  the  combined  votes  of  the 
"National  Republican,"  or  Adams 
and  Clay  members,  with  those  of  a 
portion  of  the  Jacksonians,  who  were 
dissatisfied  with  the  erratic  conduct 
and  bitter  personalities  of  John  Ran- 
dolph of  Roanoke,  Mr.  Tyler's  com- 
petitor and  predecessor.  Mr.  Tyler 
had  (in  1825)  written  to  Mr.  Clay, 
commending  his  preference  of  Mr 
Adams  to  Gen.  Jackson,  but  had 
afterward  gone  with  the  current  in 
Yirginia  for  Jackson — basing  this 
preference  on  his  adhesion  to  the 
'  State  Rights,'  or  Strict  Construction 
theory  of  our  Government,  which  was 
deemed  by  him  at  variance  with  some 
of  the  recommendations  in  Mr. 
Adams's  first  Message.  In  the  Se- 
nate, Mr.  Tyler  was  anti-Tariff,  anti- 
Improvement,  anti-Bank,  and  anti- 
Coercion  ;  having  voted  alone  (in 
February,  1833)  in  opposition  to  the 
passage  of  Gen.  Jackson's  "  Force 
Bill,"  against  South  Carolina's  Nulli- 
fication. He  supported  Mr  Clay's 
Compromise  Tariff.  Being  reelected 
for  a  second  full  term,  commencing 
December,  1833,  he  opposed  the  re- 
moval of  the  public  deposits  from 


JOHN  TYLER  AND  ANNEXATION. 


155 


the  United  States  Bank  by  Gen. 
Jackson,  and  supported  Mr.  Clay's 
resolution  censuring  that  removal. 
He  was  fully  sustained  in  so  doing, 
at  the  time,  by  the  public  opinion 
and  the  Legislature  of  Virginia ;  but, 
two  or  three  years  thereafter,  the 
thorough-going  supporters  of  Gen. 
Jackson,  having  elected  a  decided 
majority  to  the  Legislature,  proceed- 
ed to  "  instruct"  him  to  vote  for  ex- 
punging from  the  journal  of  the 
Senate  that  resolution ;  whereupon, 
refusing  to  comply,  he  resigned  his 
seat,  and  returned  to  private  life.  In 
the  desultory  and  tumultuous  Presi- 
dential canvass  that  soon  followed, 
he  was  supported  by  the  Whigs,  or 
anti- Jackson  men,  of  the  Slave  States 
for  Vice-President,  and  received  the 
electoral  votes  of  Maryland,  Georgia, 
South  Carolina,  and  Tennessee.  In 
1838,  he  was  elected  as  a  Whig  to 
the  Legislature  of  Virginia,  and  as 
such  made  a  delegate  to  the  Whig: 
National  Convention,  which  met  at 
Harrisburg,  Pa.,  in  December,  1839. 
He  there,  along  with  his  Virginia 
colleagues,  zealously  supported  Mr. 
Clay  for  President,  and  was  affected 
to  tears  when  the  choice  of  a  major- 
ity of  the  Convention  finally  desig- 
nated Gen.  Harrison  as  the  Whig 
candidate.  The  next  day,  he  was, 
with  little  opposition,  nominated  for 
Vice-President — the  friends  of  Gen. 
Harrison  urging  this  nomination  as  a 
peace-offering  to  the  friends  of  Mr. 
Clay.  Every  elector  who  voted  for 
Gen.  Harrison  voted  for  him  also. 

If  Mr.  Tyler's  past  political  course 
might,  by  a  severe  critic,  have  been 
judged  unstable,  and  indicative  rath- 
er of  pervading  personal  aspirations 
than  of  profound  political  convic- 
tions, there  was  one  grave  topic — 


that  of  Slavery — on  which  not  even 
the  harshest  judgment  could  pro- 
nounce him  a  waverer,  or  infirm  of 
purpose.  Born,  reared,  and  living, 
in  one  of  the  most  aristocratic  coun- 
ties of  tidewater  Virginia — that  of 
Charles  City,  removing  subsequently 
to  that  of  Williamsburg — by  no  act, 
no  vote,  no  speech,  had  he  forfeited 
the  confidence  or  incurred  the  dis- 
trust of  the  Slave  Power ;  and  his 
fidelity  to  its  behests  and  presumed 
interests,  was  about  to  be  conspicu- 
ously manifested. 

He  soon  contrived  to  quarrel  im- 
medicably  with  Mr.  Clay,  and  with 
the  great  majority  of  those  whose 
votes  had  elected  him,  by  vetoing, 
first,  a  National  Bank  bill,  passed  by 
both  Houses,  while  all  the  leading 
provisions  wTere  suggested  by  his 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury ;  and  then, 
Congress  having  passed  another 
Bank  bill,  based  entirely  on  his  own 
suggestions,  and  conforming  in  all 
points  to  his  requirements,  he  vetoed 
that  also.  Hereupon,  all  the  mem- 
bers of  his  Cabinet — which  was  that 
originally  selected  by  Gen.  Harrison 
— peremptorily  resigned  their  places, 
Mr.  Webster  alone  excepted,  who  re- 
tained the  position  of  Secretary  of 
State  until  May,  1843,  when  he  also 
resigned,  and  was  succeeded  by  Abel 
P.  Upshur,  of  Virginia,  a  gentleman 
of  considerable  ability  and  spotless 
private  character,  but  a  doctrinaire 
of  the  extreme  State  Eights,  Pro- 
Slavery  school,  under  whom  the  pro- 
ject of  annexing  Texas  to  this  coun- 
try wTas  more  openly  and  actively 
pushed  than  it  had  hitherto  been. 
Mr.  Upshur  was  killed  by  the  burst- 
ing of  a  gun,  on  the  28th  of  Febru- 
ary, 1844,  and  was  succeeded  by 
John  C.  Calhoun,  who  prosecuted 


.156 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  scheme  still  more  openly  and 
vigorously,  and  under  whose  auspices 
a  Treaty  of  Annexation  was  conclud- 
ed April  12,  1844,  but  which  was 
resolutely  opposed  in  the  Senate,  and 
rejected,  receiving  but  fifteen  votes. 

It  is  not  probable  that  the  master- 
spirits of  the  Annexation  intrigue 
were  either  disappointed  or  displeas- 
ed by  this  signal  defeat  of  their  first 
public  movement.  It  is  very  certain 
that  they  were  not  disconcerted.  For 
the  Presidential  Election  of  1844  was 
now  in  immediate  prospect ;  and  they 
had  two  darling  objects  to  achieve 
by  the  Annexation  project :  first,  the 
defeat  of  Mr.  Yan  Buren  in  the  De- 
mocratic National  Convention ;  next, 
the  defeat  of  Mr.  Clay  before  the 
people. 

The  defeat  of  Mr.  Yan  Buren's 
nomination  was  first  in  order,  and  a 
matter  of  very  considerable  difficulty. 
He  had  been  the  candidate  of  the  party 
at  the  preceding  election,  and  beaten, 
as  his  supporters  contended,  "  without 
a  why  or  wherefore,"  by  a  popular 
frenzy  incited  by  disgusting,  though 
artful,  appeals  to  ignorance,  sensual- 
ity, and  every  vulgar  prejudice  and 
misconception.  The  disorganization 
of  the  Whigs,  following  Gen.  Harri- 
son's death  and  Tyler's  defection, 
had  brought  their  antagonists  into 
power  in  at  least  two-thirds  of  the 
States,  and  they  were  quite  as  confi- 
dent as  the  Whigs  of  their  ability  to 
triumph  in  the  approaching  Presi- 
dential election. 

"  The  sober  second  thought"  of  the 
people  had  been  specially  appealed 
to  by  Mr.  Yan  Buren  for  the  vindica- 
tion of  his  conduct  of  public  affairs, 
and  that  appeal  had  been  favorably 
responded  to  by  his  party.  There 


was  no  room  for  reasonable  doubt 
that  a  great  majority  of  his  fellow- 
Democrats  earnestly  desired  and  ex- 
pected his  nomination  and  election. 
To  prevent  the  former  was  the  more 
immediate  object  of  the  preternatural 
activity  suddenly  given  to  the  Texas 
intrigue,  which,  never  abandoned, 
had  for  several,  years  apparently  re- 
mained in  a  state  of  suspended  ani- 
mation. Mr.  Thomas  W.  Gilmer,  of 
Ya.,  formerly  a  State  Rights  Whig 
member  of  Congress,  now  an  ardent 
disciple  of  Calhoun  and  a  partisan  of 
John  Tyler,  by  whom  he  was  made 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  a  few  days 
before  he  was  killed  (February  28, 
1844,  on  board  the  IT.  S.  war  steamer 
Princeton,  by  the  bursting  of  the  big 
gun  already  noticed),  was  the  man 
selected  to  bring  the  subject  freshly 
before  the  public.  In  a  letter  dated 
Washington,  January  10,  1843,  and 
published  soon  after  in  The  Madiso- 
nian,  Mr.  Tyler's  organ,  he  says  : 

"  Dear  Sir  : — Yon  ask  if  I  have  expressed 
the  opinion  that  Texas  would  be  annexed  to 
the  United  States.  I  answer,  yes  :  and  this 
opinion  has  not  been  adopted  without  reflec- 
tion, nor  without  a  careful  observation  of 
causes,  which  I  believe  are  rapidly  bringing 
about  this  result.  I  do  not  know  how  far 
these  causes  have  made  the  same  impression 
on  others ;  but  I  am  persuaded  that  the  time 
is  not  distant  when  they  will  be  felt  in  all 
their  force.  The  excitement,  which  you  ap- 
prehend, may  arise ;  but  it  will  be  temporary, 
and,  in  the  end,  salutary.  *  *  *  I  am,  as 
you  know,  a  strict  constructionist  of  the 
powers  of  our  Federal  Government ;  and  I 
do  not  admit  the  force  of  mere  precedent  to 
establish  authority  under  written  constitu- 
tions. The  power  conferred  by  the  Consti- 
tution over  our  foreign  relations,  and  the 
repeated  acquisitions  of  territory  under  it, 
seem  to  me  to  leave  this  question  open  as 
one  of  expediency. 

"  But  you  anticipate  objections  with  re- 
gard to  the  subject  of  Slavery.  This  is, 
indeed,  a  subject  of  extreme  delicacy,  but  it 
is  one  on  which  the  annexation  of  Texas  will 
have  the  most  salutary  influence.  Some 
have  thought  that  the  proposition  would 


THE   SLA  YE  PO  WE 


R  COVETS  TEXAS. 


157 


endanger  our  Union.  I  am  of  a  different 
opinion.  1  believe  it  will  bring  about  a  bet- 
ter understanding  of  our  relative  rights  and 
obligations.  *  *  *  Having  acquired  Loui- 
siana and  Florida,  we  have  an  interest  and 
a  frontier  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  along 
our  interior  to  the  Pacific,  which  will  not 
permit  us  to  close  our  eyes  or  fold  our  arms 
with  indifference  to  the  events  which  a  few 
years  may  disclose  in  that  quarter.  We 
have  already  had  one  question  of  boundary 
with  Texas ;  other  questions  must  soon  arise, 
under  our  revenue  laws,  and  on  other  points 
of  necessary  intercourse,  which  it  will  be  dif- 
ficult to  adjust.  The  institutions  of  Texas, 
and  her  relations  with  other  governments,  are 
yet  in  that  condition  which  inclines  her  peo- 
ple (who  are  our  countrymen)  to  unite  their 
destiny  with  ours.  This  must  oe  done  soon, 
or  not  at  all.  There  are  numerous  tribes  of 
Indians  along  both  frontiers,  which  can  easi- 
ly become  the  cause  or  the  instrument  of 
border  wars.  Our  own  population  is  press- 
ing onward  to  the  Pacific.  No  power  can 
restrain  it.  The  pioneer  from  our  Atlantic 
seaboard  will  soon  kindle  his  fires,  and  erect 
his  cabin,  beyond  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
and  on  the  Gulf  of  California.  If  Mahomed 
comes  not  to  the  mountain,  the  mountain 
will  go  to  Mahomed.  Every  year  adds  new 
difficulties  to  our  progress,  as  natural  and  as 
inevitable  as  the  current  of  the  Mississippi. 
These  difficulties  will  soon,  like  mountains 
interposed — 

4  Make  enemies  of  nations, 
Which  now,  like  kindred  drops, 
Might  mingle  into  one.'  "  • 

Following  immediately  on  the  pub- 
lication of  this  letter,  the  Legislatures 
of  Alabama,  of  Mississippi,  and  prob- 
ably of  other  Southwestern  States, 
were  induced  to  take  ground  in  favor 
of  Annexation  ;  with  what  views,  and 
for  what  purpose,  the  following  ex- 
tract from  the  report  adopted  by  that 
of  Mississippi  will  sufficiently  indi- 
cate : 

44  But  we  hasten  to  suggest  the  importance 
of  the  Annexation  of  Texas  to  this  Republic 
upon  grounds  somewhat  local  in  their  com- 
plexion, but  of  an  import  infinitely  grave  and 
interesting  to  the  people  who  inhabit  the 
Southern  portion  of  this  confederacy,  where 
it  is  known  that  a  species  of  Domestic  Slav- 
ery is  tolerated  and  protected  by  law,  whose 
existence  is  prohibited  by  the  legal  regula- 
tions of  other  States  of  this  confederacy; 
which  system  of  Slavery  is  held  by  all,  who 


are  familiarly  acquainted  with  its  practical 
effects,  to  be  of  highly  beneficial  influence 
to  the  country  within  whose  limits  it  is 
permitted  to  exist. 

44  The  Committee  feel  authorized  to  say 
that  this  system  is  cherished  by  our  consti- 
tuents as  the  very  palladium  of  their  pros- 
perity  and  happiness ;  and,  whatever  igno- 
rant fanatics  may  elsewhere  conjecture,  the 
Committee  are  fully  assured,  upon  the  most 
diligent  observation  and  reflection  on  the 
subject,  that  the  South  dots  not  possess  within 
her  limits  a  blessing  with  which  the  affec- 
tions of  her  people  are  so  closely  entwined 
and  so  completely  enfibered,  and  whose  value 
is  more  highly  appreciated,  than  that  wThich 
we  are  now  considering.    *    *  * 

44  It  may  not  be  improper  here  to  remark' 
that,  during  the  last  session  of  Congress, 
when  a  Senator  from  Mississippi  proposed 
the  acknowledgment  of  Texan  independence, 
it  wras  found,  with  a  few  exceptions,  the 
members  of  that  body  were  ready  to  take 
ground  upon  it  as  upon  the  subject  of 
Slavery  itself. 

"  With  all  these  facts  before  us,  we  do 
not  hesitate  in  believing  that  these  feelings 
influenced  the  New  England  Senators ;  but 
one  voting  in  favor  of  the  measure ;  and,  in- 
deed, Mr.  Webster  has  been  bold  enough,  in 
a  public  speech  recently  delivered  in  New 
York  to  many  thousands  of  citizen^,  to  de- 
clare that  the  reasons  which  influenced  his 
opposition  was  his  abhorrence  of  Slavery  in 
the  South,  and  that  it  might,  in  the  event  of 
its  recognition,  become  a  slaveholding  State. 
He  also  spoke  of  the  effort  making  in  favor 
of  Abolition;  and  that,  being  predicated 
upon  and  aided  by  the  powerful  influence  of 
religious  feeling,  it  would  become  irresist- 
ible and  overwhelming. 

"  This  language,  coming  from  so  distin- 
guished an  individual  as  Mr.  Webster,  so 
familiar  with  the  feelings  of  the  North,  and 
entertaining  so  high  a  respect  for  public 
sentiment  in  New  England,  speaks  so  plain- 
ly the  voice  of  the  North  as  not  to  be  mis- 
understood. 

"  We  sincerely  hope  there  is  enough  good 
sense  and  genuine  love  of  country  among 
our  fellow-countrymen  of  the  Northern 
States  to  secure  us  final  justice  on  this  sub- 
ject; yet  we  cannot  consider  it  safe  or  ex- 
pedient for  the  people  of  the  South  to  en- 
tirely disregard  the  efforts  of  the  fanatics, 
and  the  efforts  of  such  men  as  Webster,  and 
others  who  countenance  such  dangerous 
doctrines. 

14  The  Northern  States  have  no  interests 
of  their  own  which  require  any  special  safe- 
guards for  their  defense,  save  only  their  do- 
mestic manufactures  ;  and  God  knows  they 
have  already  received  protection  from  Gov- 
ernment on  a  most  liberal  scale;  uuder 


158 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


which  encouragement  they  have  improved 
and  flourished  beyond  example.  The  South 
has  very  peculiar  interests  to  preserve,  inter- 
ests already  violently  assailed  and  boldly 
threatened. 

"  Your  Committee  are  fully,  persuaded 
that  this  protection  to*  her  best  interests  will 
be  afforded  by  the  Annexation  of  Texas  ;  an 
equipoise  of  influence  in  the  halls  of  Con- 
gress will  be  secured,  which  will  furnish  us  a 
permanent  guarantee  of  protection.'''' 

Mr.  Henry  A.  Wise,  of  Yirginia, 
of  the  same  political  school  with  Gil- 
mer, in  a  speech  in  the  House,  Jan- 
nary  26,  1842,  said : 

"  True,  if  Iowa  be  added  on  the  one  side, 
Florida  will  be  added  on  the  other.  But 
there  the  equation  must  stop.  Let  one 
more  Northern  State  be  admitted,  and  the 
equilibrium  is  gone  —  gone  forever.  The 
balance  of  interests  is  gone — the  safeguard 
of  American  property  —  of  the  American 
Constitution — of  the  American  Union,  van- 
ished into  thin  air.  This  must  be  the  inevit- 
able result,  unless,  by  a  treaty  with  Mexico, 
the  South  can  add  more  weight  to  her  end  of 
the  lever.  Let  the  South  stop  at  the  Sabine, 
while  the  North  may  spread  unchecked  be- 
yond the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  the  Southern 
scale  must  kick  the  beam." 

The  letter  of  Mr.  Gilmer,  when 
printed,  was,  by  Mr.  Aaron  Y. 
Brown,  a  Democratic  member  of 
Congress  from  Tennessee,  inclosed  in 
a  letter  to  Gen.  Jackson,  asking  the 
General's  opinion  thereon.  That  re- 
quest promptly  elicited  the  following 
response : 

"Hermitage,  February  13,  1843. 

"My  Dear  Sir:— Yours  of  the  23d  ulti- 
mo has  been  received,  and  with  it  The  Madi- 
sonian,  containing  Gov.  Gilmer's  letter  on 
the  subject  of  the  annexation  of  Texas  to 
the  United  States. 

"  You  are  not  mistaken  in  supposing  that 
I  have  formed  an  opinion  on  this  interesting 
subject.  It  occupied  much  of  my  time  dur- 
ing my  Presidency,  and,  I  am  sure,  has  lost 
none  of  its  importance  by  what  has  since 
transpired. 

"  Soon  after  my  election  in  1829,  it  was 
made  known  to  me  by  Mr.  Erwin,  formerly 
our  minister  to  the  Court  of  Madrid,  that, 
whilst  at  that  Court,  he  had  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  a  treaty  with  Spain  for  the  cession 


of  the  Floridas  and  the  settlement  of  the  I 
boundary  of  Louisiana,  fixing  the  western  | 
limit  of  the  latter  at  the  Rio  Grande,  agree-  I 
ably  to  the  understanding  of  France  ;  that 
he  had  written  home  to  our  Government  for  I 
powers  to  complete  and  sign  this  negotia-  I 
tion ;  but  that,  instead  of  receiving  such  au- 
thority, the  negotiation  was  taken  out  of  his 
hands  and  transferred  to  Washington,  and  a  I 
new  treaty  was  there  concluded  by  which  | 
the  Sabine,  and  not  the  Rio  Grande,  was  • 
recognized  and  established  as  the  boundary 
of  Louisiana. 

"  Finding  that  these  statements  were  true, 
and  that  our  Government  did  really  give  up  I 
that  important  territory,  when  it  was  at  its 
option  to  retain  it,  I  was  filled  with  aston- 
ishment. The  right  of  the  territory  was 
obtained  from  France ;  Spain  stood  ready  to 
acknowledge  it  to  the  Rio  Grande;  and  yet 
the  authority  asked  by  our  Minister  to  insert 
the  true  boundary  was  not  only  withheld, 
but,  in  lieu  of  it,  a  limit  was  adopted  which 
stripped  us  of  the  whole  of  the  vast  country 
lying  between  the  two  rivers. 

"  On  such  a  subject,  I  thought,  with  the 
ancient  Romans,  that  it  was  right  never  to  I 
cede  any  land  or  boundary  of  the  republic, 
but  always  to  add  to  it  by  honorable  treaty,  j 
thus  extending  the  area  of  freedom  ;  and  it 
was  in  accordance  with  this  feeling  that  I 
gave  our  Minister  to  Mexico  instructions  to 
enter  upon  a  negotiation  for  the  retrocession 
of  Texas  to  the  United  States. 

u  This  negotiation  failed;  and  I  shall  ever 
regret  it  as  a  misfortune  both  to  Mexico  and 
the  United  States.  Mr.  Gilmer's  letter  pre- 
sents many  of  the  considerations  which,  in 
my  judgment,  rendered  -the  step  necessary  to 
the  peace  and  harmony  of  the  two  countries  ; 
but  the  point  in  it,  at  that  time,  which  most 
strongly  impelled  me  to  the  course  I  pursued, 
was  the  injustice  done  to  us  by  the  surrender 
of  the  territory,  when  it  was  obvious  that  it 
could  have  been  retained,  without  increasing 
the  consideration  afterward  given  for  the 
Floridas.  I  could  not  but  feel  that  the  sur- 
render of  so  vast  and  important  a  territory 
was  attributable  to  an  erroneous  estimate 
of  the  tendency  of  our  institutions,  in  which  • 
there  was  mingled  somewhat  of  jealousy 
as  to  the  rising  greatness  of  the  South  and 
West. 

"  But  I  forbear  to  dwell  on  this  part  of  the 
history  of  this  question.  It  is  past,  and  can- 
not now  be  undone.  We  can  now  only  look 
at  it  as  one  of  annexation,  if  Texas  presents 
it  to  us ;  and,  if  she  does,  I  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  our 
Union  require  that  it  should  be  accepted. 

"  If,  in  a  military  point  of  view  alone,  the 
question  be  examined,  it  will  be  found  to  be 
most  important  to  the  United  States  to  be  in 
possession  of  the  territory. 


PROTEST  FROM  CONGRES 


S  AGAINST  ANNEXATION. 


159 


"  Great  Britain  has  already  made  treaties 
with  Texas;  and  we  know  that  far-seeing 
nation  never  omits  a  circumstance,  in  her 
extensive  intercourse  with  the  world,  which 
can  be  turned  to  account  in  increasing  her 
military  resources.  May  she  not  enter  into 
an  alliance  with  Texas?  and,  reserving,  as 
she  doubtless  will,  the  North- Western  Boun- 
dary question  as  the  cause  of  war  with  us 
whenever  she  chooses  to  declare  it,  let  us 
suppose  that,  as  an  ally  with  Texas,  we  are 
to  fight  her!  Preparatory  to  such  a  move- 
ment, she  sends  her  20,000  or  30,000  men  to 
Texas ;  organizes  them  on  the  Sabine,  where 
supplies  and  arms  can  be  concentrated  be- 
fore we  have  even  notice  of  her  intentions ; 
makes  a  lodgment  on  the  Mississippi ;  excites 
the  negroes  to  insurrection  ;  the  lower  coun- 
try falls,  and  with  it  New  Orleans;  and  a 
servile  war  rages  through  the  whole  South 
and  West. 

"  In  the  mean  time,  she  is  also  moving  an 
army  along  the  western  frontier  from  Cana- 
da, which,  in  cooperation  with  the  army 
from  Texas,  spreads  ruin  and  liavoc  from 
the  Lakes  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

"  Who  can  estimate  the  national  loss  we 
may  sustain,  before  such  a  movement  could 
be  repelled  with  such  forces  as  we  could 
organize  on  short  notice  ? 

"Remember  that  Texas  borders  upon  us, 
on  our  west  to  42°  of  north  latitude,  and  is 
our  southern  boundary  to  the  Pacific.  Re- 
member also,  that,  if  annexed  to  the  United 
States,  our  Western  boundary  would  be  the 
Rio  Grande,  which  is  of  itself  a  fortification, 
on  account  of  its  extensive,  barren,  and  unin- 
habitable plains.  With  such  a  barrier  on 
our  west,  we  are  invincible.  The  whole 
European  world  could  not,  in  combination 
against  us,  make  an  impression  on  our  Onion. 
Our  population  on  the  Pacific  would  rapidly 
increase,  and  soon  be  strong  enough  for  the 
protection  of  our  eastern  whalers,  and,  in 
the  worst  event,  could  always  be  sustained 
by  timely  aids  from  the  intermediate  coun- 
try. 

"  From  the  Rio  Grande,  overland,  a  large 
army  could  not  march,  or  be  supplied,  unless 
from  the  Gulf  by  water,  which,  by  vigilance, 
could  always  be  intercepted ;  and  to  march 
an  army  near  the  Gulf,  they  could  be  harass- 
ed by  militia,  and  detained  until  an  organ- 
ized force  could  be  raised  to  meet  them. 

uBut  I  am  iu  danger  of  running  into  un- 
necessary details,  which  my  debility  will  not 
enable  me  to  close.  The  question  is  full  of 
interest  also  as  it  affects  our  domestic  rela- 
tions, and  as  it  may  bear  upon  those  of  Mex- 
ico to  us.  I  will  not  undertake  to  follow  it 
out  to  its  consequences  in  those  respects; 
though  I  must  say  that,  in  all  aspects,  the 
annexation  of  Texas  to  the  United  States 
promises  to  enlarge  the  circle  of  free  insti- 


tutions, and  is  essential  to  the  United  States, 
particularly  as  lessening  the  probabilities  of 
future  collision  with  foreign  powers,  and 
giving  them  greater  efficiency  in  spreading 
the  blessings  of  peace. 

"  I  return  you  my  thanks  for  your  kind 
letter  on  this  subject,  and  subscribe  myself, 
with  great  sincerity,  your  friend  and  obedi- 
ent servant,  Andrew  Jackson. 

"Hon.  A.  V.  Brown." 

This  letter  was  secretly  circulated, 
but  carefully  withheld  from  the  press 
for  a  full  year,  and  finally  appeared 
in  The  Richmond  Enquirer,  with  its 
date  altered  from  1843  to  1844,  as  if 
it  had  been  written  in  immediate 
support  of  the  Tyler-Calhoun  nego- 
tiation. 

Col.  Benton,  in  his  "  Thirty  Years5 
View,"  directly  charges  that  the  let- 
ter was  drawn  from  Gen.  Jackson 
expressly  to  be  used  to  defeat  Mr. 
Yan  Buren's  nomination,  and  secure, 
if  possible,  that  of  Mr.  Calhoun  in- 
stead ;  and  it  doubtless  exerted  a 
strong  influence  adverse  to  the  for- 
mer, although  Gen.  Jackson  was 
among  his  most  unflinching  support- 
ers to  the  last. 

Mr.  John  Quincy  Adams  had  unit- 
ed with  Mr.  William  Slade,  J oshuaR. 
Giddings,  and  ten  other  an ti- Slavery 
Whig  members  of  the  XXVIIth 
Congress  (March  3,  1843),  in  a  stir- 
ring address  to  the  people  of  the  Free 
States,  warning  them  against  the  An- 
nexation intrigue,  as  by  no  means 
abandoned,  but  still  energetically, 
though  secretly,  prosecuted.  In  that 
address,  they  recited  such  of  the  fore- 
going facts  as  were  then  known  to 
them,  saying : 

"  We,  the  undersigned,  in  closing  our  du- 
ties to  our  constituents  and  our  country  as 
members  of  the  Twenty-Seventh  Congress, 
feel  bound  to  call  your  attention,  very  briefly, 
to  the  project,  long  entertained  by  a  portion  of 
the  people  of  these  United  States,  still  perti- 
naciously adhered  to,  and  intended  soon  to  be 


160 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


consummated  :  The  Annexation  of  Tdxas  to 
this  Union.  In  the  press  of  business  inci- 
dent to  the  last  days  of  a  session  of  Con- 
gress, we  have  not  time,  did  we  deem  it 
necessary,  to  enter  upon  a  detailed  state- 
ment of  the  reasons  which  force  upon  our 
minds  the  conviction  that  this  project  is  by 
no  means  abandoned ;  that  a  large  portion 
of  the  country,  interested  in  the  continuance 
of  Domestic  Slavery  and  the  Slave-Trade  in 
these  United  States,  have  solemnly  and  unal- 
terably determined  that  it  shall  be  speed- 
ily carried  into  execution ;  and  that,  by  this 
admission  of  new  Slave  territory  and  Slave 
States,  the  undue  ascendency  of  the  Slave- 
holding  Power  in  the  Government  shall  be 
secured  and  riveted  beyond  all  redemption. 

"  That  it  was  with  these  views  and  inten- 
tions that  settlements  were  effected  in  the 
province,  by  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
difficulties  fomented  with  the  Mexican  Gov- 
ernment, a  revolt  brought  about,  and  an 
independent  government  declared,  cannot 
now  admit  of  a  doubt;  and  that,  hitherto, 
all  attempts  of  Mexico  to  reduce  her  re- 
volted province  to  obedience  have  proved 
unsuccessful,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  un- 
lawful aid  and  assistance  of  designing  and 
interested  individuals  in  the  United  States ; 
and  the  direct  and  indirect  cooperation  of 
our  own  Government,  with  similar  views,  is 
not  the  less  certain  and  demonstrable. 

"  The  open  and  repeated  enlistment  of 
troops  in  several  States  of  this  Union,  in  aid 
of  the  Texan  Revolution  ;  the  intrusion  of  an 
American  army,  by  order  of  the  President, 
far  into  the  territory  of  the  Mexican  Govern- 
ment, at  a  moment  critical  for  the  fate  of 
the  insurgents,  under  pretense  of  preventing 
Mexican  soldiers  from  fomenting  Indian 
disturbances,  but  in  reality  in  aid  of,  and 
acting  in  singular  concert  and  coincidence 
with,  the  army  of  the  Revolutionists;  the 
entire  neglect  of  our  Government  to  adopt 
any  efficient  measures  to  prevent  the  most 
unwarrantable  aggressions  of  bodies  of  our 
own  citizens,  enlisted,  organized,  and  officer- 
ed within  our  own  borders,  and  marched  in 
arms  and  battle  array  upon  the  territory  and 
against  the  inhabitants  of  a  friendly  govern- 
ment, in  aid  of  freebooters  and  insurgents ; 
and  the  premature  recognition  of  the  Inde- 
pendence of  Texas,  by  a  snap  vote,  at  the 
heel  of  a  session  of  Congress,  and  that,  too, 
at  the  very  session  when  President  Jackson 
had,  by  special  Message,  insisted  that  '  the 
measure  would  be  contrary  to  the  policy  in- 
variably observed  by  the  United  States  in  all 
similar  cases,1  would  be  marked  with  great 
injustice  to  Mexico,  and  peculiarly  liable  to 
the  darkest  suspicions,  inasmuch  as  the 
Texans  were  almost  all  emigrants  from  the 
United  States,  and  sought  the  recognition  of 
their  independence  with  the  avowed  purpose 


of  obtaining  their  annexation  to  the  United 
States.    *    *  * 

"  The  open  avowal  of  the  Texans  them- 
selves—  the  frequent  and  anxious  negotia- 
tions of  our  own  Government — the  resolu- 
tions of  various  States  of  the  Union  —  the 
numerous  declarations  of  members  of  Con- 
gress— the  tone  of  the  Southern  press— as 
well  as  the  direct  application  of  the  Texan 
Government  —  make  it  impossible  for  any 
man  to  doubt  that  Annexation,  and  the 
formation  of  several  new  Slaveholding 
States,  were  originally  the  policy  and  de- 
sign of  the  Slaveholding  States  and  the 
Executive  of  the  Nation. 

"  The  same  references  will  show  very  con- 
clusively that  the  particular  objects  of  this 
new  acquisition  of  Slave  territory  were  the 
perpetuation  of  slavery  and  the  continued 
ascendency  of  the  Slave  Power.    *    *  * 

"  We  hold  that  there  is  not  only  '  no  po- 
litical necessity'  for  it,  '  no  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  it,'  but  that  there  is  no  consti- 
tutional power  delegated  to  any  department 
of  the  National  Government  to  authorize  it ; 
that  no  act  of  Congress,  or  treaty  for  annex- 
ation, can  impose  the  least  obligation  upon 
the  several  States  of  this  Union  to  submit  to 
such  an  unwarrantable  act,  or  to  receive  into 
their  family  and  fraternity  such  misbegotten 
and  illegitimate  progeny. 

"  We  hesitate  not  to  say  that  Annexa- 
tion, effected  by  any  act  or  proceeding  of  the 
Federal  Government,  or  any  of  its  depart- 
ments, would  be  identical  with  dissolution. 
It  would  be  a  violation  of  our  National 
compact,  its  objects,  designs,  and  the  great 
elementary  principles  which  entered  into 
its  formation,  of  a  character  so  deep  and 
fundamental,  and  would  be  an  attempt  to 
eternize  an  institution  and  a  power  of  a  na- 
ture so  unjust  in  themselves,  so  injurious  to 
the  interests  and  abhorrent  to  the  feelings  of 
the  people  of  the  Free  States,  as,  in  our 
opinion,  not  only  inevitably  to  result  in  a 
dissolution  of  the  Union,  but  fully  to  justify 
it;  and  we  not  only. assert  that  the  people 
of  the  Free  States  1  ought  not  to  submit  to 
it,'  but,  we  say  with  confidence,  they  would 
not  submit  to  it.  We  know  their  present 
temper  and  spirit  on  this  subject  too  well  to 
believe  for  a  moment  that  they  would  be- 
come partieeps  criminis  in  any  subtle  con- 
trivance for  the  irremediable  perpetuation 
of  an  institution,  which  the  wisest  and  best 
men  who  formed  our  Federal  Constitution, 
as  well  from  the  Slave  as  the  Free  States, 
regarded  as,an  evil  and  a  curse,  soon  to  be- 
come extinct  under  the  operation  of  laws  to 
be  passed  prohibiting  the  Slave-Trade,  and 
the  progressive  influence  of  the  principles  of 
the  Revolution. 

"To  prevent  the  success  of  this  nefarious 
project—to  preserve  from  such  gross  viola- 


MR.  VAN  BUREN  AG 


AINST  ANNEXATION. 


161 


tion  the  Constitution  of  our  country,  adopt- 
ed expressly  '  to  secure  the  blessings  of  lib- 
erty,' and  not  the  perpetuation  of  Slavery — 
and  to  prevent  the  speedy  and  violent  disso- 
lution of  the  Union — we  invite  you  to  unite, 
without  distinction  of  party,  in  an  immedi- 
ate exposition  of  your  views  on  this  subject, 
in  such  manner  as  you  may  deem  best  calcu- 
lated to  answer  the  end  proposed.1' 

On  the  27th  of  March,  1844,  Mr. 
Wm.  H.  Hammet,  Representative  in 
Congress  from  Mississippi,  and  an 
unpledged  delegate  elect  to  the  ap- 
proaching Democratic  National  Con- 
vention, addressed,  from  his  seat  in 
the  House,  a  letter  of  inquiry  to  Mr. 
Yan  Buren,  asking  an  expression  of 
his  "  opinions  as  to  the  constitution- 
ality and  expediency  of  immediately 
annexing  Texas  to  the  United  States, 
80  soon  as  the  consent  of  Texas  may 
be  had  to  such  Annexation."  The 
writer  commended  himself  to  Mr. 
Yan  Buren  as  "  one  of  your  warmest 
supporters  in  1836  and  1840,  and  an 
unpledged  delegate  to  the  Baltimore 
Convention  ;"  and,  though  courteous 
in  its  terms,  the  letter  gave  him  very 
clearly  to  understand  that  his  answer 
would  govern  the  course  of  the  que- 
rist in  the  Convention  aforesaid,  and 
be  very  likely  to  influence  the  result 
of  its  deliberations. 

Mr.  Yan  Buren  replied  in  a  very 
long  and  elaborate  letter,  dated  Lin- 
denwald,  April  20th,  whereof  the  drift 
and  purport  were  very  clearly  hostile 
to  the  contemplated  Annexation.  He 
fully  admitted  that  Annexation  was 
per  se  desirable ;  encouraging  hopes 
that  he  might  consent  to  ft,  as  a  mea- 
sure of  imperative  self-defense,  rather 
than  permit  Texas  to  become  a  Brit- 
ish dependency,  or  the  colony  of  any 
European  power ;  and  intimating  that 
Mexico  might  too  long  persist  "  in  re- 
fusing to  acknowledge  the  independ- 
ence of  Texas,  and  in  destructive  but 
11 


fruitless  efforts  to  reconquer  that 
State,"  so  as  to  produce  a  general 
conviction  of  the  necessity  of  An- 
nexation to  the  permanent  welfare, 
if  not  absolute  safety,  of  all  concern- 
ed. He,  nevertheless,  decidedly  neg- 
atived any  presumption  that  he  could, 
under  existing  circumstances,  or  un- 
der any  in  immediate  prospect,  give 
his  support  to  the  scheme,  even  though 
assured  that  his  re-election  to  the  Pres- 
idency depended  thereon.  His  view 
of  the  main  question  directly  present- 
ed, is  fairly  and  forcibly  set  forth  in 
the  following  passage  of  his  letter : 

"The  question,  then,  recurs,  if,  as  sensi- 
ble men,  we  cannot  avoid  the  conclusion 
that  the  immediate  Annexation  of  Texas 
would,  in  all  human  probability,  draw  after 
it  a  war  with  Mexico,  can  it  be  expedient 
to  attempt  it  ?  Of  the  consequences  of  such 
a  war,  the  character  it  might  be  made  to 
assume,  the  entanglements  with  other  na- 
tions which  the  position  of  a  belligerent 
almost  unavoidably  draws  after  it,  and  the 
undoubted  injuries  which  might  be  inflicted 
on  each,  notwithstanding  the  great  disparity 
of  their  respective  forces,  I  will  not  say  a 
word.  God  forbid  that  an  American  citizen 
should  ever  count  the  cost  of  any  appeal  to 
what  is  appropriately  denominated  the  last 
resort  of  nations,  whenever  that  resort  be- 
comes necessary,  either  for  the  safety,  or  to 
vindicate  the  honor,  of  his  country.  There 
is,  I  trust,  not  one  so  base  as  not  to  regard 
himself,  and  all  he  has,  to  be  forever,  and  at 
all  times,  subject  to  such  a  requisition.  But 
would  a  war  with  Mexico,  brought  on  under 
such  circumstances,  be  a  contest  of  that 
character?  Could  we  hope  to  stand  per- 
fectly justified  in  the  eyes  of  mankind  for 
entering  into  it ;  more  especially  if  its  com- 
mencement is  to  be  preceded  by  the  appro- 
priation to  our  own  uses  of  the  territory, 
the  sovereignty  of  which  is  in  dispute  be- 
tween two  nations,  one  of  which  we  are  to* 
join  in  the  struggle?  This,  Sir,  is  a  matter 
of  the  very  gravest  import — one  in  respect 
to  which  no  American  statesman  or  citizen 
can  possibly  be  indifferent.  AVe  have  a. 
character  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  to 
maintain.  All  our  public  functionaries,  as 
well  those  who  advocate  this  measure  as. 
those  who  oppose  it,  however  much  they 
may  differ  as  to  its  effects,  will,  I  am  sure,, 
be  equally  solicitous  for  the  performance  of 
this  first  of  duties. 

"  It  has  hitherto  been  our  pride  and  ourr 


162 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


boast  that,  whilst  the  lust  of  power,  with 
fraud  and  violence  in  its  train,  has  led  other 
and  differently  constituted  Governments  to 
aggression  and  conquest,  our  movements  in 
these  respects  have  always  been  regulated 
by  reason  and  justice.  A  disposition  to 
detract  from  our  pretensions  in  this  respect 
will,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  always  prev- 
alent elsewhere,  and  has,  at  this  very  mo- 
ment, and  from  special  causes,  assumed,  in 
some  quarters,  the  most  rabid  character. 
Should  not  every  one,  then,  who  sincerely 
loves  his  country — who  venerates  its  time- 
honored  and  glorious  institutions — who 
dwells  with  pride  and  delight  on  associa- 
tions connected  with  our  rise,  progress,  and 
present  condition — on  the  steady  step  with 
which  we  have  advanced  to  our  present 
eminence,  in  despite  of  the  hostility,  and  in 
contempt  of  the  bitter  revilings,  of  the  ene- 
mies of  freedom  in  all  parts  of  the  globe — 
consider,  and  that  deeply,  whether  we  would 
not,  by  the  immediate  Annexation  of  Texas, 
place  a  weapon  in  the  hands  of  those  who 
now  look  upon  us  and  our  institutions  with 
distrustful  and  envious  eyes,  that  would  do 
us  more  real,  lasting  injury  as  a  nation, 
than  the  acquisition  of  such  a  territory,  val- 
uable as  it  undoubtedly  is,  could  possibly 
repair  ? 

"  It  is  said,  and  truly  said,  that  this  war  be- 
tween Texas  and  Mexico  has  already  been 
of  too  long  duration.  We  are,  and  must 
continue  to  be,  annoyed  by  its  prosecution, 
and  have  undoubtedly,  as  has  been  remark- 
ed, an  interest  in  seeing  it  terminated.  But 
can  we  appeal  to  any  principle  in  the  law 
of  Nations,  to  which,  we  practice  a  scrupu- 
lous adherence,  that  would,  under  present 
circumstances,  justify  us  in  interfering  for 
its  suppression  in  a  manner  that  would  una- 
voidably make  us  a  party  to  its  further  prose- 
cution ?  Can  this  position  be  made  sufficient- 
ly clear  to  justify  us  in  committing  the  peace 
And  honor  of  the  country  to  its  support  ? 

"  In  regard  to  the  performance  by  us  of 
that  duty,  so  difficult  for  any  Government 
to  perform — the  observance  of  an  honest 
neutrality  between  nations  at  war — we  can 
now  look  through  our  whole  career,  since 
our  first  admission  into  the  family  of  na- 
tions, not  only  without  a  blush,  but  with 
feelings  of  honest  pride  and  satisfaction. 
The  way  was  opened  by  President  Washing- 
ton himself,  under  circumstances  of  the 
most  difficult  character,  and  at  no  less  a 
hazard  than  that  of  exposing  ourselves  to 
plausible,  yet  unjust,  imputations  of  infidel- 
ity to  treaty  stipulations.  The  path  he  trod 
with  such  unfaltering  steps,  and  which  led 
to  such  beneficial  results,  has  hitherto  been 
pursued  with  unvarying  fidelity  by  every 
one  of  his  successors,  of  whom  it  becomes 
me  to  speak." 


The  "Whigs  were  unanimous  andH 
enthusiastic  in  their  determination^ 

that  no  other  than  Mr.  Clay  should 
be  their  candidate,  and  that  no  other 
than  he  should  be  elected.  He  had 
spent  the  Winter  of  1843-4,  main- 
ly in  New  Orleans — then  a  hot-bed 
of  the  Texas  intrigue — but  had  left, 
it  unshaken  in  his  opposition  to  the 
plot — not  to  Annexation  itself,  at  a 
suitable  time,  and  under  satisfactory 
conditions ;  but  to  its  accomplish-  j 
ment  while  the  boundaries  of  Texas; 
remained  undetermined  and  disput-1 
ed,  her  independence  unacknowledg- 
ed by  Mexico,  and  her  war  with  that 
country  unconcluded. 

Mr.  Clay  set  forth  his  view  of  the 
matter  in  a  letter  to  The  National* 
Intelligencer,  dated  "  Raleigh,  N.  C, 
April  17,  1844" — three  days  earlien 
than  the  date  of  Mr.  Van  Buren's 
letter.  Premising  that  he  had  be- 
lieved and  maintained  that  Texas* 
was  included  in  the  Louisiana  pur-- 
chase,  and  had,  therefore,  opposed 
the  treaty  of  1819,  with  Spain,  by 
which  Florida  was  acquired,  and  the 
Sabine  recognized  as  our  western; 
boundary,  he  says : 

"  My  opinions  of  the  inexpediency  of  the 
treaty  of  1819  did  not  prevail.    The  coun- 
try and  Congress  were  satisfied  with  it;  ap-' 
propriations  were  made  to  carry  it  into: 
effect ;  the  line  of  the  Sabine  was  recognized  \ 
by  us  as  our  boundary,  in  negotiations  both 
with  Spain  and  Mexico,  after  Mexico  became 
independent ;  and  measures  have  been  in , 
actual  progress  to  mark  the  line,  from  the 
Sabine  to  the  Red  river,  and  thence  to  the 
Pacific  ocean.    We  have  thus  fairly  alienat- 
ed our  title  to  Texas,  by  solemn  National 
compacts,  to  the  fulfillment  of  which  we 
stand  bound  by  good  faith  and  National 
honor.    It  is,  therefore,  perfectly  idle  and 
ridiculous,  if  not  dishonorable,  to  talk  of  re-  '. 
suming  our  title  to  Texas,  as  if  we  had 
never  parted  writh  it.    We  can  no  more  do 
that  than  Spain  can  resume  Florida,  France 
Louisiana,  or  Great  Britain  the  thirteen 
colonies  now  comprising  a  part  of  the  Uni- 
ted States." 


MR.   CLAY   AGAINST  ANNEXATION. 


163 


After  glancing  at  the  recent  his- 
tory of  Texas,  Mr.  Clay  continues  : 

"Mexico  has  not  abandoned,  but  perse- 
veres in,  the  assertion  of  her  rights  by  ac- 
tual force  of  arms,  which,  if  suspended,  are 
ntended  to  be  renewed.    Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, if  the  Government  of  the  Uni- 
ed  States  were  to  acquire  Texas,  it  would 
jicquire  along  with  it  all  the  encumbrances 
vhich  Texas  is  under,  and,  among  them, 
foe  actual  or  suspended  war  between  Mexi- 
co and  Texas.    Of  that  consequence,  there 
cannot  be  a  doubt.    Annexation  and  war 
rith  Mexico  are  identical.    Now,  for  one, 
[  certainly  am  not  willing  to  involve  this 
•ountry  in  a  foreign  war  for  the  object  of 
icquiring  Texas.    I  know  there  are  those 
xho  regard  such  a  war  with  indifference, 
md  as  a  trifling  affair,  on  account  of  the 
weakness  of  Mexico,  and  her  inability  to 
|nflict  serious  injury  on  this  country.  But 
i  do  not  look  upon  it  thus  lightly.  I  regard 
ill  wars  as  great  calamities,  to  be  avoided, 
If  possible,  and  honorable   peace  as  the 
wisest  and  truest  policy  of  this  country, 
what  the  United  States  most  need  are 
jinion,  peace,  and  patience.    Nor  do  I  think 
j;hat  the  weakness  of  a  power  should  form  a 
motive,  in  any  case,  for  inducing  us  to  en- 
rage in,  or  to  depreciate,  the  evils  of  war. 
Honor,  and  good  faith,  and  justice,  are 
pqually  due  from  this  country  toward  the 
veak  as  toward  the  strong.    And,  if  an  act 
)f  injustice  wTere  to  be  perpetrated  toward 
iny  power,  it  would  be  more  compatible 
vvith  the  dignity  of  the  nation,  and,  in  my 
udgment,  less  dishonorable,  to  inflict  it 
lpon  a  powerful,  instead  of  a  weak,  foreign 
lation." 

Mr.  Yan  Buren,  in  his  very  long 
letter,  had  studiously  avoided  all 
allusion  to  what,  in  the  cant  of  a 
later  day,  would  have  been  termed 
the  "sectional"  aspect  of  the  ques- 
tion ;  that  is,  the  earnest  and  invin- 
cible repugnance  of  a  large  portion 
Df  our  people  to  the  annexation  pro- 
posed, because  of  its  necessary  tend- 
ency to  extend  and  strengthen 
jSlavery.  Mr.  Clay  confronted  this 
view  of  the  case  cautiously,  yet 
manfully,  saying  : 

u  I  have  hitherto  considered  the  question 
ppon  the  supposition  that  the  annexation 
fa  attempted  without  the  assent  of  Mexico. 
If  she  yields  her  consent,  that  would  mate- 
rially affect  the  foreign  aspect  of  the  ques- 


tion, if  it  did  not  remove  all  foreign  difficul- 
ties. On  the  assumption  of  that  assent,  the 
question  would  be  confined  to  the  domestic 
considerations  which  belong  to  it,  embrac- 
ing the  terms  and  conditions  upon  which 
annexation  is  proposed.  I  do  not  think 
Texas  ought  to  be  received  into  the  Union, 
as  an  integral  part  of  it,  in  decided  opposi- 
tion to  the  wishes  of  a  considerable  and  re- 
spectable portion  of  the  confederacy.  I  think 
it  far  more  wise  and  important  to  compose 
and  harmonize  the  present  confederacy,  as 
it  now  exists,  than  to  introduce  a  new  ele- 
ment of  discord  and  distraction  into  it.  In 
my  humble  opinion,  it  should  be  the  con- 
stant and  earnest  endeavor  of  American 
statesmen  to  eradicate  prejudices,  to  culti- 
vate and  foster  concord,  and  to  produce 
general  contentment  among  all  parts  of  our 
confederacy.  And  true  Avisdom,  it  seems 
to  me,  points  to  the  duty  of  rendering  its 
present  members  happy,  prosperous,  and 
satisfied  with  each  other,  rather  than  to  at- 
tempt to  introduce  alien  members,  against 
the  common  consent,  and  with  the  certainty 
of  deep  dissatisfaction.  Mr.  Jefferson  ex- 
pressed the  opinion,  and  others  believed, 
that  it  never  was  in  the  contemplation  of 
the  framers  of  the  Constitution  to  add  for- 
eign territory  to  the  confederacy,  out  of 
which  new  States  were  to  be  formed.  The 
acquisitions  of  Louisiana  and  Florida  may 
be  defended  upon  the  peculiar  ground  of 
the  relation  in  which  they  stood  to  the 
States  of  the  Union.  After  they  were  ad- 
mitted, we  might  well  pause  a  while,  people 
our  vast  wastes,  develop  our  resources,  pre- 
pare the  means  of  defending  what  we  pos- 
sess, and  augment  our  strength,  power,  and 
greatness.  If,  hereafter,  further  territory 
should  be  wanted  for  an  increased  popula- 
tion, we  need  entertain  no  apprehension . 
but  that  it  will  be  acquired,  by  means,  it  is 
to  be  hoped,  fair,  honorable,  and  constitu- 
tional. It  is  useless  to  disguise  that  there 
are  those  who  espouse,  and  those  who  op- 
pose, the  annexation  of  Texas  upon  the 
ground  of  the  influence  which  it  wrould 
exert  on  the  balance  of  political  power  be- 
tween two  great  sections  of  the  Union.  I 
conceive  that  no  motive  for  the  acquisition 
of  foreign  territory  could  be  more  unfortu- 
nate, or  pregnant  with  more  fatal  conse- 
quences, than  that  of  obtaining  it  for  the 
purpose  of  strengthening  one  part  against 
another  part  of  the  common  confederacy. 
Such  a  principle,  put  into  practical  opera- 
tion, would  menace  the  existence,  if  it  did 
not  certainly  sow  the  seeds  of  a  dissolution 
of  the  Union." 

He  closed  his  letter — which  is  not 
quite  a  third  so  long  as  Mr.  Yan 


164 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Buren's — with  the  following  sum- 

ming  up  of  his  convictions : 

"  I  consider  the  Annexation  of  Texas,  at 
this  time,  without  the  consent  of  Mexico,  as 
a  measure  compromising  the  National  char- 
acter, involving  us  certainly  in  war  with 
Mexico,  probably  with  other  foreign  Pow- 
ers, dangerous  to  the  integrity  of  the  Union, 
inexpedient  in  the  present  financial  condi- 
tion of  the  country,  and  not  called  for  by 
any  general  expression  of  public  opinion." 

The  Whig  National  Convention 
met  at  Baltimore,  May  1 — every  dis- 
trict in  the  United  States  fully  rep- 
resented. Henry  Clay  was  at  once 
nominated  for  President  by  acclama- 
tion, and  Theodore  Frelinghuysen 
for  Yice-President  on  the  third  bal- 
lot. The  number  in  attendance  was 
estimated  by  tens  of  thousands,  and 
the  enthusiasm  was  immense.  The 
multitude  separated  in  undoubting 
confidence  that  Mr.  Clay  would  be 
our  next  President. 

The  Democratic  National  Conven- 
tion met  in  the  same  city  on  the  27th 
of  that  month.  A  majority  of  its 
delegates  had  been  elected  expressly 
to  nominate  Mr.  Yan  Buren,  and 
were  under  explicit  instructions  to 
support  him.  But  it  was  already 
settled  among  the  master-spirits  of 
the  party  that  his  nomination  should 
be  defeated.  To  this  end,  before  the 
Convention  had  been  fully  organiz- 
ed, Gen.  K.  M.  Saunders,  of  North 
Carolina,  moved  the  adoption  of  the 
rules  and  regulations  of  the  Democra- 
tic National  Conventions  of  May, 
1832,  and  May,  1835,  for  the  govern- 
ment of  this  body ;  his  object  being 
the  enactment  of  that  rule  which  re- 
quired a  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the 
delegates  to  nominate  a  candidate. 
After  a  heated  discussion,  the  two- 
thirds  rule  was  adopted,  on  the  second 


day,  by  148  Yeas  to  118  .Nays,  anc 
the  fate  of  Yan  Buren  sealed.  Or 
the  first  ballot,  he  received  146  vote? 
to  116  for  all  others  ;  but  he  fell,  oi 
the  second,  to  127,  and  settled  gradual 
ly  to  104  on  the  eighth,  when  he  wa 
withdrawn — Gen.  Cass,  who  begaa 
with  83,  having  run  up  to  114.  Of 
the  next  ballot,  James  K.  Polk,  oi 
Tennessee,  who  had  received  no  voti 
at  all  till  the  eighth  ballot,  and  ther 
but  44,  was  nominated,  receiving  23* 
out  of  266  votes.  This  was  on  th( 
third  day  of  the  Convention,  wher 
Silas  Wright,  of  New  York,  was  im/ 
mediately  nominated  for  Yice-Presi 
dent.  He  peremptorily  declined 
and  George  M.  Dallas,  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, was  selected  in  his  stead.  Mr 
Polk  had  been  an  early,  and  was  t 
zealous,  champion  of  Annexation,  as 
always  of  every  proposition  or  pro- 
ject calculated  to  aggrandize  the 
Slave  Power.  The  Convention,  m 
its  platform, 

"Resolved,  That  our  title  to  the  whole2  ter- 
ritory of  Oregon  is  clear  and  unquestiona- 
ble ;  that  no  portion  of  the  same  ought  tc 
be  ceded  to  England  or  any  other  power ; 
and  that  the  ^occupation  of  Oregon,  and 
the  r<?'annexation  of  Texas,  at  the  earliest 
practicable  period,  are  great  American 
measures,  which  the  Convention  recom- 
mends to  the  cordial  support  of  the  Demo-i 
cracy  of  the  Union." 

Col.  Thomas  H.  Benton,  in  a 
speech  in  the  Senate,  May  6,  had  set 
forth  the  objections  to  Messrs.  Tyler  I 
and  Calhoun's  Treaty  of  Annexa- 
tion, on  the  ground  of  its  assuming, 
on  the  one  hand,  to  cede,  and  on  the 
other,  to  accept  and  maintain,  the; 
entire  territory  claimed  by  Texas,  in- 
cluding all  that  portion  of  New 
Mexico  lying  east  of  the  Rio  Grande, , 
in  these  forcible  terms : 

"These  former  provinces  of  the  Mexican 


2  That  is,  up  to  54°  40';  including  what  is  now  British  Columbia. 


COL.    BENTON    ON    THE    BOUNDARY    OF   TEXAS.  165 


7ice-royalty,  now  departments  of  the  Mexi- 
:an  Republic,  lying  on  both  sides  of  the  Rio 
jrande  from  its  head  to  its  mouth,  we  now 
>ropose  to  incorporate,  so  far  as  they  lie  on 
he  left  bank  of  the  river,  into  our  Union, 
)j  virtue  of  a  treaty  of  ^'annexation  with 
Texas.    Let  us  pause  and  look  at  our  new 
ind  important  proposed  acquisitions  in  this 
marter.    First :  There  is  the  department, 
brinerly  the  province,  of  New  Mexico, 
ying  on  both  sides  of  the  river  from  its 
lead-spring  to  near  the  Pass  del  Norte — 
;hat  is  to  say,  half  way  down  the  river. 
This  department  is  studded  with  towns  and 
dllages — is  populated,  well  cultivated,  and 
covered  with  flocks  and  herds.    On  its  left 
>ank  (for  I  only  speak  of  the  part  which 
xe  propose  to  reannex)  is,  first,  the  frontier 
rillage  Taos,  3,000  souls,  and  where  the 
:ustom-house  is  kept  at  which  the  Missouri 
saravans  enter  their  goods.    Then  comes 
,  Santa  Fe,  the  capital,  4,000  souls;  then 
Albuquerque,  6,000  souls ;  then  some  scores 
)f  other  towns  and  villages — all  more  or 
ess  populated  and  surrounded  by  flocks  and 
ields.    Then  come  the  departments  of  Chi- 
luahua,  Coahuila,  and  Tamaulipas,  without 
settlements  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river, 
mt  occupying  the  right  bank,  and  com- 
nanding  the  left.    All  this — being  parts  of 
bur  Mexican  departments,  now  under  Mexi- 
can Governors  and  Governments — is  perma- 
lently  mmnexed  to  this  Union,  if  this 
xeaty  is  ratified,  and  is  actually  ^'annexed 
Tom  the  moment  of  the  signature  of  the 
:reaty,  according  to  the  President's  last 
Message,  to  remain  so  until  the  acquisition 
•  s  rejected  by  rejecting  the  treaty !  The 
me-half  of  the  department  of  New  Mexico, 
with  its  capital,  becomes  a  territory  of  the 
dnited  States ;  an  angle  of  Chihuahua,  at 
:he  Pass  del  Norte,  famous  for  its  wine, 
jilso  becomes  ours;  a  part  of  the  depart- 
ment of  Coahuila,  not  populated  on  the  left 
bank,  which  we  take,  but  commanded  from 
{the  right  bank  by  Mexican  authorities ;  the 
J3ame  of  Tamaulipas,  the  ancient  Nuevo  San- 
tander  (New  St.  Andrew),  and  which  covers 
both  sides  of  the  river  from  its  mouth  for 
pome  hundred  miles  up,  and  all  the  left  bank 
if  which  is  in  the  power  and  possession  of 
Mexico.    These,  in  addition  to  old  Texas ; 
these  parts  of  four  States — these  towns  and 
villages — these  people  and  territory — these 
flocks  and  herds — this  slice  of  the  Republic 
pf  Mexico,  two  thousand  miles  long  and 
some  hundred  broad — all  this  our  President 
has  cut  off  from  its  mother  empire,  and  pre- 
sents to  us,  and  declares  it  ours  till  the 
Senate  rejects  it  1    He  calls  it  Texas !  and 
khe  cutting  off  he  calls  ^'annexation  !  Hum- 
boldt calls  it  New  Mexico,  Chihuahua,  Coa- 
huila, and  Nuevo  Santander — now  Tamau- 
hpas ;  and  the  civilized  world  may  qualify 


this  reannexation  by  the  application  of  some 
odious  and  terrible  epithet.  Demosthenes 
advised  the  people  of  Athens  not  to  take, 
but  to  retake,  a  certain  city ;  and  in  that  re 
lay  the  virtue  which  saved  the  act  from  the 
character  of  spoliation  and  robbery.  Will 
it  be  equally  potent  with  us?  and  will  the 
re  prefixed  to  the  annexation  legitimate  the 
seizure  of  two  thousand  miles  of  a  neigh- 
bor's dominion,  with  whom  we  have  trea- 
ties of  peace,  and  friendship,  and  com- 
merce? Will  it  legitimate  this  seizure, 
made  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  with  Texas,  when 
no  Texan  force — witness  the  disastrous  ex- 
peditions to  Mier  and  to  Santa  Fe — have 
been  seen  near  it  without  being  killed  or 
taken,  to  the  last  man  ? 

"  I  wash  my  hands  of  all  attempts  to  dis- 
member the  Mexican  Republic  by  seizing 
her  dominions  in  New  Mexico,  Chihuahua, 
Coahuila,  and  Tamaulipas.  The  treaty,  in 
all  that  relates  to  the  boundary  of  the  Rio 
Grande,  is  an  act  of  unparalleled  outrage 
on  Mexico.  It  is  the  seizure  of  two  thou- 
sand miles  of  her  territory,  without  a  word  of 
explanation  with  her,  and  by  virtue  of  a 
treaty  with  Texas,  to  which  she  is  no  party. 
Our  Secretary  of  State,  in  his  letter  to  the 
United  States  Charge  in  Mexico  several 
days  after  the  treaty  was  signed,  and  after 
the  Mexican  Minister  had  withdrawn  from 
our  seat  of  Government,  shows  full  well 
that  he  w^as  conscious  of  the  enormity  of 
this  outrage;  knew  it  was  war;  and  prof- 
fered volunteer  apologies  to  avert  the  conse- 
quences which  he  knew  he  had  provoked. 

"  I  therefore  propose,  as  an  additional 
resolution,  applicable  to  the  Rio  del  Norte 
boundary  alone — the  one  which  I  will  read 
and  send  to  the  Secretary's  table,  and  on 
which,  at  the  proper  time,  I  shall  ask  the 
vote  of  the  Senate.     This  is  the  resolution  : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  incorporation  of  the 
left  bank  of  the  Rio  Del  Norte  into  the 
American  Union,  by  virtue  of  a  treaty  with 
Texas,  comprehending,  as  the  said  incorpo- 
ration would  do,  a  part  of  the  Mexican  de- 
partments of  New  Mexico,  Chihuahua,  Coa- 
huila, and  Tamaulipas,  would  be  an  act  of 
direct  aggression  on  Mexico ;  for  all  the  con- 
sequences of  which  the  United  States  would 
stand  responsible." 

Tlie  opposition  of  the  Northern 
Democrats  to  the  Annexation  pro- 
ject, though  crippled  by  the  action 
of  their  National  Convention,  was 
not  entirely  suppressed.  Especially  in 
New  York,  where  attachment  to  the 
person  and  the  fortunes  of  Mr.  Yan 
Buren  had  been  peculiarly  strongv 


166 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Democratic  repugnance  to  this  mea- 
sure was  still  manifested.  Messrs. 
George  P.  Barker,  William  C.  Bry- 
ant, John  W.  Edmonds,  David  Dud- 
ley Field,  Theodore  Sedgwick,  and 
others,  united  in  a  letter — stigmatiz- 
ed by  annexationists  as  a  "  secret  cir- 
cular"— urging  their  fellow-Demo- 
crats, while  supporting  Polk  and 
Dallas,  to  repudiate  the  Texas  reso- 
lution, and  to  unite  in  supporting, 
for  Congress,  Democratic  candidates 
hostile  to  Annexation.  Silas  Wright, 
who  had  prominently  opposed  the 
Tyler  treaty  in  the  United  States 
Senate,  and  had  refused  to  run  for 
Yice-President  with  Polk,  was  made 
the  Democratic  candidate  for  Govern- 
or of  New  York,  which  State  could 
not  otherwise  have  been  carried  for 
Polk.  In  a  canvassing  speech  at 
Skaneateles,  Mr.  Wright  referred  to 
his  opposition  as  unabated,  and  de- 
clared that  he  could  never  consent 
to  Annexation  on  any  terms  which 
would  give  Slavery  an  advantage 
over  Freedom.  This  sentiment  was 
reiterated,  and  emphasized  in  a  great 
Democratic  convention  held  at  Her- 
kimer in  the  autumn  of  that  year. 

The  canvass  of  1844  was  opened 
with  signal  animation,  earnestness, 
and  confidence  on  the  part  of  the 
Whigs,  who  felt  that  they  should  not, 
and  believed  that  they  could  not,  be 
beaten  on  the  issue  made  up  for  them 
by  their  adversaries.  So  late  as  the 
4th  of  J uly,  their  prospect  of  carry- 
ing New  York  and  Pennsylvania, 
and  thus  overwhelmingly  electing 
their  candidates,  was  very  flattering. 
On  the  16th  of  August,  however, 
The  North  Aldbamian  published  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Clay  to  two  Alabama 
friends,  who  had  urged  him  to  make 
a  further  statement  of  his  views  on 


the  Annexation  question.  The  ma-  I 
terial  portion  of  that  letter  concluded  I 
as  follows : 

"  I  do  not  think  it  right  to  announce  in 
advance  what  will  be  the  course  of  a  future 
Administration  in  respect  to  a  question  with 
a  foreign  power.  I  have,  however,  no  hesi- 
tation in  saying  that,  far  from  having  any 
personal  objection  to  the  Annexation  of 
Texas,  I  should  oe  glad  to  see  it — without 
dishonor,  without  war,  with  the  common 
consent  of  the  Union,  and  upon  just  and 
fair  terms. 

"I  do  not  think  that  the  subject  of  Slave- 
ry ought  to  affect  the  question,  one  way  or 
the  other.  Whether  Texas  be  independent, 
or  incorporated  in  the  United  States,  I  do 
not  believe  it  will  prolong  or  shorten  the 
duration  of  that  institution.  It  is  destined 
to  become  extinct,  at  some  distant  day,  in 
my  opinion,  by  the  operation  of  the  inevita- 
ble laws  of  population.  It  would  be  un- 
wise to  refuse  a  permanent  acquisition, 
which  will  exist  as  long  as  the  globe  re- 
mains, on  account  of  a  temporary  institu- 
tion. 

"  In  the  contingency  of  my  election,  to 
which  you  have  adverted,  if  the  affair  of 
acquiring  Texas  should  become  a  subject  of 
consideration,  I  should  be  governed  by  the 
state  of  facts,  and  the  state  of  public  opinion 
existing  at  the  time  I  might  be  called  upon 
to  act.  Above  all,  I  should  be  governed  by 
the  paramount  duty  of  preserving  the  Union 
entire,  and  in  harmony,  regarding  it,  as  I 
do,  as  the  great  guaranty  of  every  political 
and  public  blessing,  under  Providence, 
which,  as  a  free  people,  we  are^ permitted 
to  enjoy." 

This  letter  was  at  once  seized  upon 
by  Mr.  Clay's  adversaries,  whether 
Democrats  or  Abolitionists,  as  evinc- 
ing a  complete  change  of  base  on 
his  part.  It  placed  the  Northern 
advocates  of  his  election  on  the  de- 
fensive for  the  remainder  of  the  can- 
vass, and  weakened  their  previous 
hold  on  the  moral  convictions  of  the 
more  considerate  and  conscientious 
voters  of  the  Free  States.  These 
were  generally  hostile  to  Annexation 
precisely  or  mainly  because  of  its 
bearings  upon  Slavery;  and  the 
declaration  pf  their  candidate  that 
such  considerations  "ought  not  to 


DEFEAT  OF 

affect  the  question,  one  way  or  the 
other,"  was  most  embarrassing.  The 
"  Liberty  party,"  so  called,  pushed 
this  view  of  the  matter  beyond  all 
justice  and  reason,  insisting  that 
Mr.  Clay's  antagonism  to  Annexa- 
tion, not  being  founded  in  anti- 
Slavery  conviction,  was  of  no  ac- 
count whatever,  and  that  his  election 
should,  on  that  ground,  be  opposed. 
Mr.  James  G.  Birney,  their  candidate 
for  President,  went  still  further,  and, 
in  a  letter  published  on  the  eve  of 
the  election,  proclaimed  that  Mr. 
Clay's  election  would  be  more  likely 
to  promote  Annexation  than  Mr. 
Polk's,  because  of  Mr.  C.'s  superior 
ability  and  influence  !  It  was  in  vain 
that  Mr.  Clay  attempted  to  retrieve 
his  error — if  error  it  was — by  a  final 
letter  to  The  National  Intelligencer, 
reasserting  his  unchanged  and  in- 
vincible objections  to  any  such  An- 
nexation as  was  then  proposed  or 
practicable.3  The  State  of  New 
York  was  carried  against  him  by 
the  lean  plurality  of  5,106  in  nearly 
500,000  votes — the  totals  being, 
Clay,  232,482,  Polk,  237,588,  Bir- 
ney, 15,812  ; — one-third  of  the  in- 

3  This  letter  bears  date  "Ashland,  September 
23,  1844,"  and  says; 

"  In  announcing  my  determination  to  permit 
no  other  letters  to  be  drawn  from  me  on  public 
affairs,  I  think  it  right  to  avail  myself  of  the 
present  occasion  to  correct  the  erroneous  inter- 
pretation of  one  or  two  of  those  which  I  had 
previously  written.  In  April  last,  I  addressed 
to  you  from  Raleigh  a  letter  in  respect  to  the 
proposed  treaty  annexing  Texas  to  the  United 
States,  and  I  have  since  addressed  two  letters 
to  Alabama  upon  the  same  subject.  Most  un- 
warranted allegations  have  been  made  that 
those  letters  are  inconsistent  with  each  other, 
and,  to  make  it  out,  particular  phrases  or  ex- 
pressions have  been  torn  from  their  context, 
and  a  meaning  attributed  to  me  which  I  never 
entertained. 

"  I  wish  now  distinctly  to  say,  that  there  is 
not  a  feeling,  a  sentiment,  or  an  opinion,  ex- 
pressed in  my  Raleigh  letter  to  which  I  do  not 
adhere.    I  am  decidedly  opposed  to  the  imme- 


MR.  CLAY.  167 

tensely  anti- Slavery  votes  thrown 
away  on  Birney  would  have  given 
the  State  to  Mr.  Clay,  and  elected 
him.  The  vote  of  Michigan  was,  in 
like  manner,  given  to  Polk  by  the 
diversion  of  anti-Slavery  suffrages  to 
Birney ;  but  New  York  alone  would 
have  secured  Mr.  Clay's  election, 
giving  him  141  electoral  votes  to 
134  for  his  opponent.  As  it  was, 
Mr.  Clay  received  the  electoral 
votes  of  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Isl- 
and, Connecticut,  Vermont,  New 
Jersey,  Delaware,  Maryland,  North 
Carolina,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  and  Ten- 
nessee— 105  in  all,  being  those  of 
eleven  States;  while  Mr.  Polk  was 
supported  by  Maine,  New  Hamp- 
shire, New  York,  Pennsylvania,  Vir- 
ginia, South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Ala- 
bama, Mississippi,  Louisiana,  Indi- 
ana, Illinois,  Michigan,  Missouri,  and 
Arkansas — fifteen  States,  casting  170 
electoral  votes.  The  popular  votes 
throughout  the  country,  as  returned, 
were,  for  Clay,  1,288,533 ;  for  Polk, 
1,327,325;  for  Birney,  62,263.  So 
the  triumph  of  Annexation  had  been 
secured  by  the  indirect  aid  of  the 
more  intense  partisans  of  Abolition. 

diate  Annexation  of  Texas  to  the  United  States. 
I  think  it  would  be  dishonorable,  might  involve 
us  in  war,  would  be  dangerous  to  the  integrity 
and  harmony  of  the  Union  ;  and,  if  all  these  ob- 
jections were  removed,  could  not  be  effected 
upon  just  and  admissible  conditions. 

"  It  was  not  my  intention,  in  either  of  the 
two  letters  which  I  addressed  to  Alabama,  to 
express  any  contrary  opinion.  Representations 
had  been  made  to  me  that  I  was  considered  as 
inflexibly  opposed  to  the  Annexation  of  Texas 
under  any  circumstances ;  and  that  my  position, 
was  so  extreme  that  I  would  not  waive  it,  even 
if  there  was  a  general  consent  to  the  measure 
by  all  the  States  of  the  Union.  I  replied,  in  my 
first  letter  to  Alabama,  that,  personally,  I  had 
no  objection  to  Annexation.  I  thought  that  my 
meaning  was  sufficiently  obvious,  that  I  had  no 
personal,  individual,  or  private  motives  for  op- 
posing, as  I  have  none  for  espousing,  the  mea- 
sure— my  judgment  being  altogether  influenced 
by  general  and  political  considerations,  which 
have  ever  been  the  guide  of  my  public  conduct." 


168 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


The  Presidential  canvass  of  1844 
had  been  not  only  the  most  arduous 
but  the  most  equal  of  any  that  the 
country  had  ever  known,  with  the 
possible  exception  of  that  of  1800. 
The  election  of  Madison  in  1812,  of 
Jackson  in  1828,  and  of  Harrison  in 
1840,  had  probably  been  contested 
with  equal  spirit  and  energy ;  but 
the  disparity  of  forces  in  either  case 
was,  to  the  intelligent,  impartial  ob- 
server, quite  obvious.  In  the  con- 
test of  1844,  on  the  contrary,  the 
battle  raged  with  uniform  fury  from 
extreme  North  to  furthest  South — 
Maine  and  New  Hampshire  voting 
strongly  for  Polk,  while  Tennessee 
(his  own  State)  went  against  him  by 
a  small  majority,  and  Louisiana  was 
carried  against  Clay  only  by  fraud, 
and  by  a  majority  of  less  than  seven 
hundred  in  nearly  twenty-seven 
thousand  votes.  Up  to  the  appear- 
ance of  Mr.  Clay's  luckless  Alabama 
letter,  he  seemed  quite  likely  to  car- 
ry every  great  Free  State,  including 
New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and  In- 
diana. Not  till  the  election  (October 
8)  of  Shunk,  the  Democratic  candi- 
date for  Governor  of  Pennsylvania, 
by  160,759  votes  to  156,562  for  his 
Clay  competitor,  Markle,  did  the 
chances  for  Polk  seem  decidedly 
promising  ;  had  Markle  received  the 
full  vote  (161,203)  polled,  some  three 
weeks  later,  for  Clay  himself,  the 
electoral  votes  of  Pennsylvania,  New 
York,  Indiana,  and  Louisiana,  would 
probably  have  been  cast  for  the  lat- 
ter, giving  him  185,  and  leaving  his 
antagonist  but  90.  As  it  was,  with 
Pennsylvania  carried  for  Polk  at  the 
State  election,  the  vote  of  no 
less  than  fourteen  of  the  twenty- 
eight  States,  choosing  166  of  the  275 
Electors,  was  doubtful  up  to  the 


evening  after  the  election.  So  close 
a  Presidential  race  was  and  remains 
without  parallel.  Mr.  Clay  had  the 
ardent  support  of  a  decided  majority 
of  the  native-born  voters,  as  well  as 
of  those  who  could  read  the  ballots 
they  cast — of  all  who  had  either  prop- 
erty or  social  consideration,  and 
probably  of  all  who  had  a  legal  right 
to  vote.  But  the  baleful  "  Nativism" 
which  had  just  broken  out  in  the 
great  cities,  and  had  been  made  the 
occasion  of  riot,  devastation,  and 
bloodshed  in  Philadelphia,  had 
alarmed  the  foreign-born  population, 
and  thrown  them  almost  unanimous- 
ly into  the  ranks  of  his  adversaries ; 
so  that,  estimating  the  vote  cast  by 
Adopted  or  to-be  Adopted  Citizens 
at  Half  a  Million,  it  is  nearly  certain 
that  four  hundred  and  seventy-five 
thousand  of  it  was  cast  for  Polk — not 
with  special  intent  to  annex  Texas, 
but  in  order  to  defeat  and  prostrate 
Nativism.  Under  other  auspices, 
Mr.  Clay's  portion  of  this  vote  could 
hardly  have  been  less  than  a  fifth. 

The  election  of  Polk  secured  the 
immediate  Annexation  of  Texas. 
That  event  would  probably  have 
taken  place  at  some  future  day,  had 
Mr.  Yan  Buren  or  Mr.  Clay  been 
chosen,  as  their  avowals  fully  indica- 
ted. But  Mr.  Polk  was  the  outspok- 
en, unequivocal  champion  of  Annex- 
ation forthwith — Annexation  in  defi- 
ance of  Mexico — Annexation  regard- 
less of  her  protest  and  the  existing 
War — Annexation  with  our  unjustifi- 
able claim  to  the  boundary  of  the  Bio 
Grande  ready  to  convert  the  danger 
of  war  with  Mexico  into  a  certainty 
— Annexation  in  defiance  of  the  sus* 
ceptibilities  and  convictions  of  the 
more  conscientious  and  considerate 


POLK  TO  KANE 


ALHOUN  TO  KING. 


169 


half  of  the  population  of  the  Free 
States  as  to  the  evil  and  peril,  the 
guilt  and  shame  of  extending  and  for- 
tifying Slavery  by  the  power  and  un- 
der the  nasr  of  our  Union.  No  matter 
what  the  People  meanthj  electing  him 
President — they  had  voted  with  their 
eyes  open ;  and  he,  while  equivocat- 
ing 4  and  dissembling  on  the  Tariff 
question,  had  been  frank  and  open 
on  this.  Nor  had  the  ruling  purpose 
with  which  the  acquisition  of  Texas 
was  pursued  been  disguised  by  its 
champions.  "  It  will  give  a  Gibraltar 
to  the  South"  said  Gen.  James  Ham- 
ilton, jr.,  of  S.  C,  an  eminent  disci- 
ple of  Calhoun,  who  had  migrated 
from  South  Carolina  to  Texas,  and 
taken  a  leading  part  in  her  affairs,  in 
furtherance  of  the  project.  Such 
was  the  drift  of  Southern  inculca- 
tion on  this  subject ;  and  the  coloni- 
zing, the  revolutionizing,  and  the  an- 
nexing of  the  coveted  region,  were 
but  three  acts  in  the  same  drama,  and 
all  the  work  of  '  the  South.'  When 
a  Tennessee  slaveholder  and  unflinch- 
ing devotee  of  the  Slave  Power,  well 
known  as  an  earnest  and  self-pro- 
claimed Annexationist,  had  been 
chosen  President,  and  thus  invest- 
ed with  the  Executive  power  and 
patronage  of  the  Republic  for  the 
four  years  ensuing,  the  speedy  and 

4  Witness  the  following  letter : 

"Columbia,  Tenn.,  June  19, 1844. 

"  Dear,  Sir: — I  have  recently  received  several 
letters  in  reference  to  my  opinions  on  the  subject 
of  the  Tariff,  and  among  others  yours  of  the  10th 
ultimo.  My  opinions  on  this  subject  have  been 
often  given  to  the  public.  They  are  to  be  found 
in  my  public  acts,  and  in  the  public  discussions 
in  which  I  have  participated. 

"  I  am  in  favor  of  a  Tariff  for  revenue,  such 
a  one  as  will  yield  a  sufficient  amount  to  the 
Treasury  to  defray  the  expenses  of  Government 
economically  administered.  In  adjusting  the  de- 
tails of  a  revenue  Tariff,  I  have  heretofore  sanc- 
tioned such  moderate  discriminating  duties,  as 
would  produce  the  amount  of  revenue  needed, 
and  at  the  same  time  afford  reasonable  incidental 


complete  triumph  of  the  measure 
was  rendered  inevitable. 


Mr.  Tyler  was  still  President,  with 
John  C.  Calhoun  as  Secretary  of  State, 
and  would  so  remain  until  the  4th  of 
March.  On  the  first  Monday  in 
December,  the  Twenty-Eighth  Con- 
gress reassembled,  and  the  President 
laid  before  it,  among  others,  a  dis- 
patch from  Mr.  Calhoun,  dated  Au- 
gust 12,  1844,  to  Hon.  William  K. 
King,  our  Minister  at  Paris,  instruct- 
ing him  to  represent  to  the  French 
Government  the  advantages  and  the 
necessity  of  Annexation  on  many 
grounds,  but  especially  on  that  of  its 
tendency  to  uphold  Slavery,  primari- 
ly in  Texas  itself,  but  "  ultimately  in 
the  United  States,  and  throughout  the 
whole  of  this  continent."  Mr.  Calhoun 
assumed  that  Great  Britain  was  intent 
on  Abolition  generally ;  that  she  had 
destroyed  her  own  West  India  Colo- 
nies in  a  futile  attempt  "  to  combine 
philanthropy  with  profit  and  power,  as 
is  not  unusual  with  fanaticism  ;"  and 
that  she  was  now  employing  all  her 
diplomacy  and  influence  to  drag 
down,  first  Texas,  then  the  residue 
of  this  continent,  to  her  own  degra- 
ded level.    Says  Mr.  Calhoun  : 

"In  order  to  regain  her  superiority,  she 
not  only  seeks  to  revive  and  increase  her 


protection  to  our  home  industry.  I  am  opposed 
to  a  Tariff  for  protection  merely,  and  not  for  rev- 
enue.      *****  * 

"In  my  judgment,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Gov- 
ernment to  extend,  as  far  as  it  may  be  practi- 
cable to  do  so,  by  its  revenue  laws  and  all  other 
means  within  its  power,  fair  and  just  protection 
to  all  the  great  interests  of  the  whole  Union, 
embracing  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  the 
mechanic  arts,  commerce,  and  navigation.  I 
heartily  approve  the  resolutions  upon  this  sub- 
ject as  passed  by  the  Democratic  National  Con- 
vention, lately  assembled  at  Baltimore. 

"  I  am  with  great  respect, 
"Dear  Sir,  your  ob't  serv't, 
"James  K.  Polk. 

"  John  K.  Kane,  Esq.,  Philadelphia:'' 


170 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


own  capacity  to  produce  tropical  produc- 
tions, but  to  diminish  and  destroy  the  capa- 
city of  those  who  have  so  far  outstripped 
her  in  consequence  of  her  error.  In  pursuit 
of  the  former,  she  has  cast  her  eyes  to  her 
East  India  possessions  —  to  central  and 
eastern  Africa — with  the  view  of  establish- 
ing colonies  there,  and  even  to  restore,  sub- 
stantially, the  Slave-Trade  itself,  under  the 
specious  name  of  transporting  free  labor- 
ers from  Africa  to  her  West  India  posses- 
sions, in  order,  if  possible,  to  compete  suc- 
cessfully with  those  who  have  refused  to 
follow  her  suicidal  policy.  But  these  all 
afford  but  uncertain  and  distant  hopes  of 
recovering  her  lost- superiority.  Her  main 
reliance  is  on  the  other  alternative — to  crip- 
ple or  destroy  the  productions  of  her  suc- 
cessful rivals.  There  is  but  one  way  by 
which  it  can  be  done,  and  that  is,  by  abol- 
ishing African  Slavery  throughout  this  con- 
tinent :  and  that  she  openly  avows  to  be  the 
constant  object  of  her  policy  and  exertions. 
It  matters  not  how,  or  from  what  motive, 
it  may  be  done — whether  it  be  done  by 
diplomacy,  influence,  or  force ;  by  secret  or 
open  means ;  and  whether  the  motive  be 
humane  or  selfish,  without  regard  to  man- 
ner, means,  or  motive.  The  thing  itself, 
should  it  be  accomplished,  would  put  down 
all  rivalry,  and  give  her  the  undisputed  su- 
premacy in  supplying  her  own  wants  and 
those  of  the  rest  of  the  world ;  and  thereby 
more  than  fully  retrieve  what  she  lost  by  her 
errors.  It  would  give  her  the  monopoly  of 
tropical  productions,  which  I  shall  next  pro- 
ceed to  show. 

"  What  would  be  the  consequence,  if  this 
object  of  her  unceasing  solicitude  and  exer- 
tions should  be  effected  by  the  abolition  of 
Negro  Slavery  throughout  this  continent? 
Some  idea  may  be  formed  from  the  immense 
diminution  of  productions,  as  has  been 
shown,  which  has  followed  abolition  in  her 
West  India  possessions.  But,  as  great  as 
that  has  been,  it  is  nothing  compared  with 
what  would  be  the  effect,  if  she  should  suc- 
ceed in  abolishing  Slavery  in  the  United 
States,  Cuba,  Brazil,  and  throughout  this 
continent.  The  experiment  in  her  own 
colonies  was  made  under  the  most  favor- 
able circumstances.  It  was  brought  about 
gradually  and  peaceably  by  the  steady  and 
firm  operation  of  the  parent  country,  armed 
with  complete  power  to  prevent  or  crush  at 
once  all  insurrectionary  movements  on  the 
part  of  the  negroes,  and  able  and  disposed 
to  maintain,  to  the  full,  the  political  and 
social  ascendency  of  the  former  masters 
over  their  former  slaves.  It  is  not  at  all 
wonderful  that  the  change  of  the  relations 
of  master  and  slave  took  place,  under  such 
circumstances,  without  violence  and  blood- 
shed, and  that  order  and  peace  should  have 


been  since  preserved.  Very  different  would 
be  the  result  of  Abolition  should  it  be  effect- 
ed by  her  influence  and  exertions  in  the  pos- 
sessions of  other  countries  on  this  continent 
—and  specially  in  the  United  States,  Cuba, 
and  Brazil,  the  great  cultivators  of  the  prin- 
cipal tropical  products  of  America.  To  form 
a  correct  conception  of  what  would  be  the 
result  with  them,  we  must  look,  not  to  Ja- 
maica, but  to  St.  Domingo,  for  example. 
The  change  would  be  followed  by  unforgiv- 
ing hate  between  the  two  races,  and  end  in 
a  bloody  and  deadly  struggle  between  them 
for  the  superiority.  One  or  the  other  would 
have  to  be  subjugated,  extirpated,  or  expell- 
ed; and  desolation  would  overspread  their 
territories,  as  in  St.  Domingo,  from  which 
it  would  take  centuries  to  recover.  The  end 
would  be,  that  the  superiority  in  cultivating 
the  great  tropical  staples  would  be  trans- 
ferred from  them  to  the  British  tropical 
possessions. 

"  These  are  of  vast  extent,  and  those  be- 
yond the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  possessed  of 
an  unlimited  amount  of  labor,  standing 
ready,  by  the  aid  of  British  capital,  to  sup- 
ply the  deficit  which  would  be  occasioned 
by  destroying  the  tropical  productions  of 
the  United  States,  Cuba,  Brazil,  and  other 
countries  cultivated  by  Slave  labor  on  this 
continent,  as  soon  as  the  increased  prices,  in 
consequence,  would  yield  a  profit.  It  is  the 
successful  competition  of  that  labor  which 
keeps  the  prices  of  the  great  tropical  staples 
so  low  as  to  prevent  their  cultivation  with 
profit  in  the  possessions  of  Great  Britain, 
by  what  she  is  pleased  to  call  free  labor. 

*'  If  she  can  destroy  its  competition,  she 
would  have  a  monopoly  of  these  produc- 
tions. She  has  all  the  means  of  furnishing 
an  unlimited  supply — vast  and  fertile  posses- 
sions in  both  Indies,  boundless  command 
of  capital  and  labor,  and  ample  power  to 
suppress  disturbances  and  preserve  order 
throughout  her  wide  domain. 

"It  is  unquestionable  that  she  regards 
abolition  in  Texas  as  a  most  important  step 
toward  this  great  object  of  policy,  so  much 
the  aim  of  her  solicitude  and  exertions ;  and 
the  defeat  of  the  Annexation  of  Texas  to  our 
Union  as  indispensabls  to  the  abolition  of 
Slavery  there.  She  is  too  sagacious  not  to 
see  what  a  fatal  blow  it  would  give  to  Slav- 
ery in  the  United  States,  and  how  certainly 
its  abolition  with  us  will  abolish  it  over  the 
whole  continent,  and  thereby  give  her  a 
monopoly  in  the  production  of  the  great 
tropical  staples,  and  the  command  of  the 
commerce,  navigation,  and  manufactures  of 
the  world,  with  an  established  naval  ascen- 
dency and  political  preponderance.  To  this 
continent,  the  blow  would  be  calamitous  be- 
yond description.  It  would  destroy,  in  a 
great  measure,  the  cultivation  and  produc- 


ANNEXATION  IN  CONGRESS. 


171 


tion  of  the  great  tropical  staples,  amounting 
annually  in  value  to  nearly  $300,000,000,  the 
fund  which  stimulates  and  upholds  almost 
every  other  branch  of  its  industry,  com- 
merce, navigation,  and  manufactures.  The 
whole,  by  their  joint  influence,  are  rapidly 
spreading  population,  wealth,  improvement, 
and  civilization,  over  the  whole  continent, 
and  vivifying,  by  their  overflow,  the  indus- 
try of  Europe,  thereby  increasing  its  popu- 
lation, wealth,  and  advancement  in  the  arts, 
in  power,  and  in  civilization. 

"  Such  must  be  the  result,  should  Great 
Britain  succeed  in  accomplishing  the  con- 
stant object  of  her  desire  and  exertions — 
the  Abolition  of  Negro  Slavery  over  this  con- 
tinent— and  toward  the  effecting  of  which 
she  regards  the  defeat  of  the  Annexation  of 
Texas  to  our  Union  as  so  important." 

Sucli  were  the  grounds  on  which 
France  was  asked  to  give  her  sympa- 
thy and  moral  support  to  the  Annex- 
ation of  Texas  to  this  country. 

On  .the  19th  of  December,  Mr. 
John  B.  TTeUer,  of  Ohio,  by  leave, 
introduced  to  the  House  a  joint  re- 
solve, providing  for  the  Annexation 
of  Texas  to  the  United  States  ;  which 
was  sent  to  the  Committee  of  the 
whole.  Mr.  John  P.  Hale,  of  New 
Hampshire,  then  also  a  Democrat, 
proposed  (January  10,  1845),  an 
amendment,  as  follows : 

"  Provided,  That,  immediately  after  the 
question  of  boundary  between  the  United 
States  of  America  and  Mexico  shall  have 
been  definitively  settled  by  the  two  govern- 
ments, and  before  any  State  formed  out  of 
the  territory  of  Texas  shall  be  admitted  into 
the  Union,  the  said  territory  of  Texas  shall 
be  divided  as  follows,  to  wit :  beginning  at 
a  point  on  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  midway  be- 
tween the  Northern  and  Southern  bounda- 
ries thereof  on  the  coast ;  and  thence  by  a 
line  running  in  a  northwesterly  direction  to 
the  extreme  boundary  thereof,  so  as  to  divide 
the  same  as  nearly  as  possible  into  two  equal 
parts,  and  in  that  portion  of  the  said  terri- 
tory lying  south  and  west  of  the  line  to  be 
run  as  aforesaid,  there/shall  be  neither  Sla- 
very nor  involuntary  servitude,  otherwise 
than  in  the  punishment  of  crimes,  whereof 
the  party  shall  have  been  duly  convicted. 

"  And  provided  further,  That  this  pro- 
vision shall  be  considered  as  a  compact  be- 
tween the  people  of  the  United  States  and 


the  people  of  the  said  territory,  and  forever 
remain  unalterable,  unless  by  the  consent  of 
three-fourths  of  the  States  of  the  Union." 

Mr.  Hale's  motion  that  the  rules 
be  suspended,  to  enable  him  to  offer 
this  proposition,  was  defeated — Yeas 

I  92  (not  two-thirds)  to  Nays  81.  Mr. 
Charles  J.  Ingersoll,  of  Pa.,  reported 
(Jan.  12),  from  the  Committee  on 
Foreign  Affairs  a  joint  resolve  in  fa- 
vor of  Annexation,  which  was  sent 
to  the  Committee  of  the  Whole 
January    25th,    the    debate  was 

|  brought  to  a  close,  and  the  following 
joint  resolution  adopted — that  por- 
tion relating  to  Slavery  having  been 
added  in  Committee,  on  motion  of 
Mr.  Milton  Brown  (Whig),  of  Ten- 
nessee : 

M  Resolved,  by  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives  in  Congress  assembled*  That 
Congress  doth  consent  that  the  territory 
properly  included  in,  and  rightfully  belong- 
ing to,  the  Eepublic  of  Texas,  may  be  erect- 
i  ed  into  a  new  State,  to  be  called  the  State 
I  of  Texas,  with  a  republican  form  of  govern- 
!  ment,  to  be  adopted  by  the  people  of  said 
Republic,  by  deputies  in  Convention  assem- 
bled, with  the  consent  of  the  existing  gov- 
ernment, in  order  that  the  same  may  be  ad- 
mitted as  one  of  the  States  of  this  Union. 

"2.  And  be  it  further  resolved,  That  the 
foregoing  consent  of  Congress  is  given  on 
the  following  conditions,  and  with  the  fol- 
lowing guarantees,  to  wit : 

u  First.  Said  State  to  be  formed,  subject 
to  the  adjustment  by  this  Government  of  all 
questions  of  boundary  that  may  arise  with 
other  governments;  and  the  Constitution 
thereof,  with  the  proper  evidence  of  its 
adoption  by  the  people  of  said  Republic  of 
Texas,  shall  be  transmitted  to  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  to  be  laid  before  Con- 
gress for  its  final  action,  on  or  before  the 
1st  day  of  January,  1846. 

"  Second.  Said  State,  when  admitted  into 
the  Union,  after  ceding  to  the  United  States 
all  public  edifices,  fortifications,  barracks, 
ports  and  harbors,  navy  and  navy  yards, 
docks,  magazines,  arms,  armaments,  and  all 
other  property  and  means  pertaining  to  the 
public  defense,  belonging  to  the  said  Repub- 
lic of  Texas,  shall  retain  all  the  public  funds, 
debts,  taxes,  and  dues  of  every  kind,  which 
may  belong  to,  or  be  due  or  owing  said  Re- 
public ;  and  shall  also  retain  all  the  vacant 
and  unappropriated  lands,  lying  within  its 


« 


172 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


limits,  to  be  applied  to  the  payment  of  the 
debts  and  liabilities  of  said  Republic  of 
Texas ;  and  the  residue  of  said  lands,  after 
discharging  said  debts  and  liabilities,  to  be 
disposed  of  as  said  State  may  direct ;  but  in 
no  event  are  said  debts  and  liabilities  to  be- 
come a  charge  upon  the  United  States. 

u  Third.  New  States,  of  convenient  size, 
not  exceeding  four  in  number,  in  addition 
to  said  State  of  Texas,  and  having  sufficient 
population,  may  hereafter,  by  the  consent 
of  said  State,  be  formed  out  of  the  territory 
thereof,  which  shall  be  entitled  to  admission, 
under  the  provisions  of  the  Federal  Consti- 
tution. And  such  States  as  may  be  formed 
out  of  that  portion  of  said  territory  lying 
south  of  thirty-six  degrees  thirty  minutes 
of  North  latitude,  commonly  known  as  the 
Missouri  Compromise  line,  shall  be  admitted 
into  the  Union  with  or  without  Slavery,  as 
the  people  of  each  State  asking  admission 
may  desire  ;  and  in  such  State  or  States  as 
may  be  formed  out  of  said  territory  north 
of  said  Missouri  Compromise  line,  Slavery 
or  involuntary  servitude  (except  for  crime; 
shall  be  prohibited." 

The  amendment  of  Mr.  Brown  was 

adopted  by  Yeas  118  to  Nays  101 — 

the  Yeas  consisting  of  114  Democrats 

and  4  Southern  Whigs  (as  yet) — 

Milton  Brown,  of  Tennessee  ;  James 

Dellet,   of   Alabama ;  Duncan  L. 

Clinch  and  Alexander  Stephens,  of 

Georgia.    The  Nays  were  78  "Whigs 

and  23  Democrats  (from  Free  States), 

among    them,   Hannibal  Hamlin, 

John  P.  Hale,  Preston  King,  George 

Rathbun,  and  Jacob  BrinckerhofF — 

since  known  as  Republicans.  The 

joint  resolve,  as  thus  amended,  passed 

the  House  by  Yeas  120  to  Nays  98— 

the  division  being  substantially  as 

before. 

In  the  Senate,  this  resolve  was 
taken  up  for  action,  February  24th ; 
and,  on  the  27th,  Mr.  Foster  (Whig), 
of  Tennessee,  proposed  the  following : 

" And  provided  further,  That,  in  fixing  the 
terms  and  conditions  of  such  admission,  it 
shall  be  expressly  stipulated  and  declared, 
that  the  State  of  Texas,  and  such  other 
States  as  may  be  formed  out  of  that  portion 
of  the  present  territory  lying  south  of 
thirty-six  degrees  thirty  minutes  north 
latitude,  commonly  known  as  the  Missouri 


Compromise  line,  shall  be  admitted  into  the 
;  Union  with  or  without  Slavery,  as  the  peo- 
ple of  each  State,  so  hereafter  asking  admis- 
sion, may  desire:  And  qtrotided  further- 
i  more,  That  it  shall  be  also  stipulated  and 
declared  that  the  public  debt  of  Texas  shall 
in  no  event  become  a  charge  upon  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States." 

This  was  voted  down,  as  were  one 

or  two  kindred  propositions.  Mr. 

Miller  (Whig),  of  New  Jersey,  moved 

to  strike  out  all  after  the  enacting 

clause,  and  insert  as  follows  : 

"  That  the  President  of  the  United  States 
be,  and  he  hereby  is,  authorized  and  advised 

!  to  open  negotiations  with  Mexico  and  Texas, 
for  the  adjustment  of  their  boundaries,  and 
the  annexation  of  the  latter  to  the  United 
States,  on  the  following  basis,  to  wit : 

M  I.  The  boundary  of  the  annexed  terri- 
tory to  be  in  the  desert  prairie  west  of  the 

:  Nueces,  and  along  the  highlands  and  moun- 
tain hights  which  divide  the  waters  of  the 
Mississippi  from  the  waters  of  the  Rio  del 
Norte,  and  to  latitude  forty-two  degrees 
north. 

"  II.  The  people  of  Texas,  by  a  legislative 
act,  or  by  any  authentic  act  which  shows  the 
will  of  the  majority,  to  express  their  assent 
to  said  annexation. 

"III.  A  State,  to  be  called  'the  State  of 
Texas,'  with  boundaries  fixed  by  herself, 
and  extent  not  exceeding  the  largest  State 
of  the  Union,  to  be  admitted  into  the  Union, 
by  virtue  of  this  act,  on  an  equal  footing 
with  the  original  States. 

"IV.  The  remainder  of  the  annexed  terri- 
tory, to  be  held  and  disposed  of  by  the 
United  States,  as  one  of  their  Territories,  to 
be  called  'the  South-west  Territory.' 

"  V.  The  existence  of  Slavery  to  be  for- 
ever prohibited  in  the  northern  and  north- 
western part  of  said  Territory,  west  of  the 
100th  degree  of  longitude  west  from  Green- 
wich, so  as  to  divide,  as  equally  as  may  be, 
the  whole  of  the  annexed  country  between 
slaveholding  and  non-slaveholding  States. 

"  VI.  The  assent  of  Mexico  to  be  obtained 
by  treaty  to  such  annexation  and  boundary, 
or  to  be  dispensed  with  when  the  Congress 
of  the  United  States  may  deem  such  as- 
sent to  be  unnecessary. 

"VII.  Other  details  of  the  annexation  to 
be  adjusted  by  treaty,  so  far  as  the  same 
may  come  within  the  scope  of  the  treaty- 
making  power." 

This  was  rejected  by  11  Yeas — all 
Whigs  from  Free  States — to  33  Nays. 

Mr.  Walker,  of  Wisconsin,  moved 
1  to  add  to  the  House  proposition  an 


CONGRESS    ASSENTS  TO  ANNEXATION. 


173 


alternative  contemplating  negotia- 
tion as  a  means  of  effecting  the  end  ! 
proposed:  and  this  was  carried  by 
27  Yeas,  to  25  Nays— the  Nays  all 
Whigs.  The  measure,  as  thus  amend- 
ed, passed  the  Senate  by  Yeas  27 — 
all  the  Democrats  present  and  three 
Whigs,  of  whom  two  thereupon 
turned  Democrats  —  to  25  Nays — 
all  Whigs ; 5  and  the  proposition 
being  returned  to  the  House,  the 
amendment  of  the  Senate  was  con- 
curred iii  by  134  Yeas  to  77  Nays — 
a  party  vote  :  so  the  Annexation  of 
Texas  was  decreed,  in  the  following 
terms  : 

"  Resolved ',  by  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives  of  the  United  States  in  Con- 
gress assembled,  That  Congress  doth  consent 
that  the  territory  properly  included  within, 
and  rightfully  belonging  to,  the  Republic  of 
Texas,  may  be  erected  into  a  new  State,  to 
be  called  the  State  of  Texas,  with  a  repub- 
lican form  of  government,  to  be  adopted  by 
the -people  of  said  republic,  by  deputies  in 
Convention  assembled,  with  the  consent  of 
the  existing  government,  in  order  that  the 
same  may  be  admitted  as  one  of  the  States 
of  the  Union. 

"  Sec.  2.  And  be  it  further  resolved,  That 
the  foregoing  consent  of  Congress  is  given 
upon  the  following  conditions,  and  with  the 
following  guarantees,  to  wit : 

"  First:  Said  State  to  be  formed,  subject 
to  the  adjustment  by  this  Government  of  all 
questions  of  boundary  that  may  arise  with 
other  governments ;  and  the  Constitution 
thereof,  with  the  proper  evidence  of  its 
adoption  by  the  people  of  said  Republic 
of  Texas,  shall  be  transmitted  to  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States,  to  be  laid  before 
Congress  for  its  final  action,  on  or  before 
the  first  day  of  January,  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  forty  six. 

"Second:  Said  State,  when  admitted  into 
the  Union,  after  ceding  to  the  United  States 
all  public  edifices,  fortifications,  barracks, 

6  On  the  final  vote  in  the  Senate,  the  Yeas 
— for  the  Proposition  as  amended — were  as  fol- 
lows— the  names  in  italics  being  those  of  Whigs : 

Messrs.  Allen,  Ashley,  Atchison,  Atherton, 
Bagby,  Benton,  Breese,  Buchanan,  Colquitt, 
Dickinson,  Dix,  Fairfield,  Hannegan,  Haywood, 
Henderson,  Huger,  Johnson,  Lewis,  McDuffie, 
Merrick,  Niles,  Semple,  Sevier,  Sturgeon,  Tappan, 
"Walker,  Woodbury — 27. 


forts  and  harbors,  navy  and  navy-yards, 
docks,  magazines,  arms,  armaments,  and  all 
other  property  and  means  pertaining  to  the 
public  defense,  belonging  to  the  said  Republio 
of  Texas,  shall  retain  all  public  funds,  debts, 
taxes,  and  dues  of  every  kind,  which  may 
belong  to,  or  be  due  or  owing  said  Repub- 
lic ;  and  shall  also  retain  all  the  vacant  or 
unappropriated  lands  lying  within  its  limits, 
to  be  applied  to  the  payment  of  the  debts 
and  liabilities  of  said  Republic  of  Texas; 
and  the  residue  of  said  lands,  after  discharg- 
ing said  debts  and  liabilities,  to  be  disposed 
of  as  said  State  may  direct ;  but  in  no  event 
are  said  debts  and  liabilities  to  become  a 
charge  upon  the  United  States. 

"  Third.  New  States  of  convenient  size, 
not  exceeding  four  in  number,  in  addition  to 
the  said  State  of  Texas,  and  having  sufficient 
population,  may  hereafter,  by  the  consent  of 
said  State,  be  formed  out  of  the  territory 
thereof,  which  shall  be  entitled  to  admission 
under  the  provisions  of  the  Federal  Consti- 
tution ;  and  such  States  as  may  be  formed 
out  of  that  portion  of  said  territory  lying 
south  of  thirty-six  degrees  thirty  minutes 
north  latitude,  commonly  known  as  the 
Missouri  Compromise  line,  shall  be  admit- 
ted into  the  Union  with  or  without  Slavery, 
as  the  people  of  each  State  asking  admission 
may  desire.  And  in  such  State  or  States  as 
shall  be  formed  out  of  said  territory  north  of 
said  Missouri  Compromise  line,  Slavery  or 
involuntary  servitude  (except  for  crime) 
shall  be  prohibited. 

[WALKER'S  AMENDMENT — ADDED.] 

M  And  be  it  further  resolved,  That  if  the 
President  of  the  United  States  shall,  in  his 
judgment  and  discretion,  deem  it  most  ad- 
visable, instead  of  proceeding  to  submit  the 
foregoing  resolutions  to  the  Republic  of 
Texas,  as  an  overture  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States  for  admission,  to  negotiate 
with  that  Republic ;  then, 

"Be  it  resolved,  That  a  State  to  be  form- 
ed out  of  the  present  Republic  of  Texas, 
with  suitable  extent  and  boundaries,  and 
with  two  representatives  in  Congress,  until 
the  next  apportionment  of  representation, 
shall  be  admitted  into  the  Union  by  virtue 
of  this  act,  on  an  equal  footing  with  the 
existing  States,  as  soon  as  the  terms  and 
conditions   of  such   admission,    and  the 

The  Nays — against  the  proposed  Annexation 
— were  : 

Messrs.  Archer,  Barrow,  Bates,  Bayard,  Ber- 
rien, Choate,  Clayton,  Crittenden,  Dayton,  Kvans, 
Foster,  Francis,  Huntington,  Jarnagin,  Mangum, 
Miller,  Morehead,  Pearce,  Pliolps,  Porter,  Rives, 
Simmons,  Upham,  White,  Woodbridge — 25. 
Yeas:  From  Free  States,  13;  Slave  States,  14. 
Nays:    "      "       H     12;     «       "  13. 


174 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


cession  of  the  remaining  Texan  territory 
to  the  United  States,  shall  be  agreed  upon 
by  the  Governments  of  Texas  and  the  United 
States. 

"  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  the  sum 
of  one  hundred  thousand  dollars  be,  and  the 
same  is  hereby,  appropriated  to  defray  the 
expenses  of  missions  and  negotiations,  to 
agree  upon  the  terms  of  said  admission  and 
cession,  either  by  treaty  to  be  submitted  to 
the  Senate,  or  by  articles  to  be  submitted  to 
the  two  Houses  of  Congress,  as  the  President 
may  direct. 

"Approved,  March  2,  1845." 

President  Tyler  immediately,  on 
the  last  day  of  his  term,  rendered 
the  Walker  amendment  nugatory  by 
dispatching  a  messenger  to  Texas  to 
secure  her  assent  to  Annexation,  pure 
and  simple  ;  and  thus  the  triumph  of 
the  measure  was  secured. 

The  pretext  or  show  of  compromise 
with  respect  to  Slavery,  by  a  partition 
of  territory,  was  one  of  the  worst  fea- 
tures of  this  most  objectionable  mea- 
sure. So  much  of  Texas  as  lay  north 
of  the  parallel  of  36°  30'  north  lati- 
tude was  thereby  allotted  to  Free 
labor,  when  Texas  had  never  con- 
trolled, and  did  not  at  that  moment 
possess,  a  single  acre  north  of  that 
parallel,  nor  for  two  hundred  miles 
south  of  it.  All  the  territory  claim- 
ed by  her  north  of  that  line  was  New 
Mexico,  which  had  never  been  for  a 
week  under  the  flag  of  Texas.  While 
seeming  to  curtail  and  circumscribe 
Slavery  north  of  the  above  parallel, 
this  measure  really  extended  it  north- 
ward to  that  parallel,  which  it  had 
not  yet  approached,  under  the  flag 
of  Texas,  within  hundreds  of  miles, 
tut  the  chief  end  of  this  sham  com- 
promise was  the  involving  of  Con- 
gress and  the  country  in  an  indirect 
indorsement  of  the  claim  of  Texas  to 
the  entire  left  bank  of  the  Rio  Grande, 
from  its  mouth  to  its  source ;  and  this 
was  effected. 


This  complete  triumph  of  Annexa- 
tion, even  before  the  inauguration  of 
Mr.  Polk,  was  hailed  with  exultation 
throughout  the  South,  and  received 
with  profound  sensation  and  concern 
at  the  North.  It  excited,  moreover, 
some  surprise  ;  as,  three  days  before 
it  occurred,  its  defeat  for  that  session 
appeared  almost  certain.  Mr.  Bag- 
by,  a  Democratic  Senator  from  Ala- 
bama, positively  declared  from  his 
seat  that  he  would  not  support  it ; 
while  the  opposition  of  Messrs.  Niles, 
of  Connecticut,  Dix,  of  New  York, 
and  Benton,  of  Missouri,  was  deemed 
invincible ;  but  the  Alabamian  was 
tamed  by  private,  but  unquestiona- 
ble, intimations,  that  it  would  not  be 
safe  for  him  to  return  to  his  own 
State,  nor  even  to  remain  in  Wash- 
ington, if  his  vote  should  defeat  the 
darling  project ;  and  the  repugnance 
of  Messrs.  Niles,  Dix,  and  Benton, 
was  somehow  overcome— the  Walker 
amendment  serving  as  a  pretext  for 
submission  to  the  party  behest>  when 
no  plausible  excuse  could  be  given. 
Mr.  Polk  was  already  in  Washing- 
ton, engaged  in  making  up  his  jew- 
els ;  and  he  had  very  freely  intima- 
ted that  no  man  who  opposed  Annex- 
ation should  receive  office  or  con- 
sideration at  his  hands.  The  three 
Tylerized  Whigs  from  the  South, 
who  voted  in  the  affirmative,  had  not 
been  counted  on  as  opponents  of  the 
scheme. 

The  Democrats  of  the  North,  hav- 
ing elected  Mr.  Polk  after  a  desper- 
ate struggle,  and  being  intent  on  the 
imminent  distribution  of  the  spoils, 
might  regret  this  early  fruit  of  their 
triumph,  but  could  hardly  be  expect- 
ed openly  to  denounce  it.  Mr.  John 
P.  Hale,  of  New  Hampshire,  who  had 
evinced  (as  we  have  6een)  insubor- 


THE    UNION    A  CHAMPION    OF  SLAVERY. 


175 


dination  in  the  House,  and  who  was 
then  the  regular  Democratic  nominee 
for  the  next  House  in  the  election 
just  at  hand,  was  thrown  off  the 
ticket  unceremoniously,  and  another 
nominated  in  his  stead — who,  how- 
ever, failed  of  success ;  the  election 
resulting  in  no  choice,  so  far  as  this 
seat  was  concerned.  Three  regular 
Democrats  were  elected  to  the  others. 
In  no  other  State  was  there  any  open 
and  formidable  opposition  manifested 
by  Democrats  to  this  sudden  consum- 
mation of  the  Texan  intrigue. 

The  Whigs  and  Abolitionists  of 
the  Free  States,  of  course,  murmur- 
ed ;  but  to  what  end  ?  What  could 
they  do  ?  The  new  Democratic  Ad- 
ministration must  hold  the  reins 
for  the  ensuing  four  years,  and  its 
decided  ascendency  in  both  Houses 
of  the  next  Congress  was  already 
amply  secured.  There  were  the 
usual  editorial  thunderings  ;  perhaps 
a  few  sermons,  and  less  than  half-a- 
dozen  rather  thinly-attended  public 
meetings,  mainly  in  Massachusetts, 
whereat  ominous  whispers  may  have 
been  heard,  that,  if  things  were  to 
go  on  in  this  way  much  longer,  the 
Union  would,  or  should,  be  dissolved. 
This  covert  menace  was  emphatically 
rebuked  by  Mr.  Robert  C.  Winthrop, 
of  Boston,  speaking  the  sentiment  of 
the  great  majority  of  leading  Whigs. 
"  Our  country,  however  bounded," 
was  declared  by  him  entitled  to  his 
allegiance,  and  the  object  of  his  affec- 
tions. The  great  majority,  even  of 
the  murmurers,  went  on  with  their 
industry  and  their  trade,  their  pur- 
suits and  their  aspirations,  as  though 

6 "  The  negroes  taken  from  the  Southern 
States  should  be  returned  to  their  owners,  or 
paid  for  at  their  full  value.  If  these  slaves  were 
considered  as  non-combatants,  they  ought  to  be 
restored ;  if  as  property,  they  ought  to  be  paid 


nothing  of  special  moment  had  hap- 
pened. 

Yet  it  did  not  escape  the  regard 
of  keen  observers  that  our  country 
had  placed  herself,  by  annexing 
Texas  under  the  circumstances,  not 
merely  in  the  light  of  a  powerful  ag- 
gressor on  the  rights  of  neighboring 
helplessness,  but  of  a  champion  and 
propagandist  of  Slavery,  as  the  fit, 
beneficent  condition  of  the  producers 
of  tropical  and  semi-tropical  staples 
throughout  the  world.  The  dispatch 
of  Mr.  Calhoun  to  France,  with  one 
or  two  others  of  like  purport,  aimed 
more  directly  at  England,  justified 
and  commended  our  designs  on 
Texas  expressly  and  emphatically  on 
this  ground.  England,  he  argued, 
was  plotting  the  extinction  of  Slave- 
ry throughout  the  Western  Hemis- 
phere. The  United  States  must 
clutch  Texas,  or  she  would  soon  fall 
a  prey  to  British  intrigue  and  British 
influence — being  induced  thereby  to 
emancipate  her  slaves  ;  thus  dealing 
a  damaging,  if  not  mortal,  blow  to 
Slavery  throughout  the  New  World. 
To  avert  this  blow,  and  to  shield  the 
social  and  industrial  system  which  it 
menaced,  were  the  chief  ends  of  An- 
nexation. 

Now,  it  was  not  literally  true  that 
our  country  was  thus  presented,  for 
the  first  time,  in  the  questionable  at- 
titude of  a  champion  of  Slavery.  In 
our  last  treaty  of  peace  with  Great 
Britain,  our  commissioners  at  Ghent, 
acting  under  special  instructions  from 
the  State  Department,6  had  adroitly 
bound  Great  Britain  to  return  to 

for."  This  stipulation  is,  moreover,  expressly 
included  "  in  the  conditions  on  which  you  are 
to  insist  in  the  proposed  negotiations." — Letter 
of  Instructions  from  Mr.  Monroe,  Secretary  of 
State,  28th  January,  1814. 


176  THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


us  such  slaves  as  had  escaped  from 
our  coast  to  her  cruisers,  during  the 
progress  of  the  war.7  And,  under 
this  treaty,  after  a  tedious  controver- 
sy, Great  Britain — refusing,  of  course, 
to  surrender  persons  who  had  fled 
from  her  enemies  to  her  protection — 
was  compelled,  in  1818,  on  the  award 
of  Alexander  I.  of  Eussia  to  pay  over 
to  us  no  less  than  twelve  hundred 
thousand  dollars,  to  be  divided  among 
our  bereft  slaveholders.  Before  this 
sum  was  received  (1826-7),  our  Gov- 
ernment had  made  application  to  the 
British  for  a  mutual  stipulation,  by 
treaty,  to  return  fugitives  from  labor. 
But,  though  Great  Britain,  through 
her  colonies,  was  then  a  slave-holding 
nation,  she  peremptorily  declined  the 
proposed  reciprocity.  The  first  ap- 
plication for  such  a  nice  arrange- 
ment was  made  by  Mr.  Gallatin,  our 
Minister  at  London,  under  instruc- 
tions from  Mr.  Clay,  as  Secretary  of 
State,  dated  June  19,  1826.  On  the 
5th  of  July,  1827,  Mr.  Gallatin  com- 
municated to  his  Government  the 
final  answer  of  the  British  Minister, 
that  "it  was  utterly  impossible  for 
them  to  agree  to  the  stimulation  for 
the  surrender  of  fugitive  slaves ;"  and, 
when  the  application  was  renewed 
through  our  next  Minister,  Mr. 
James  Barbour,  the  British  Minister 
conclusively  replied  that  "  the  law  of 
Parliament  gives  freedom  to  every 
slave  who  effects  his  landing  on  Brit- 
ish ground."  Yet  a  Democratic 
House  of  Bepresentatives,  in  1828, 
(May  10),  requested  the  President 

"  To  open  a  negotiation  with  the  British 
Government,  in  the  view  to  obtain  an  ar- 


7 "Art.  I.  All  territory,  places,  and  posses- 
sions whatever,  taken  from  either  party  by  the 
other,  during  the  war,  or  which  may  be  taken 
after  the  signing  of  this  treaty,  shall  be  restored 
without  delay;  and  without  causing  any  de- 


rangement, whereby  fugitive  slaves,  who 
have  taken  refuge  in  the  Canadian  provinces 
of  that  Government,  may  be  surrendered 
by  the  functionaries  thereof  to  their  mas- 
ters, upon  making  satisfactory  proof  of  their 
ownership  of  said  slaves." 

A  Presidential  Election  was  then 
imminent,  and  neither  party  willing 
to  provoke  the  jealousy  of  the  Slave 
Power:  so  this  disgraceful  resolve 
passed  the  House  without  a  division. 

In  1826,  Joel  R  Poinsett,  our  Min- 
ister to  Mexico,  acting  under  instruc- 
tions from  Mr.  Clay,  negotiated  with 
the  Mexican  Government  a  treaty  for 
the  mutual  restoration  of  runaway 
slaves,  but  the  Mexican  Senate  refu- 
sed to  ratify  it.  In  1831  (January 
3),  the  brig  Comet,  a  regular  slaver 
from  the  District  of  Columbia,  on 
her  voyage  to  New  Orleans,  with  a 
cargo  of  164  slaves,  was  lost  off  the 
island  of  Abaco.  The  slaves  were 
saved,  and  carried  into  New  Provi- 
dence, a  British  port,  whose  authori- 
ties immediately  set  them  at  liberty. 
And  in  1833  (February  4),  the  brig 
Encomium,  from  Charleston  to  New 
Orleans  with  45  slaves,  was  also 
wrecked  near  Abaco,  and  the  slaves, 
in  like  manner,  carried  into  New 
Providence,  and  there  declared  free. 
In  February,  1835,  the  Enterprise, 
another  slaver  from  the  Federal  Dis- 
trict, proceeding  to  Charleston  with 
78  slaves,  was  driven  in  distress  into 
Bermuda,  where  the  slaves  were  im- 
mediately set  at  liberty.  After  long 
and  earnest  efforts  on  the  part  of  our 
Government,  the  British  Cabinet  re- 
luctantly consented  to  pay  for  the  car- 
goes of  the  Comet  and  Encomium, 
expressly  on  the  grounds  that  Slavery 

struction  or  the  carrying  away  of  the  artillery, 
or  other  public  property  originally  captured  in 
said  forts  or  places,  and  which  shall  remain  up- 
on the  exchange  of  the  ratifications  of  this  trea 
ty,  or  any  slaves,  or  other  private  property." 


DESTRUCTION  OF  A  FORT  IN  FLORID  A.. 


177 


still  existed  in  the  British  West  In- 
dies at  the  time  their  slaves  were  lib- 
erated ;  but  refused  to  pay  for  those 
of  the  Enterprise,  or  any  other  slaver 
that  might  be  brought  on  British  soil 
subsequently  to  the  passage  of  her 
Emancipation  act.  Importunity  and 
menace  were  alike  exhausted  by  our 
diplomatists  down  to  a  recent  period, 
but  to  no  purpose.  Great  Britain 
stubbornly  refused  either  to  unite 
with  us  in  a  reciprocal  surrender  of 
fugitive  slaves  to  their  masters,  or  in 
paying  for  such  as,  by  their  own  ef- 
forts, or  through  the  interposition  of 
Providence,  might  emerge  from  Amer- 
ican bondage  into  British  liberty. 

Our  repeated  in  vasions  of  Florida, 
while  a  Spanish  colony,  our  purchase 
of  that  colony  from  Spain,  and  our 
unjust,  costly,  and  discreditable  wars 
upon  her  Aboriginal  tribes,  were  all 
prompted  by  a  concern  for  the  inter- 
ests and  security  of  the  slaveholders 
of  southern  Georgia  and  Alabama, 
whose  chattels  would  persist  in  fol- 
lowing each  other  out  of  Christian 
bondage  into  savage  freedom.  Gen. 
Jackson,  in  1816,  wrote  to  Gen. 
Gaines  with  respect  to  a  fort  in 
Florida,  then  a  Spanish  possession : 

^  "  If  the  fort  harbors  the  negroes  of  our 
citizens,  or  of  friendly  Indians  living  within 
our  territory,  or  holds  out  inducements  to 
the  slaves  of  our  citizens  to  desert  from 
their  owners'  service,  it  must  be  destroyed. 
Notify  the  Governor  of  Pensacola  of  your 
advance  into  his  territory,  and  for  the 
express  purpose  of  destroying  these  lawless 
banditti." 

Gen.  Gaines,  for  some  reason,  did 
not  execute  this  order;  but  a  gun- 
boat, sent  up  the  Apalachicola  river 
by  our  Commodore  Patterson,  on  the 
27th  of  July,  attacked  and  destroyed 
the  fort  by  firing  red-hot  shot,  explo- 
ding its  magazine.  The  result  is  thus 
summed  up  in  the  official  report: 
12 


"  Three  hundred  negroes,  men,  women,  and 
children,  and  about  twenty  Indians,  were  in 
the  fort;  of  these  two  hundred  and  seventy 
were  killed,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  rest 
mortally  wounded." 

Commodore  Patterson,  in  his  offi- 
cial letter  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  expressly  justifies  the  destruc- 
tion <of  this  fort  on  the  ground  of 
its  affording  a  harbor  "  for  runaway 
slaves  and  disaffected  Indians :"  add- 
ing, "  they  have  no  longer  a  place  to 
fly  to,  and  will  not  be  so  liable  to 
abscond." 

The  resistance  interposed  by  Gen. 
Cass,  our  Minister  at  Paris  in  1840- 
41,  to  the  treaty  negotiated  between 
the  Great  Powers,  conceding  a  mutu- 
al right  to  search  on  the  slave-coast 
of  Africa,  with  a  view  to  the  more 
effectual  suppression  of  the  Slave- 
Trade,  though  cloaked  by  a  jealousy 
of  British  maritime  preponderance, 
was  really  a  bid  for  the  favor  of  the 
Slave  Power.  The  concession,  by 
our  Government,  of  the  right  to 
search,  since  that  Government  has 
passed  out  of  the  hands  of  the  devo- 
tees of  Slavery,  is  suggestive.  It 
was  American  Slavery,  not  Ameri- 
can commerce,  that  dreaded  the  vis- 
itation of  our  vessels  on  the  western 
coast  of  central  Africa  by  National 
cruisers,  intent  on  the  punishment  of 
a  crime  which  had  already  been  pro- 
nounced piracy  by  the  awakened 
conscience  of  Christendom. 

In  fact,  so  long  as  more  than  one 
hundred  members  of  Congress  were 
chosen  to  represent,  to  advance,  and; 
to  guard,  before  all  else,  the  interests 
of  Slavery,  and  one  hundred  electo- 
ral votes  were  controlled,  primarily, 
by  that  interest,  it  was  morally  impos- 
sible that  our  Government  should  not 
be  warped  into  subserviency  to  our 
National  cancer.    A  6  peculiar  insti- 


178  THE  AMEJtICA 

tution,'  creating  and  upholding  the 
title  to  a  species  of  property  valued 
at  Four  Thousand  Millions  of  dollars, 
could  hardly  fail  to  make  itself  re- 
spected and  influential  in  every  de- 
partment of  the  public  service,  and 
through  every  act  of  the  Federal 
authorities  calculated  to  affect  its 
stability,  its  prosperity,  or  its  power. 

But,  up  to  this  time,  Slavery  had 
sought  and  obtained  the  protection 
and  championship  of  the  Federal 
Government  expressly  as  a  domestic 
institution — as  an  important  interest 
of  a  certain  portion  of  the  American 


N  CONFLICT. 

people.  In  the  Annexation  of  Texas, 
and  in  the  reasons  officially  adduced 
therefor,  it  challenged  the  regard  of 
mankind  and  defied  the  consciences 
of  our  own  citizens  as  a  great  Xa- 
tuSnal  interest,  to  the  protection  of 
which,  at  all  hazards  and  under  all 
circumstances,  our  Government  was 
inflexibly  committed,  and  with  whose 
fortunes  those  of  our  country  were 
inextricably  blended.  For  the  first 
time,  our  Union  stood  before  the 
nations,  not  merely  as  an  upholder, 
but  as  a  zealous,  unscrupulous  propa- 
gandist of  Human  Slavery. 


XIII. 

THE  MISSION  OF  SAMUEL  HOAE. 


The  Federal  Constitution  (Art. 
iv.  §  2)  provides  that  "  The  citizens 
"  of  each  State  shall  be  entitled  to  all 
"  the  privileges  and  immunities  of 
16  citizens  in  the  several  States." 

This  is  plainly  condensed  from  the 
corresponding  provision  of  the  Arti- 
cles of  Confederation,  adopted  in 
1778,  and  thenceforth  our  bond  of 
Union,  until  superseded  in  1787-8 
by  the  Federal  Constitution  afore- 
said.   That  provision  is  as  follows : 

"  Art.  4.  The  better  to  secure  and  per- 
petuate mutual  friendship  and  intercourse 
among  the  people  of  the  different  States  in 
the  Union,  the  free  inhabitants  of  each 
State  —  paupers,  vagabonds,  and  fugitives 
from  justice  excepted  —  shall  be  entitled 
to  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  free 
citizens  in  the  several  States ;  and  the  peo- 
ple of  each  State  shall  have  free  ingress  and 
egress  to  and  from  any  other  State,  and 
shall  enjoy  therein  all  the  privileges  of  trade 
and  commerce,  subject  to  the  same  duties, 
impositions,  and  restrictions,  as  the  inhab- 
itants thereof  respectively." 


When  this  Article  was  under  con- 
sideration, the  delegates  from  South 
Carolina  moved  to  amend  by  insert- 
ing the  word  "  white"  between 
"  free "  and  "  inhabitants  ;"  which 
was  emphatically  negatived  —  only 
two  States  voting  for  it :  so  it  was 
determined  that  States  had,  or  might 
have,  citizens  who  were  not  "  white," 
and  that  these  should  be  entitled  to 
all  the  privileges  of  citizens  in  every 
other  State. 

"We  have  seen1  that  Congress,  in 
1821,  resisted  the  attempt  of  Mis- 
souri to  prohibit  the  immigration 
of  free  colored  persons,  deeming  it  a 
palpable  violation  of  that  require- 
ment of  the  Federal  Constitution 
above  quoted;  and  would  not  ad- 
mit that  State  into  the  Union  until, 
by  a  second  compromise,  she  was  re- 
quired to  pledge  herself  that  her 


1  Page  80. 


SOUTH  CAROLINA  IM 


PRISONING  SEAMEN. 


179 


'  Legislature  should  pass  no  act  "  by 
"  which  any  of  the  citizens  of  either 
"of  the  States  should  be  excluded 
"  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  privi- 
"  leges  and  immunities  to  which  they 
"  are  entitled  under  the  Constitution 
"  of  the  United  States."  There  was 
no  question  pending,  no  proscription 
or  exclusion  meditated,  but  that  af- 
fecting colored  persons  only ;  and 
Congress,  by  the  above  action,  clear- 
ly affirmed  their  right,  when  citizens 
of  any  State,  to  the  privileges  and 
immunities  of  citizens  in  all  other 
States. 

The  assumption  that  negroes  are 
not,  and  cannot  be,  citizens,  is  abund- 
antly refuted  by  the  action  of  several 
of  the  Slave  States  themselves.  Till 
within  a  recent  period,  free  negroes 
were  not  merely  citizens,  but  electors, 
of  those  States — which  all  citizens 
are  not,  or  need  not  be.  John  Bell, 
when  first  elected  to  Congress,  in 
1827,  running  out  Felix  Grundy,  re- 
ceived the  votes  of  several  colored 
electors,  and  used,  long  after,  to  con- 
fess his  obligation  to  them. 

2  December  19th. 

3  The  following  is  a  portion  of  the  act  in  ques- 
tion: 

"  II.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority 
aforesaid,  That  it  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any- 
free  negro,  or  person  of  color,  to  come  into  this 
State,  on  board  any  vessel,  as  a  cook,  steward, 
or  mariner,  or  in  any  other  employment  on 
board  such  vessel ;  and,  in  case  any  vessel  shall 
arrive  in  any  port  or  harbor  of  this  State,  from 
any  other  State  or  foreign  port,  having  on  board 
any  free  negro  or  person  of  color,  employed  on 
board  such  vessel  as-  a  cook,  steward,  or  mari- 
ner, or  in  any  other  employment,  it  shall  be  the 
duty  of  the  sheriff  of  the  district  in  which  such 
port  or  harbor  is  situated,  immediately  on  the 
arrival  of  such  vessel,  to  apprehend  such  free 
negro  or  person  of  color,  so  arriving  contrary  to 
this  Act,  and  to  confine  him  or  her  closely  in 
jail,  until  such  vessel  shall  be  hauled  off  from 
the  wharf,  and  ready  to  proceed  to  sea.  And 
that,  when  said  vessel  is  ready  to  sail,  the  cap- 
tain of  the  said  vessel  shall  be  bound  to  carry 
away  such  free  negro  or  person  of  color,  and  to 
pay  the  expenses  of  his  or  her  detention.  And 


North  Carolina  allowed  her  free 
negroes,  who  possessed  the  requisite 
qualifications  in  other  respects,  to 
vote,  regardless  of  their  color,  down 
to  about  1830.  Their  habit  of  vot- 
ing for  the  Federal  or  Whig  cancli- 
dates,  and  against  the  Democratic, 
was  a  subject  of  frequent  and  jocular 
remark — the  Whigs  insisting  that 
the  instincts  of  the  negro  impelled 
him  uniformly  to  associate,  so  far  as 
practicable,  with  the  more  gentle- 
manly portion  of  the  white  race. 

In  the  year  1835,2  the  Legislature 
of  South  Carolina  saw  lit  to  pass  an 
act,  whereby  any  and  every  colored 
person  found  on  board  of  any  vessel 
entering  one  of  her  ports  was  to  be 
forthwith  seized  by  her  municipal 
officers,  and  lodged  in  jail ;  there  to 
reniain  until  the  vessel  should  be 
cleared  for  departure,  when  said 
colored  person  or  persons  should  be 
restored  to  said  vessel,  on  payment 
of  the  cost  and  charges  of  arrest,  de- 
tention, and  subsistence.3 

This  act  necessarily  bore  with 
great  hardship  on  the  colored  sea- 

in  every  such  case  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the 
sheriff  aforesaid,  immediately  on  the  apprehen- 
sion of  any  free  negro  or  person  of  color,  to 
cause  said  captain  to  enter  into  a  recognizance, 
with  good  and  sufficient  security,  in  the  sum  of 
one  thousand  dollars,  for  such  free  negro  or 
slave  so  brought  into  this  State,  that  he  will 
comply  with  the  requisitions  of  this  act;  and 
that,  on  his  neglect,  or  refusal,  or  disability  to 
do  the  same,  he  shall  be  compelled  by  the  she- 
riff aforesaid  to  haul  said  vessel  into  the  stream, 
one  hundred  yards  distant  from  the  shore,  and 
remain  until  said  vessel  shall  proceed  to  sea. 
A  nd  if  said  vessel  shall  not  be  hauled  off  from 
the  shore  as  aforesaid  on  the  order  of  the  sheriff 
aforesaid,  the  captain  or  commanding  officer  of 
said  vessel  shall  be  indicted  therefor,  and,  on 
conviction,  forfeit  and  pay  one  thousand  dollar^, 
and  suffer  imprisonment  not  exceeding  six 
months. 

"III.  And  be  it  further  enacted  by  the  authority 
aforesaid,  That  whenever  any  free  negro  or  per- 
son of  color  shall  be  apprehended  or  committed 
to  jail,  as  having  arrived  in  any  vessel  in  the 
capacity  of  cook,  steward,  mariner,  or  otherwise, 
contrary  to  this  Act,  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the 


180 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


men,  cooks,  etc.,  of  Northern  vessels  j 
trading  to  Charleston.  Massachu- 
setts, therefore,  at  length  resolved, 
through  the  action  of  her  Legisla- 
ture,4 to  test  its  constitutionality  by 
instituting  legal  proceedings,  which 
should  bring  it  ultimately  to  an  ad- 
judication by  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  United  States.  To  this  end, 
Gov.  Briggs  appointed  Hon.  Sam- 
uel Hoar — one  of  her  most  emi- 
nent and  venerable  citizens,  who  had 
served  her  with  honor  in  many  im- 
portant trusts,  including  a  seat  in 
Congress — to  proceed  to  Charleston, 
and  there  institute  the  necessary  pro- 
ceedings, in  order  to  bring  the  mat- 
ter to  judgment.  Mr.  Hoar  accepted 
this  new  duty,  and  left  home  accord- 
ingly in  November,  1844,  for  Charles- 
ton ;  reaching  that  city  on  the  28th 
of  that  month.  So  utterly  unsuspect- 
ing was  he  of  giving  ofTense,  or  pro- 
voking violence,  that  his  young 
daughter  accompanied  him. 

On  the  day  of  his  arrival,  Mr. 
Hoar  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Gov- 
ernor of  South  Carolina,5  announcing 

sheriff,  during  the  confinement  in  jail  of  such 
free  negro  or  person  of  color,  to  call  upon  some 
justice  of  the  peace  or  quorum,  to  warn  such 
free  negro  or  person  of  color  never  to  enter  the 
said  State  after  he  shall  have  departed  there- 
from ,  and  such  justice  of  the  peace,  or  quorum, 
shall,  at  the  time  of  warning  such  free  negro,  or 
person  of  color,  insert  his  or  her  name  in  a 
book,  to  be  provided  for  that  purpose  by  the 
sheriff,  and  shall  therein  specify  his  or  her  age, 
occupation,  hight,  and  distinguishing  marks ; 
which  book  shall  be  good  and  sufficient  evidence 
to  such  warning ;  and  said  book  shall  be  a  pub- 
lic record,  and  be  subject  and  open  to  the  exam- 
ination of  all  persons  who  may  make  application 
to  the  clerk  of  the  court  of  general  sessions,  in 
whose  office  it  shall  be  deposited.  And  such 
justice  shall  receive  the  y^jx  of  two  dollars,  pay- 
able by  the  captain  of  the  vessel  in  which  said 
free  negro  or  person  of  color  shall  be  introduc- 
ed into  this  State,  for  the  services  rendered  in 
making  said  entry.  And  every  free  negro,  or 
person  of  color,  who  shall  not  depart  the  State, 
in  case  of  the  captain  refusing  or  neglecting  to 
carry  him  or  her  away,  or,  having  departed, 
shall  again  enter  into  the  limits  of  this  State,  by 


'  the  fact,  and  stating  the  purpose  of 
his  mission  to  be,  "the  collecting 
and  transmission  of  accurate  informa- 
tion respecting  the  number  and  the 
names  of  citizens  of  Massachusetts, 
who  have  heretofore  been,  or  may 
be,  during  the  period  of  the  engage- 
ment of  the  agent,  imprisoned  with- 
out the  allegation  of  any  crime." 
He  further  stated  that  he  was  au- 
thorized to  bring  and  prosecute  one 
or  more  suits  in  behalf  of  any  citizen 
so  imprisoned,  for  the  purpose  of 
having  the  legality  of  such  imprison- 
ment tried  and  determined  in  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States. 

The  next  morning,  Mr.  Hoar  call- 
ed on  Mr.  Eggleston,  who  had  been 
appointed  to  the  same  agency  before 
him,  and  requested  of  him  an  intro- 
duction to  the  Mayor  of  Charleston, 
his  object  being  to  procure  access  to 
the  records  of  orders  or  sentences, 
under  which  citizens  of  Massachu- 
setts, it  was  understood,  had  been 
imprisoned.  Mr.  Eggleston  acceded 
to  his  request,  but  said  it  would  be 
best  that  he  should  first  see  the 

land  or  by  water,  after  having  been  warned  as 
aforesaid,  shall  be  dealt  with  as  the  first  section 
of  this  Act  directs  in  regard  to  persons  of  color, 
who  shall  migrate,  or  be  brought,  into  this 

State." 

It  may  be  as  well  to  add  that  the  penalty  of 
the  first  section  referred  to,  is  corporal  punish- 
ment for  the  first  offense :  "  and  if,  after  said 
sentence  or  punishment,  such  free  negro  or  per- 
son of  color  shall  still  remain  in  the  State  longer 
than  the  time  allowed,  or,  having  left  the  State, 
shall  thereafter  return  to  the  same,  upon  proof 
and  conviction  thereof  before  a  court,  to  be  con- 
stituted as  hereinbefore  directed,  he  or  she  shall 
be  appropriated  and  applied,  one  half  thereof  to  the 
use  of  the  State,  and  the  other  half  to  the  use  of  the 
informer." 

4  Resolves  of  March  24,  1843,  and  March  16, 
1844 

5  Hon.  James  H.  Hammond,  since  distinguish, 
ed  as  a  U.  S.  Senator. 


SOUTH  CAROLINA 

Mayor,  and  explain  the  matter  in 
advance  of  the  proposed  introduction. 
Mr.  Hoar  assented,  and  Eggleston  left 
Mr.  H.  waiting  in  his  office,  while  he 
proceeded  to  confer  with  the  Mayor. 
After  a  considerable  absence,  he  re- 
turned, and  stated  that  the  Mayor 
was  at  Columbia,  attending  the  ses- 
sion of  the  Legislature,  and  that  the 
gentleman  who  temporarily  discharg- 
ed the  duties  of  the  officer  judged  it 
best  that  all  further  proceedings 
should  await  his  return.  This  was 
assented  to,  and  Mr.  Hoar  waited 
through  the  next  three  days  accord- 
ingly. 

Meantime,  Gov.  Hammond  had 
received  Mr.  Hoar's  letter,  and  com- 
municated it  to  the  Legislature,  by 
which  it  was  received  in  high  dudg- 
eon. That  Legislature  proceeded  to 
pass,  by  a  substantially  unanimous 
vote,  the  following  resolutions  : 

"Resolved,  1st,  That  the  right  to  exclude 
from  their  territories  seditious  persons,  or 
others  whose  presence  may  be  dangerous  to 
their  peace,  is  essential  to  every  independ- 
ent State. 

"  Resolved,  2d,  That  free  and  other  per- 
sons of  color  are  not  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  within  the  meaning  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, which  confers  upon  the  citizens  of  one 
State  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  citi- 
zens of  the  several  States. 
*  "  Resolved,  3d,  That  the  emissary  sent  by 
the  State  of  Massachusetts  to  the  State  of 
South  Carolina,  with  the  avowed  purpose  of 
interfering  with  her  institutions,  and  dis- 
turbing her  peace,  is  to  be  regarded  in  the 
character  he  has  assumed,  and  to  be  treated 
accordingly. 

"  Resolved,  4th,  That  his  Excellency  the 
Governor  be  requested  to  expel  from  our 
territory  the  said  agent,  after  due  notice  to 
depart;  and  that  the  Legislature  will  sus- 
tain the  Executive  authority  in  any  meas- 
ure it  may  adopt  for  the  purpose  aforesaid." 

The  Legislature  proceeded  di- 
rectly thereafter  to  pass  an  act  for- 
bidding and  punishing  such  missions 
as  that  of  Mr.  Hoar,  whereof  the 


EXPELS  MR.  HOAR.  181 

more  material  provisions  are  as  fol- 
lows : 

"I.  Be  it  enacted  by  the  Senate  and  Rouse 
of  Representatives,  now  met  and  sitting  in 
General  Assembly  and  by  authority  of  the 
same,  That  any  person  or  persons  who  shall 
on  his,  her,  or  their  own  behalf,  or  under 
any  color,  or  in  virtue  of  any  commission 
or  authority  from  any  State  in  this  Union, 
or  of '  any  foreign  power,  come  within  the 
limits  of  this  State  for  the  purpose  or  with 
the  intent  to  disturb,  counteract,  or  hinder 
the  operation  of  such  laws  as  have  been  or 
shall  be  made  by  the  public  authorities  of 
this  State,  in  relation  to  slaves  or  free  per- 
sons of  color,  such  person  or  persons  shall 
be  deemed  guilty  of  a  high  misdemeanor, 
and  shall  be  committed  for  trial  to  the  com- 
mon jail  of  the  district,  by  any  one  of  the 
judges  of  the  courts  of  law  or  equity,  or  the 
recorder  of  the  city  of  Charleston,  unless 
admitted  to  bail  by  the  said  judge  or  re- 
corder; and,  upon  due  conviction  thereof  by 
any  court  of  competent  jurisdiction,  shall 
be  sentenced  to  banishment  from  the  State, 
and  to  such  fine  and  imprisonment  as  may 
be  deemed  fitting  by  the  court  which  shall 
have  tried  such  offense. 

"  II.  That  any  person  within  this  State 
who  shall  at  any  time  accept  any  commis- 
sion or  authority  from  any  State,  or  public 
authority  of  any  State  in  this  Union,  or  from 
any  foreign  power,  in  relation  to  slaves  or 
free  persons  of  color,  and  who  shall  commit 
any  overt  act  with  intent  to  disturb  the 
peace  or  security  of  this  State,  or  with  in- 
tent to  disturb,  counteract,  or  hinder  the 
operation  of  the  laws  or  regulations  of  the 
public  authorities  of  this  State,  made  or  to 
be  made,  in  relation  to  slaves  or  free  per- 
sons of  color,  such  person  shall  be  deemed 
guilty  of  a  misdemeanor,  and,  on  conviction 
thereof,  before  any  competent  court,  shall 
be  sentenced  to  pay,  for  the  first  offense,  a 
fine  not  exceeding  one  thousand  dollars, 
and  to  be  imprisoned  not  exceeding  one 
year ;  for  the  second  offense,  he  shall  be 
imprisoned  for  seven  years,  and  pay  a  fine 
not  less  than  one  thousand  dollars,  or  be 
banished  from  the  State,  as  the  court  may 
see  fit." 

[The  act  furthermore  requires  that  the 
Governor  for  the  time  being  shall  require 
the  aforesaid  emissary  or  emissaries  from 
another  State,  or  from  a  foreign  power,  to 
depart  from  the  limits  of  the  State  in  forty- 
eight  hours — such  person  or  persons,  neg- 
lecting to  depart  within  the  specified  time, 
to  be  committed  (unless  admitted  to  bail), 
and  to  be  tried  and  punished  as  before 


182 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


stated ;  and  provides  that  the  Sheriff  shall 
see  that  the  sentence  of  banishment  be  exe- 
cuted, and  imprison  such  offender  if  he  re- 
turns, unless  by  unavoidable  accident.] 

On  Monday,  December  2d,  Mr. 
Hoar  was,  for  the  first  time,  apprised 
of  the  reception  accorded  at  Colum- 
bia to  his  mission,  and  of  the  com- 
motion it  had  raised.  After  discuss- 
ing the  matter  freely  with  those 
around  him,  he  walked  out  for  some 
distance,  and,  returning  at  dark  to 
his  hotel,  he  encountered  three  per- 
sons standing  on  the  piazza.  One 
of  them  stepped  forward  and  asked, 
"  Is  your  name  Hoar,  Sir  ?"  and,  be- 
ing answered  in  the  affirmative, 
announced  himself  as  follows :  "  I 
am  the  Sheriff  of  Charleston  Dis- 
trict, and  I  have  some  business  with 
you,  Sir."  He  then  introduced  his 
associates  as  the  acting  mayor  and 
another  alderman  of  the  city.  Mr. 
Hoar  invited  them  to  walk  up  into  the 
parlor  of  the  house.  When  seated, 
the  sheriff  inquired  his  business  in 
Charleston ;  and  was  answered  that 
he  had  already  communicated  it  to 
the  Governor  ;  but  he  stated  it  afresh 
to  the  sheriff,  who  said :  "It  is  sus- 
pected that  you  are  an  Abolitionist, 
and  have  come  here  to  accomplish 
some  of  their  measures."  After  some 
hesitation,  Mr.  Hoar  assured  him 
that  he  was  no  Abolitionist,  but  had 
been,  for  many  years,  a  member  of 
the  Colonization  Society.  The  sher- 
iff intimating  some  suspicion  that 
Mr.  Hoar  was  not  duly  accredited, 
the  latter  exhibited  his  commission 
from  the  Governor  of  Massachusetts, 
and  gave  permission  to  copy  it,  as 
also  the  resolves  of  the  Legislature 
on  which  it  was  founded. 

The  Sheriff  continued  :  "  It  is  con- 
sidered a  great  insult  on  South  Caro- 


lina by  Massachusetts  to  send  an 
agent  here  on  such  business.  The 
city  is  highly  incensed.  You  are  in 
great  danger,  and  you  had  better 
leave  the  city  as  soon  as  possible." 
Mr.  H.  replied  that  he  had  been  sent 
there  by  the  Governor  of  Massachu- 
setts on  lawful  business,  and  could 
not  leave  until  he  had  at  least  at- 
tempted to  perform  the  duty  im- 
posed on  him.  The  sheriff  then 
produced  a  letter  purporting  to  be 
from  the  Attorney-General  of  South 
Carolina,  urging  the  avoidance  of  a 
resort  to  lynching,  as  that  would  dis- 
grace the  city,  and  adding  that  the 
person  to  prevent  such  a  procedure 
was  the  sheriff.  That  functionary 
declared  that  he  should  endeavor  to 
defend  Mr.  H.,  even  at  the  hazard  of 
his  own  life,  but  doubted  his  ability  to 
do  it  in  view  of  the  prevailing  excite- 
ment, and  urged  him,  as  a  friend,  to 
leave  at  the  earliest  moment.  Mr.  H. 
repeated  his  answer  already  given, 
and  thereupon  his  visitors  left  him. 

The  next  morning,  the  sheriff  re- 
turned and  repeated  his  representa- 
tions and  entreaties  of  the  evening. 
"  What  do  you  expect  ?"  he  asked  ; 
"you  can  never  get  a  verdict ;  and, 
if  you  should,  the  marshal  would 
need  all  the  troops  of  the  United 
States  to  enforce  the  judgment." 
Mr.  Hoar  remarked  that  enforcing  the 
judgment  was  no  part  of  his  business, 
and  they  thereupon  separated. 

During  the  day,  several  gentle- 
men called,  making  representations 
substantially  like  the  sheriff's,  and 
setting  forth  the  various  plans  sug- 
gested for  ridding  the  city  of  his 
presence.  He  could  only  reply  that 
he  should  not  voluntarily  leave  until 
he  had  fulfilled  the  duty  he  had  un- 
dertaken. 


DRIVING  MR.  HOAR  OUT  OF  CHARLESTON. 


183 


In  the  evening,  a  gentleman  to 
whom  Mr.  Hoar  had  a  letter  of  in- 
troduction called,  and  said  the  sher- 
iff had  offered,  in  case  he  would 
leave,  to  agree  on  a  case  to  be  sub- 
mitted to  the  U.  S.  Circuit  Court, 
and  thence  carried  to  the  Supreme 
Court  for  final  decision.  To  this, 
Mr.  Hoar  readily  assented,  observing 
that  such  an  agreement  would  very 
much  expedite  his  departure.  He 
had  prepared  himself,  in  Boston, 
with  the  names  of  a  number  of 
colored  seamen  who  had  been  taken 
out  of  Massachusetts  vessels  in 
Charleston,  and  there  imprisoned 
under  the  law  in  question,  and  he 
felt  authorized  by  his  commission  to 
commence  a  suit  in  the  name  of 
either  of  two  of  them.  It  was  agreed 
that  a  meeting  should  be  held  at 
the  sheriff's  office  next  morning  at 
nine  o'clock,  for  the  purpose  of  per- 
fecting this  arrangement.  At  that 
hour,  Mr.  H.  duly  appeared  at  the 
sheriff's  office,  but  found  there 
neither  the  sheriff  nor  any  other  of 
the  gentlemen  who  were  to  meet 
him.  Being  informed  by  one  of  the 
clerks  that  the  sheriff  had  just 
stepped  out  on  business,  and  would 
probably  soon  return,  he  waited  half 
or  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  no 
purpose,  and  was  about  to  leave, 
when  the  clerk  said  that,  if  he  would 
name  a  future  hour  when  he  would 
be  there,  he  would  inform  the  sheriff, 
so  that  he  might  meet  him.  He 
named  twelve  o'clock,  and,  return- 
ing at  that  time,  found  the  sheriff. 
That  personage  now  admitted  that 
the  gentleman  who  had  conferred 
with  Mr.  II.  the  evening  previous 
had  correctly  represented  his  pro- 
posal ;  but  said,  that,  on  further  re- 
flection and  consultation,  he  must 


retract  the  offer;  as  what  he  had 
proposed  might  thwart  the  purposes 
of  the  State ;  that  he  had  not  been 
long  in  office,  and  did  not  know  that 
there  was  any  case  which  would 
properly  present  the  question  in 
controversy.  At  all  events,  he  could 
not  abide  by  his  agreement.  He 
added  that  he  had  information  from 
Gov.  Hammond  which  removed  all 
personal  objection,  but  reiterated 
his  former  remarks  about  the  insult 
by  Massachusetts  to  South  Carolina, 
and  her  determination  to  be  rid  of 
Mr.  Hoar  by  some  means. 

On  leaving  the  sheriff's  office,  Mr. 
Hoar  was  proceeding  to  make  a  call, 
when  he  was  stopped  by  a  middle- 
aged,  decently-dressed  man,  who 
presented  a  cane  or  club,  asking,  "  Is 
your  name  Hoar  ?"  "  Yes,"  was  the 
answer.  He  then  said,  "  You  had 
better  be  traveling,  and  the  sooner, 
the  better  for  you,  I  can  tell  you  :  if 
you  stay  here  until  to-morrow  morn- 
ing, you  will  feel  something,  you  will 
not  like,  I  am  thinking."  Mr.  Hoar 
walked  on,  passing  a  number  of 
young  men  assembled  on  the  street- 
corner,  who  offered  him  no  molesta- 
tion. In  the  evening,  a  Dr.  Whit- 
redge,  to  whom  Mr.  Hoar  had 
brought  a  letter  from  Boston,  called 
upon  him  and  urged  him  to  leave 
the  city  at  the  earliest  moment.  Dr. 
"W*.  had  been  around  the  city,  had 
just  come  from  the  Council,  and  re- 
garded the  danger  to  Mr.  H.  as  not 
only  great,  but  imminent.  But  a 
word  was  needed  to  bring  on  the 
meditated  attack.  Yet  he  thought 
Mr.  Hoar,  should  he  start  at  once, 
might  get  safely  out  of  the  city.  He 
urged  him  to  procure  a  carriage,  and 
go  to  his  (W.'s)  plantation,  about 
twenty  miles  distant,  where  he  would 


184 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


be  hospitably  treated.  Mr.  Hoar 
thanked  him,  but  concluded  that  lie 
could  not  accept  bis  offer,  but  must 
remain,  and  abide  the  consequences. 

The  following  night  passed  with- 
out any  disturbance.  The  next  day 
at  noon,  three  leading  citizens  of 
Charleston,  two  of  them  eminent 
lawyers,  and  the  third  a  president  of 
one  of  the  city  banks,  called  on  Mr. 
H.  for  the  first  time,  and  gave  their 
names,  saying  they  had  come  to  see 
if  they  could  not  induce  him  to  leave 
the  city.  After  the  usual  appeals  on 
the  one  side  and  replies  on  the  other 
had  consumed  half  an  hour,  the  bank 
president  gave  Mr.  H.  notice  that  a 
number  of  gentlemen  would  call  on 
him  at  two  o'clock  and  conduct  him 
to  the  boat.  Mr.  H.  responded  that 
he  would  be  found  there ;  that  he  did 
not  propose  to  fight  a  whole  city,  and 
was  too  old  to  run,  so  that  they  could 
do  with  him  as  they  thought  proper. 
He  added  that  he  had  a  daughter 
with  him ;  on  which  the  bank  presi- 
dent observed,  "  It  is  that  which  cre- 
ates [or  created]  our  embarrassment." 
They  left  him  about  one  o'clock. 

Mr.  H.  and  his  daughter  now  pre- 
pared for  their  departure,  and  waited 
from  two  till  three  o'clock,  but  no 
one  came.  He  afterward  learned 
that  an  accident  had  prevented  the 
arrival  of  the  boat  at  the  usual  hour. 
The  next  day  at  noon,  Dr.  Whitredge 
called  and  informed  Mr.  H.  that  the 
keeper  of  the  hotel  had  requested 
the  city  government  to  take  measures 
to  remove  Mr.  H.  from  his  house,  in 
order  to  preserve  it  from  the  impend- 
ing danger.  He  had  never  intimated 
such  a  request  to  Mr.  Hoar,  nor  any- 
thing approaching  it.  But  the  fact 
that  his  host  wished  to  get  rid  of  him, 
and  that  he  could  find  no  other  lodg- 


ing without  exposing  whoever  shel- 
tered him  to  annoyance,  if  not  peril, 
created  a  fresh  embarrassment.  At 
this  moment,  a  waiter  informed  Mr. 
Hoar  that  some  gentlemen  wished  to 
see  him  in  the  hall.  He  descended, 
and  found  there  the  bank-president 
and  his  associates  surrounded  by  a 
considerable  bevy,  with  an  assem- 
blage about  the  door,  on  the  piazza, 
and  in  the  street,  where  a  number  of 
carriages  were  in  waiting.  The  presi- 
dent announced  that  they  were  there 
to  conduct  him  to  the  boat.  Mr. 
Hoar  now  stated  that  there  was  a  re- 
port in  circulation  that  he  had  con- 
sented to  leave  the  city,  which  was 
not  true.  If  he  left,  it  would  be  not 
because  he  would,  but  because  he 
must.  The  bank-president  remarked 
that  there  was  a  misunderstanding ; 
that  he  had  understood  that  Mr. 
Hoar  had  consented  to  leave  for 
the  sake  of  preserving  [or  restoring] 
the  peace  of  the  city  ;  but  that,  if  he 
refused,  they  had  no  power  to  order 
him  away ;  all  they  could  do  was  to 
warn  him  of  the  consequences  of  re- 
maining. Mr.  II.  repeated  his  lan- 
guage at  the  preceding  interview, 
which  the  president  did  not  deny  to 
be  accurate,  but  said  that  he  had 
understood  Mr.  H.  as  consenting  to 
leave. 

Hereupon,  several  of  the  party  uni- 
ted in  urging  his  departure  at  once, 
saying  it  was  impossible  that  he 
should  remain,  and  that  the  purpose 
of  his  mission  could  not  be  effected. 
Among  these,  were  two  to  whom 
he  had  been  specially  commended. 
Finding  that  he  had  but  the  choice 
between  walking  to  the  carriage  and 
being  dragged  to  it,  Mr.  Hoar  paid 
his  bill  at  the  hotel,  called  down  his 
daughter  from  her  room,  and  en- 


ANNEXATION  CONSU 


M  M  ATE  D  BY  TEXAS. 


185 


tered  with  her  the  carriage  pointed 
out  to  him,  and  one  of  the  crowd  or- 
dered the  coachman  to  drive  on.  He 
was  thus  taken  to  the  boat,  which 
was  very  soon  bearing  him  on  his 
homeward  way.  Mr.  Hoar,  in  closing 
the  official  report  of  his  visit  to  and 
expulsion  from  South  Carolina,  asked 
the  following  portentous  questions : 

"  Has  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
the  least  practical  validity  or  binding  force 
in  South  Carolina,  except  where  she  thinks 
its  operation  favorable  to  her  ?  She  prohib- 
its the  trial  of  an  action  in  the  tribunals 
established  under  the  Constitution  for  deter- 
mining such  cases,  in  which  a  citizen  of 
Massachusetts  complains  that  a  citizen  of 
South  Carolina  had  done  him  an  injury; 
saying  that  she  has  herself  already  tried 
that  cause,  and  decided  against  the  plain- 
tiff. She  prohibits,  not  only  by  her  mobs, 
but  by  her  Legislature,  the  residence  of  a 
free  white  citizen  of  Massachusetts  within 
the  limits  of  South  Carolina,  whenever  she 
thinks  his  presence  there  inconsistent  with 
her  policy.  Are  the  other  States  of  the 
Union  to  be  regarded  as  the  conquered 
provinces  of  South  Carolina?" 

Such  was  the  manner  in  which  South 
Carolina,  with  the  hearty  approval  of 
her  slaveholding  sisters,  received 
and  repelled  the  attempt  of  Mas- 
sachusetts to  determine  and  enforce 


the  rights,  while  protecting  the  lib- 
erties, of  her  free  citizens,  as  guaran- 
teed by  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States.  Massachusetts  proposed  no 
appeal  to  her  own  courts,  no  reliance 
on  her  own  views  of  constitutional 
right  and  duty,  but  an  arbitration 
before,  and  a  judgment  by,  the  tri- 
bunals of  the  Union,  specially  cloth- 
ed by  our  Federal  pact  with  juris- 
diction over  "all  cases  in  law  and 
equity  arising  under  this  Constitu- 
tion." Here  was  the  precise  case 
meditated — a  complaint  by  one  State 
that  the  rights  and  liberties  of  her 
citizens  were  subverted  by  the  legis- 
lation of  a  sister  State  ;  here  was  the 
tribunal  created  by  the  Constitution 
for  the  trial  of  such  issues.  South 
Carolina  repudiated  its  jurisdiction, 
as  she  had  previously,  with  regard  to 
the  Tariff,  repudiated .  the  authority 
of  Congress,  or  any  other  that  should 
contravene  her  own  sovereign  will. 
When  we  are  told  that  the  North 
failed,  some  years  later,  to  evince  suf- 
ficient alacrity  in  slave-catching,  let 
these  facts  be  freshly  remembered. 


XIV. 

THE  WILMOT  PROVISO. 


Mr.  Polk  succeeded  Mr.  Tyler  as 
President  of  the  United  States, 
March  4,  1845.  No  change  in  the 
policy  of  the  former  with  regard  to 
Annexation  was  made,  or,  with  rea- 
son, expected.  The  agent  so  hastily 
dispatched  to  Texas  by  Mr.  Tyler  to 
speed  the  consummation  of  the  de- 
creed union,  was  not,  of  course, 
recalled.    The  new  President  was 


doubtless  gratified  to  find  his  pre- 
destined work,  in  which  he  had  ex- 
pected to  encounter  some  impedi- 
ments at  the  hands  of  Northern 
members  of  his  own  party,  so  nearly 
completed  to  his  hand.  On  the  18th 
of  June,  joint  resolutions,  giving 
their  final  consent  to  Annexation, 
passed  both  Houses  of  the  Congress 
of  Texas  by  a  unanimous  vote ;  and 


186  THE  AMERICA 

tins  action  was  ratified  by  a  Conven- 
tion of  the  People  of  Texas  on  the 
ensuing  4th  of  July. 

The  XXIXth  Congress  met  at 
"Washington  December  1,  1845,  with 
a  strong  Democratic  majority  in 
either  branch.  John  W.  Davis,  of 
Indiana,  was  chosen  Speaker  of  the 
House  by  120  votes  to  72  for  Samuel 
F.  Vinton  (Whig),  of  Ohio,  and  18 
scattering.  On  the  16th,  a  joint  re- 
solve, reported  on  the  10th  from  the 
Committee  on  Territories  by  Mr. 
Douglas,  of  Illinois,  formally  ad- 
mitting Texas  as  a  State  into  our 
Union,  was  carried  by  the  decisive 
vote  of  141  to  56.  The  Senate  con- 
curred, on  the  22d,  by  31  Yeas  to  13 
Nays. 

Thus  far,  the  confident  predictions 
of  War  with  Mexico,  as  a  necessary 
consequence  of  our  annexing  Texas, 
had  not  been  realized.  Technically 
and  legally,  we  might,  perhaps,  be 
said  to  have  been  at  war  ever  since 
we  had  determined  on  Annexation ; 
practically  and  in  fact,  we  were  not. 
No  belligerent  action  on  the  part  of 
Mexico  directly  followed  the  decisive 
step,  or  its  official  promulgation. 
Our  commerce  and  our  flag  were 
still  welcomed  in  the  Mexican  ports. 
The  disposable  portion  of  our  little 
army,  some  1,500  strong,  under  Gen. 
Zachary  Taylor,  commander  of  the 
Southwestern  department,  in  obe- 
dience to  orders  from  Washington, 
embarked  (July,  1845)  at  New  Or- 

1  Hon.  Charles  J.  Ingersoll,  a  leading  Demo- 
cratic representative  in  Congress  from  Pennsyl- 
vania, and  a  zealous  Annexationist,  in  a  speech 
in  the  House,  January  3,  1845,  said: 

"  The  territorial  limits  are  marked  in  the  con- 
figuration of  this  continent  by  an  Almighty  hand. 
The  Platte,  the  Arkansas,  the  Red,  and  the 
Mississippi  Rivers  *  *  *  these  are  natur- 
ally our  waters,  with  their  estuaries  in  the  Bay 
of  Mexico.    The  stupendous  deserts  between 


N  CONFLICT. 

leans,  and  landed,  early  in  August, 
at  Corpus  Christi,  on  Aransas  Bay, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Nueces,  which 
was  the  extreme  western  limit  of 
Texan  occupation.1  The  correspond- 
ence between  the  Secretary  of  War 
(Gov.  Marcy)  and  Gen.  Taylor, 
which  preceded  and  inspired  this 
movement,  clearly  indicates  that  Mr. 
Polk  and  his  Cabinet  desired  Gen. 
Taylor  to  debark  at,  occupy,  and 
hold,  the  east  bank  of  the  Rio 
Grande,  though  they  shrank  from 
the  responsibility  of  giving  an  order 
to  that  effect,  hoping  that  Gen.  Tay- 
lor would  take  a  hint,  as  Gen.  Jackson 
was  accustomed  to  do  in  his  Florida 
operations,  and  do  what  was  desired 
in  such  manner  as  would  enable  the 
Government  to  disavow  him,  and 
evade  the  responsibility  of  his  course. 
Gen.  Taylor,  however,  demanded  ex- 
plicit instructions,  and,  being  there- 
upon directed  to  take  position  so  as 
to  be  prepared  to  defend  the  soil  of 
our  new  acquisition  "to  the  extent 
that  it  had  been  occupied  by  the  peo- 
ple of  Texas,"  he  stopped  at  the 
Nueces,  as  aforesaid.  Here,  though 
no  hostilities  were  offered  or  threat- 
ened, 2,500  more  troops  were  sent 
him  in  November.  Official  hints 
and  innuendoes  that  he  was  expected 
to  advance  to  the  Rio  Grande  con- 
tinued to  reach  hirn,  but  he  disre- 
garded them  ;  and  at  length,  about 
the  1st  of  March,  he  received  positive 
orders  from  the  President  to  ad- 

the  Nueces  and  the  Bravo  rivers,  are  the  natural 
boundaries  between  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  the 
Mauritanian  races.  There  ends  the  valley  of 
the  West.  There  Mexico  begins.  *  *  *  Wo 
ought  to  stop  there,  because  interminable  con- 
flicts must  ensue,  either  on  our  going  South  or 
their  coming  North  of  that  gigantic  boundary. 
While  peace  is  cherished,  that  boundary  will  be 
kept  sacred.  Not  till  the  spirit  of  conquest 
rages,  will  the  people  on  either  side"  molest  or 
mix  with  each  other." 


VAR  "WITH  MEXICO  BEGUN. 


187 


vance.  He  accordingly  put  his  col-  I 
umn  in  motion  on  the  8th  of  that  , 
month,  crossing  the  arid  waste,  over 
one  hundred  miles  wide,  that  stretch- 
es south-westward  nearly  to  the  Rio 
Grande,  and  reached  the  bank  of  that 
river,  opposite  Matamoras,  on  the 
28th.  Here 2  he  erected  Fort  Brown, 
commanding  Matamoras — the  Mexi- 
cans, under  Ampudia,  being  at  the 
same  time  engaged  in  throwing  up 
batteries  on  their  side.  These  being 
completed,  Ampudia  (April  12th)  ad- 
dressed Gen.  Taylor,  requiring  him 
to  return  to  the  Nueces  forthwith, 
there  to  remain  k>  while  our  Govern- 
ments are  regulating  the  pending 
question  relative  to  Texas ;"  with  a 
warning  that  his  refusal  would  be 
regarded  by  Mexico  as  a  declaration 
of  war.  Gen.  Taylor  courteously  re- 
plied that  he  was  acting  under  instruc- 
tions that  were  incompatible  with  the 
Mexican's  requirement.  Ampudia 
was  soon  after  superseded  by  Arista, 
who,  early  in  May,  crossed  the  Rio 
Grande  at  the  head  of  6,000  men, 
and,  on  the  8th,  attacked  Gen.  Tay- 
lor's 2,300  at  Palo  Alto,  and  was 
badly  defeated.  Retreating  to  a 
strong  position  at  Resaca  de  la  Pal- 
ma,  a  few  miles  distant,  he  was  there 
attacked  next  day  by  Gen.  Taylor, 
who  routed  his  forces,  after  a  sharp 
conflict,  and  drove  them  in  disorder 
across  the  river.  The  Mexican  loss 
in  these  two  affairs  was  1,000  men, 
with  eight  guns,  and  a  large  amount 
of  baggage.  The  undisturbed  posses- 
sion of  the  entire  left  bank  of  the 

2  The  following  is  extracted  from  a  letter 
■written  by  one  of  our  officers,  soon  after  Gen. 
Taylor's  arrival  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  before 
the  outbreak  of  actual  hostilities : 

"  Camp  opposite  Matamoras,  April  19,  1846. 

"Our  situation  here  is  an  extraordinary  one. 
Right  in  the  enemy's  country,  actually  occupy- 
ing their  corn  and  cotton  fields,  the  people  of 


I  Rio  Grande  was  among  the  "  spoils 
of  victory." 

President  Polk  (May  11th)  commu- 
nicated some  of  these  facts  to  Con- 
gress in  a  Special  Message,  where- 
in he  averred  that  the  Mexicans 
had  "  at  last  invaded  our  territory r, 
and  shed  the  blood  of  our  fellow-citi- 
zens on  our  own  soiV  Congress, 
two  days  afterward,  responded,  by 
!  the  passage  of  an  act,  calling  out 
50,000  volunteers,  and  appropriating 
$10,000,000  for  the  prosecution 
of  the  struggle  thus  begun,  with  a 
preamble,  running, 

u  Whereas,  by  the  act  of  the  Republic  of 
Mexico,  a  state  of  war  exists  between  that 
Government  and  the  United  States,  Be  it 
enacted,"  etc. 

Only  11  votes  in  the  House,  and 
2  in  the  Senate  were  cast  against  this 
bill,  though  several  members  (among 
them  Mr.  Calhoun)  refused  to  vote 
on  it  at  all ;  and  a  motion  in  the 
House  to  strike  out  the  preamble 
was  sustained  by  nearly  every  mem- 
ber elected  as  a  Whig. 

Congress  remained  in  session  till 
the  10th  of  August ;  before  which 
time,  it  had  become  evident  that 
Mexico,  distracted  and  enfeebled  by 
so  many  revolutions,  could  make  no 
effective  resistance  to  the  progress 
of  our  arms.  President  Polk,  not 
without  reason,  believed  that  a  treaty 
of  peace  might  be  negotiated  with 
her  rickety  government,  whereby,  on 
the  payment  of  a  sum  of  money  on 
our  part,  not  only  the  boundary  of 
the  Rio  Grande,  but  a  very  consider- 

the  soil  leaving  their  homes,  and  we,  with  a 
small  handful  of  men,  marching  with  colors  fly- 
ing, and  drums  beating,  right  under  the  very 
guns  of  one  of  their  principal  cities,  displaying 
the  star-spangled  banner,  as  if  in  defiance,  un- 
der their  very  nose,  and  they,  with  an  army 
twice  our  size,  at  least,  sit  quietly  down,  and 
make  not  the  least  resistance, not  the  first  effort  to 
drive  the  invaders  off.  There  is  no  parallel  to  it." 


188 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


able  acquisition  of  hitherto  Mexican 
territory  beyond  that  river,  might  be 
secured.  He  accordingly  (August  8) 
sent  a  Special  Message  to  Congress, 
asking  that  a  considerable  sum'  be 
placed  at  his  disposal  for  these  pur- 
poses. A  bill  was  immediately  re- 
ported and  considered  in  Committee 
of  the  Whole,  making  appropriations 
of  $30,000  for  expenses  of  negotia- 
tions, and  $2,000,000,  to  be  used  at 
the  discretion  of  the  President,  in 
making  such  a  treaty.  This  bill 
seemed  on  the  point  of  passing 
through  all  its  stages  without  serious 
opposition. 

But  what  should  be  the  Social  or 
Labor  system  of  the  territories  about 
to  be  acquired  ?  This  question  could 
be  no  longer  postponed  nor  evaded. 
Hitherto,  Slavery  had  entered  upon 
each  succeeding  struggle  for  a  new 
territory  with  the  great  advantage  of 
prior  possession.  Virginia,  which 
claimed  the  ownership  of  most  of  the 
territory  North-west  of  the  Ohio, 
and  between  that  river  and  the  Mis- 
sissippi, was  a  Slave  State,  and  her 
outlying  territories,  it  might  fairly  be 
argued,  inherited  her  domestic  insti- 
tutions; Alabama  and  Mississippi 
were,  in  like  manner,  constructively 
slaveholding  at  the  outset,  by  virtue 
of  the  laws  of  North  Carolina  and 
Georgia,  from  which  States  they 
were  cut  off.  Louisiana  (including 
Missouri)  had  come  to  us  slavehold- 
ing from  France;  so  had  Florida 
from  Spain ;  while  Texas  had  been 
colonized  and  revolutionized  mainly 
by  Southerners,  who  imprinted  on  her 
their  darling  "  institution"  before  we 
had  any  voice  in  the  matter.  In  the 
case  of  each,  it  had  been  plausibly 
and  successfully  contended  that  their 
Slavery  was  no  concern  of  ours — 


that  it  was  established  and  legalized 
before  we  were  empowered  to  speak 
in  the  matter,  and  must  be  upheld 
until  those  more  immediately  inter- 
ested should  see  fit  to  abolish  it. 
This  consideration  had  prevailed 
even  in  the  recent  instance  of  Texas, 
where  all  partition  had  been  refused, 
all  real  compromise  scouted,  on  the 
assumption  that  Slavery  was  already 
in  possession,  and  did  not  care  to  di- 
vide what  was  wholly  its  own. 

The  case  was  now  decidedly  alter- 
ed. Mexico  had  utterly  abolished 
Slavery  some  twenty  years  before ; 
and  every  acre  that  she  should  cede 
to  us  beyond  the  Eio  Grande  would 
come  to  us  free  soil.  Should  it  so 
remain,  or  be  surrendered  to  the 
domination  and  uses  of  Slavery  ?  It 
was  well  known  that  Mr.  Calhoun 
had  elaborated  a  new  dogma  adapt- 
ed to  the  exigency,  whereby  the  Fed- 
eral Constitution  was  held  to  carry 
Slavery  into  every  rood  of  Federal 
territory  whence  it  was  not  excluded 
by  positive  law.  In  other  words, 
every  citizen  of  any  State  had  a  con- 
stitutional right  to  migrate  into  any 
territory  of  the  Union,  carrying  with 
him  whatever  the  law  of  his  own 
State  recognized  as  property ;  and 
this  must,  therefore,  be  guarded  and 
defended  as  his  property  by  the  Fed- 
eral authorities  of  and  within  said  ter- 
ritory. Should  this  view  not  be  pre- 
cluded by  some  decided  protest,  some 
positive  action,  it  was  morally  cer- 
tain that  President  Polk,  with  every 
successor  of  like  faith,  would  adopt 
it,  and  that  the  vast  and,  as  yet, 
nearly  unpeopled  regions  about  to 
be  acquired  from  Mexico  would  thus 
be  added  to  the  already  spacious  do- 
minions of  the  Slave  Power. 

There  was  a  hasty  consultation,  in 


ORIGIN  OP    THE  WILMOT  PROVISO. 


189 


default  of  time  or  opportunity  for 
one  more  deliberate,  among  those 
Democratic  members  from  Free 
States  who  felt  that  the  extreme 
limit  of  justifiable  or  tolerable  con- 
cession to  Slavery  had  already  been 
reached ;  wherein  Messrs.  Hamlin, 
of  Maine,  George  Rathbun,  Martin 
Grover  and  Preston  King,  of  New 
York,  David  Wilmot,  of  Pennsylva- 
nia, Jacob  Brinckerhoff  and  James 
J.  Faran,  of  Ohio,  McClelland,  of 
Michigan,  and  others,  took  part ;  as 
the  result  of  which,  Mr.  Wilmot 
moved  to  add  to  the  first  section 
of  the  bill  the  following : 

"Provided,  That,  as  an  express  and  funda- 
mental condition  to  the  acquisition  of  any 
territory  from  the  Republic  of  Mexico  by  the 
United  States,  by  virtue  of  any  treaty  that 
may  be  negotiated  between  them,  and  to 
the  use  by  the  Executive  of  the  moneys 
herein  appropriated,  neither  Slavery  nor  in- 
voluntary servitude  shall  ever  exist  in  any 
part  of  said  territory,  except  for  crime, 
whereof  the  party  shall  first  be  duly  con- 
victed." 

This  Proviso  was  adopted  in  Com- 
mittee by  80  Ays  to  64  Noes  —  only 
three  members  (Democrats),  it  was 
said,  from  the  Free  States,  passing 
through  the  tellers  in  response  to  the 
call  for  the  Noes.  The  bill  was 
thereupon  reported  to  the  House ; 
and  Mr.  Kathbun,  of  New  York, 
moved  the  Previous  Question  on  its 
engrossment  (so  as  to  preclude  a  mo- 
tion to  strike  out  this  Proviso).  This 
was  met  by  Mr.  Tibbatts,  of  Ken- 
tucky, with  a  motion  that  the  bill  do  lie 
on  the  table — in  other  words,  that  the 
original  measure,  but  a  moment  since 
deemed  so  vital,  be  voted  down,  in 
order  to  kill  the  Proviso.  This  was 
defeated  on  a  call  of  the  Yeas  and 
Nays — all  the  members  from  Slave 
States  but  Messrs.  William  P.  Thom- 


asson  and  Henry  Grider  (Whigs),  of 
Kentucky,  voting  to  lay  on  the  table, 
with  Messrs.  John  Pettit,  of  Indiana, 
and  Stephen  A.  Douglas,  John  A. 
McClernand  (Democrats),  of  Illinois, 
and  Eobert  C.  Schenck  (Whig),  of 
Ohio,  making  79;  while  the  Yeas 
(comprising  all  the  Whigs  but  one, 
and  nearly  all  the  Democrats  from 
Free  States,  with  the  two  Kentucky 
Whigs  aforesaid),  were  93.  The  bill 
was  thereupon  ordered  to  be  engross- 
ed for  a  third  reading  by  85  Yeas  to 
80  Nays,  passed,  and  sent  to  the 
Senate,  then  in  the  last  hours  of  the 
session.  On  its  being  taken  up,  Mr. 
Dixon  H.  Lewis,  of  Alabama  (a  close 
adherent  of  Mr.  Calhoun),  moved 
that  the  Proviso  aforesaid  be  strick- 
en out ;  whereupon  Mr.  John  Davis 
(Whig),  of  Massachusetts,  rose  to  de- 
bate, and  persisted  in  speaking,  as 
though  against  time,  until  noon, 
which  had  been  concurrently  fixed 
as  the  hour  of  adjournment ;  so  the 
session  terminated,  and  the  bill  and 
proviso  failed  together.  It  is  prob- 
able that  President  Polk  would  have 
vetoed  the  bill,  because  of  the  Proviso, 
had  they  then  passed. 

Mr.  Davis  died3  not  many  years 
afterward,  and  no  explanation  of  his 
course  in  this  instance  was  ever  given 
to  the  public.  He  may  have  desired 
only  to  defeat  some  obnoxious  meas- 
ure which  would  have  come  up  and 
which  would  probably  have  passed  if 
this  bill  had  been  promptly  disposed 
of.  It  is  certain  that  Gen.  Cass,  then 
a  Senator,  complained,  on  his  home- 
ward journey,  of  Mr.  Davis  having 
defeated  a  measure  which  should  have 
been  passed,  so  as  to  preclude  all  fur- 
ther controversy  with  regard  to  the 
Extension  of  Slavery. 


3  At  Worcester,  Mass.,  April  19th,  1854. 


190 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


More  than  a  year  thereafter,  with  a 
Baltimore  Convention  and  a  Presiden- 
tial election  in  immediate  prospect, 
Gen.  Cass  was  interrogated  by  Mr. 
A.  O.  P.  Nicholson,  of  Tennessee, 
with  regard  to  his  opinion  of  the 
Wilmot  Proviso.  In  his  reply,4  Gen. 
C.  says  . 

"  The  Wilmot  Proviso  has  been  before  the 
country  for  some  time.  It  has  been  repeat- 
edly discussed  in  Congress  and  by  the  public 
press.  I  am  strongly  impressed  with  the 
opinion  that  a  great  change  has  been  going 
on  in  the  public  mind  upon  this  subject,  in 
my  own  as  well  as  others,  and  that  doubts  are 
resolving  themselves  into  convictions,  that 
the  principle  it  involves  should  be  kept  out 
of  the  National  Legislature,  and  left  to  the 
people  of  the  confederacy  in  their  respective 
local  governments." 

This  letter  is  notable  as  the  first 
clear  enunciation  of  the  doctrine 
termed  Popular  (otherwise  squatter) 
Sovereignty — that  is,  of  the  lack  of 
legitimate  power  in  the  Federal 
Government  to  exclude  Slavery  from 
its  territories.  Gen.  Cass's  position 
was  thoroughly  canvassed,  six  months 
after  it  was  taken,  in  a  letter5  from 
Martin  Yan  Buren  to  N.  J.  Water- 
bury  and  other  Free  Soil  Democrats 
of  his  State,  wherein  he  said  : 

"  The  power,  the  existence  of  which  is  at 
this  late  day  denied,  is,  in  my  opinion,  fully 
granted  to  Congress  by  the  Constitution. 
Its  language,  the  circumstances  under  which 
it  was  adopted,  the  recorded  explanations 
which  accompanied  its  formation — the  con- 
struction it  has  received  from  our  highest 
judicial  tribunals,  and  the  very  solemn  and 
repeated  confirmations  it  has  derived  from 
the  measures  of  the  Government — leave  not 
the  shadow  of  a  doubt  in  my  mind  in  re- 
gard to  the  authority  of  Congress  to  exer- 
cise the  power  in  question.  This  is  not  a 
new  opinion  on  my  part,  nor  the  first  oc- 
casion on  which  it  has  been  avowed.  While 
the  candidate  of  my  friends  for  the  Presi- 
dency, I  distinctly  announced  my  opinion 
in  favor  of  the  power  of  Congress  to  abolish 
Slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  al- 
though I  was,  for  reasons  which  were  then, 

4  Dated  Washington,  December  24,  1847. 
6  Dated  Lindenwald,  June  20,  1848. 


and  are  still,  satisfactory  to  my  mind,  very 
decidedly  opposed  to  its  exercise  there. 
The  question  of  power  is  certainly  as  clear 
in  respect  to  the  Territories  as  it  is  in  re- 
gard to  the  District ;  and,  as  to  the  Terri* 
tories,  my  opinion  was  also  made  known  in 
a  still  more  solemn  form,  by  giving  the 
Executive  approval  required  by  the  Consti- 
tution to  the  bill  for  the  organization  of 
the  Territorial  Government  of  Iowa,  which 
prohibited  the  introduction  of  Slavery  into 
that  Territory." 

The  XXXth  Congress  assembled 
December  6th,  1847,  when  Robert 
C.  Winthrop  (Whig),  of  Massachu- 
setts, was  chosen  Speaker  of  the 
House  by  a  majority  of  one;  and,  on 
the  28th  of  February  ensuing,  Mr. 
Harvey  Putnam,  of  Is" ew  York,  hav- 
ing moved  an  independent  resolve 
embodying  the  substance  of  the  Wil- 
mot Proviso,  Mr.  Richard  Brodhead, 
of  Pennsylvania,  moved  that  the 
same  do  lie  on  the  table,  which  pre- 
vailed— Yeas  105,  Nays  93 — twenty- 
five  Democrats  and  one  '  Native'  (L. 
C.  Levin)  from  the  Free  States 
voting  with  the  entire  South  to  lay 
on  the  table  ;  all  the  Whigs  and  a 
large  majority  of  the  Democrats 
from  Free  States  against  it. 

Peace  with  Mexico  having  been 
made,6  a  bill  providing  a  Territorial 
Government  for  Oregon  being  be- 
fore Congress  at  this  session,  and 
referred  in  the  Senate  to  a  Select 
Committee,  Mr.  John  M.  Clayton, 
of  Delaware,  from  that  Committee, 
reported  it  with  amendments  estab- 
lishing Territorial  Governments  also 
for  New  Mexico  and  California.  An 
original  feature  of  this  bill  was  a 
proposition  embodied  therein  that  all 
questions  concerning  Slavery  in  those 
Territories  be  referred  directly  to 
the  arbitration  of  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  United  States.    This  measure 

e  By  the  treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  Feb- 
ruary, 1848. 


THE  DEMOCRATIC  CO 


NYENTIONS  OF  1  848. 


191 


passed  the  Senate  by  the  strong  vote 
of  33  Yeas  to  22  Nays— all  from 
Free  States — but,  on  its  reaching  the 
House,  Mr.  Alex.  H.  Stephens,  of 
Georgia,  moved  that  it  do  lie  on  the 
table,  which  prevailed;  Yeas  112 
(30  of  them  Democrats  from  Free 
States ;  8  Whigs  from  Slave  States ; 
and  74  Whigs  from  Free  States) ; 
Nays  97 ;  (21  Democrats  from  Free 
States,  with  all  the  Democrats,  and 
all  but  8,  as  aforesaid,  of  the  Whigs, 
from  Slave  States).  As  the  Court 
was  then  constituted,  there  was  little 
room  for  doubt  that  its  award  would 
have  been  favorable  to  Slavery  Ex- 
tension ;  hence  this  vote.  Mr.  Clay- 
ton's Compromise,  thus  defeated,  was 
never  revived. 

The  Democratic  National  Conven- 
tion for  1848  assembled  at  Baltimore 
on  the  22d  of  May.  Gen.  Lewis 
Cass,  of  Michigan,  received  125 
votes  for  President  on  the  first  bal- 
lot, to  55  for  James  Buchanan,  53 
for  Levi  Woodbury,  9  for  John  C. 
Calhoun,  6  for  Gen.  Worth,  and  3 
for  Geo.  M.  Dallas.  On  the  fourth 
ballot,  Gen.  Cass  had  179  to  75  for 
all  others,  and  was  declared  nomi- 
nated. Gen.  William  0.  Butler, 
of  Kentucky,  received  114  votes  for 
Yice-President  on  the  first  ballot, 
and  was  unanimously  nominated  on 
the  third.  Two  delegations  from 
New  York  presenting  themselves  to 
this  Convention — that  of  the  Free 
S oilers,  Radicals,  or  "  Barnburners," 
whose  leader  was  Samuel  Young, 
and  that  of  the  Conservatives  or 
"  Hunkers,"  whose  chief  was  Daniel 
S.  Dickinson — the  Convention  at- 
tempted to  split  the  difference  by 
admitting  both,  and  giving  each 


half  the  vote  to  which  the  State  was 
entitled.  This  the  "  Barnburners" 
rejected,  leaving  the  Convention  and 
refusing  to  be  bound  by  its  con- 
clusions. The  great  body  of  them 
heartily  united  in  the  Free  Soil 
movement,  which  culminated  in  a 
National  Convention  at  Buffalo,7 
whereby  Martin"  Van  Burex  was 
nominated  for  President,  with 
Charles  Francis  Adams,  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, for  Yice-President. 

The  regular  Democratic  or  Cass 
and  Butler  Convention  reiterated 
most  of  the  resolves  of  its  two  prede- 
cessors, adding  two  or  three  in  com- 
mendation of  the  War  with  Mexico ; 
warmly  congratulated  France  on  her 
recent  return  to  a  republican  form 
of  government,  and  ambiguously  in- 
dorsed the  new  Popular  Sovereignty 
discovery  as  follows : 

"Resolved,  That  in  the  recent  develop- 
ment of  this  grand  political  truth,  of  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people  and  their  capacity 
for  self-government,  which  is  prostrating 
thrones  and  erecting  republics  on  the  ruins 
of  despotism  in  the  Old  World,  we  feel 
that  a  high  and  sacred  duty  is  devolved, 
with  increased  responsibility,  upon  the 
Democratic  party  of  this  country,  as  the 
party  of  the  People,  to  sustain  and  advance 
among  us  Constitutional  Liberty,  Equality 
and  Fraternity,  by  continuing  to  resist  all 
monopolies  and  exclusive  legislation  for  the 
benefit  of  the  few  at  the  expense  of  the 
many,  and  by  a  vigilant  and  consistent  ad- 
herence to  those  principles  and  compro- 
mises of  the  Constitution  which  are  broad 
enough  and  strong  enough  to  embrace  and 
uphold  the  Union  as  it  was,  as  it  is,  and  the 
Union  as  it  shall  be,  in  the  full  expansion 
of  the  energies  and  capacity  of  this  great  and 
progressive  people." 

At  this  Convention,  the  Calhoun 
or  extreme  Southern  dogma  of  the 
constitutional  right  of  each  slave- 
holder to  remove  with  his  slaves 
into  any  Federal  Territory,  and  hold 
them  there  in  defiance  of  Congress 


'August 


9,  1348. 


192 


T II E  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


or  any  local  authority,  was  submit- 
ted by  Mr.  William  L.  Yancey,  of 
Alabama,  in  the  following  guise : 

"Resolved,  That  the  doctrine  of  non- 
interference with  the  rights  of  property  of 
any  portion  of  the  people  of  this  confed- 
eracy, be  it  in  the  States  or  Territories 
thereof,  by  any  other  than  the  parties  in- 
terested in  them,  is  the  true  Kepublican 
doctrine  recognized  by  this  body." 

The  party  was  not  yet  ready  for 
such  strong  meat,  aud  this  resolve 
was  rejected  :  Nays  21G  ;  Yeas  36 — 
South  Carolina  9 ;  Alabama  9 ; 
Georgia  9  ;  Arkansas  3  ;  Florida  3 ; 
Maryland  1;  Kentucky  1;  Tennes- 
see 1. 

The  Whig  National  Convention 
assembled  in  Philadelphia,  June  7th. 
Gen.  Zachaey  Taylor,  of  Louis- 
iana, had  on  the  first  ballot  111 
votes  for  President  to  97  for  Henry 
Clay,  43  for  General  Scott,  22  for 
Mr.  Webster,  and  6  scattering.  On 
the  fourth  ballot  (next  day),  Gen. 
Taylor  had  171  to  107  for  all  others, 
and  was  declared  nominated.  Mil- 
lard Fillmore,  of  New  York,  had 
115  votes  for  Yice-President,  on  the 
first  ballot,  to  109  for  Abbott  Law- 
rence, of  Massachusetts,  and  50  scat- 
tering. On  the  second  ballot,  Mr. 
Fillmore  had  173,  and  was  nomi- 
nated. No  resolves  affirming  dis- 
tinctive principles  were  passed;  re- 
peated efforts  to  interpose  one 
affirming  the  principle  of  the  "Wil- 
mot  Proviso  being  met  by  success- 
ful motions  to  lay  on  the  table. 

The  Buffalo  or  Free  Soil  Conven- 
tion was  as  frank  and  explicit  in  its 
declarat:  on  of  principles  as  its  more 
powerful  rivals  had  been  ambiguous 
or  reticent.  The  following  are  its 
most  material  averments : 


"  Resolved,  That  the  Proviso  of  J efferson, 
to  prohibit  the  existence  of  Slavery  after 
1800,  in  all  the  Territories  of  the  United 
States,  Southern  and  Northern;  the  votes 
of  six  States  and  sixteen  delegates,  in  the 
Congress  of  1784,  for  the  Proviso,  to  three 
States  and  seven  delegates  against  it;  the 
actual  exclusion  of  Slavery  from  the  North- 
western Territory,  by  the  Ordinance  of 
1787,  unanimously  adopted  by  the  States  in 
Congress ;  and  the  entire  history  of  that 
period,  clearly  show  that  it  was  the  policy 
of  the  Nation  not  to  extend,  nationalize,  or 
encourage,  but  to  limit,  localize,  and  dis- 
courage Slavery ;  and  to  this  policy,  which 
should  never  have  been  departed  from,  the 
Government  ought  to  return. 

"  Resolved,  That  our  fathers  ordained  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States,  in  order, 
among  other  great  National  objects,  to  'es- 
tablish justice,  promote  the  general  welfare, 
and  secure  the  blessings  of  liberty but  ex- 
pressly denied  to  the  Federal  Government, 
which  they  created,  all  constitutional  power 
to  deprive  any  person  of  life,  liberty,  or 
property,  without  due  legal  process. 

"Resolved,  That,  in  the  judgment  of  this 
Convention,  Congress  has  no  more  power  to 
make  a  slave  than  to  make  a  king ;  no  more 
power  to  institute  or  establish  Slavery,  than 
to  institute  or  establish  monarchy  :  no  such 
power  can  be  found  among  those  specifically 
conferred  by  the  Constitution,  or  derived 
by  just  implication  from  them. 

"Resolved,  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Federal  Government  to  relieve  itself  from 
all  responsibility  for  the  existence  or  con- 
tinuance of  Slavery,  wherever  the  Govern- 
ment possesses  constitutional  authority  to 
legislate  on  that  subject,  and  it  is  thus  re- 
sponsible for  its  existence. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  true,  and,  in  the 
judgment  of  this  Convention,  the  only  safe 
means  of  preventing  the  extension  of  Slavery 
into  territory  now  Free,  is  to  prohibit  its 
extension  in  all  such  territory  by  an  act  of 
Congress." 

In  the  event,  Gen.  Taylor  was 

chosen  President,  receiving  the  votes 

of  New  York,  Pennsylvania,  and 

thirteen  other  States,  choosing  163 

Electors.    The  strong  Free  Soil  vote 

for  Yan  Buren  ensured  to  Gen.  Cass 

the  votes  of  Ohio,  and  of  every  other 

State  North-west  of  the  Ohio,  most 

of  them  by  a  plurality  only  over 

Taylor.    Gen.  Cass  carried  fifteen 

States,  choosing  137  Electors.  Mr. 

Yan  Buren  carried  no  Electors,  but 


ROOT'S  INSTRUCTION— GOTT'S  RESOLUTION. 


193 


received  a  respectable  support  in 
every  Free  State,  Kho-de  Island  and 
Kew  Jersey  excepted.  New  York, 
Massachusetts,  and  Vermont,  each 
gave  a  larger  popular  vote  to  him 
than  to  Gen.  Cass;  Wisconsin  gave 
him  nearly  as  many  as  Gen.  Taylor. 
The  entire  popular  vote  (South  Caro- 
lina not  casting  any)  stood — Taylor 
and  Fillmore,  1,360,752;  Cass  and 
Butler,  1,219,902 ;  Yan  Buren  and 
Adams,  291,342.  Gen.  Taylor  had 
a  majority  of  the  Electoral  and  a 
plurality  of  the  Popular  vote,  both 
in  the  Free  and  in  the  Slave  States 
respectively. 


The  struggle  for  the  organization 
of  the  territories  was  resumed  in 
Congress  the  ensuing  Winter;  and, 
though  there  had  been  very  few 
changes  of  members,  there  had  been 
a  very  considerable  change  of  feeling 
on  the  part  of  a  great  many  Demo- 
crats from  Free  States.  They  indig- 
nantly felt  that,  by  the  vote  cast  for 
Gen.  Taylor  in  the  South,  the  ser- 
vices and  sacrifices  of  their  party  had 
been  ungratefully  requited.  That 
eight  of  the  fifteen  Slave  States 
should  cast  their  votes  for  the  "Whig 
candidate  for  President,  leaving  Vir- 
ginia, Alabama,  and  Mississippi  to 
be  carried  against  him  by  the  very 
leanest  majorities,  was  not  the  enter- 
tainment to  which  they  had  been  in- 
vited when  they  risked  their  ascend- 
ency at  home,  and  their  seats,  by 

8  The  members  from  Free  States  (all  Demo- 
crats), who  had  voted  at  the  last  session  to  lay 
the  Wilmot  Proviso  on  the  table,  and  who  now 
voted  for  the  principle  as  above,  were  as  follow: 

Maine.— Asa  W.  II.  Clapp,  James  S.  Wiley 
— 2.  New  York.  —  Frederick  W.  Lord — 1. 
Ohio. — Thomas  Richey — 1.  Indiana. — Charles 
W.  Cathcart,  Thomas  J.  Henley,  John  L.  Robin- 
Bon,  William  W.  Wick — L    Illinois.— Robert 

13 


voting  for  Gag-Rules,  and  against 
the  establishment  by  law  of  Freedom 
in  the  Territories.  Some  of  them 
were  permanently  alienated,  though 
the  far  greater  number  were  but  tem- 
porarily estranged,  from  the  councils 
of  their  Southern  chiefs.  But  the 
change  was  made  evident,  soon  after 
the  assembling  of  the  XXXth  Con- 
gress for  its  second  session,  when, 
(December  13,  1848),  on  motion  of 
Hon.  Joseph  M.  Hoot,  of  Ohio,  the 
House 

"Resolved,  That  the  Committee  on  Terri- 
tories be  instructed  to  report  to  this  House, 
with  as  little  delay  as  practicable,  a  bill  or 
bills  providing  a  territorial  government  for 
each  of  the  Territories  of  New  Mexico  and 
California,  and  excluding  Slavery  there- 
from." 

This  passed  by  Yeas  108,  includ- 
ing every  Whig,  and  all  but  eight  of 
the  Democrats8  from  Free  States; 
Nays  80 — all  from  the  Slave  States 
but  the  eight  aforesaid. 

A  further  evidence  of  the  altered 
feeling  of  the  House  was  afforded, 
when,  a  few  days  thereafter,  the  fol- 
lowing was,  during  the  morning 
hour,  moved  by  Mr.  Daniel  Gott,  of 
New  York : 

"Whereas,  the  traffic  now  prosecuted  in 
this  metropolis  of  the  Republic  in  human 
beings,  as  chattels,  is  contrary  to  natural 
justice,  and  the  fundamental  principles  of 
our  political  system,  is  notoriously  a  re- 
proach to  our  country  throughout  Christen- 
dom, and  a  serious  hindrance  to  the  pro>- 
gress  of  republican  liberty  among  the  na- 
tions of  the  earth  :  Therefore, 

"Resolved,  That  the  Committee  on  the 
District  of  Columbia  be  instructed  to  report 

Smith — I.  Messrs.  Clark  and  H.  Williams,  of 
Maine,  Birdsall  and  Maclay,  of  New  York, 
Brodhead  and  Mann,  of  Pennsylvania ;  Pettit, 
of  Indiana  ;  Ficklin  and  McClernand,  of  Illinois, 
who  voted  with  the  South  at  the  former  session 
— now  failed  to  vote.  Mr.  D.  S.  Jackson,  of  New 
York,  who  then  voted  with  the  South,  had  been 
succeeded  by  Mr.  H.  Greeley,,  who  voted  witlx 
the  North. 


194 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


a  bill,  as  soon  as  practicable,  prohibiting  the 
Slave-Trade  in  said  District.'1 

The  Previous  Question  having 
been  required  and  ordered,  this  reso- 
lution was  adopted  by  Yeas  98  to 
Nays  88.  Hereupon  there  was  a  call 
for  the  Southern  members  to  leave 
the  Hall,  and  various  demonstrations 
of  the  sort,  which  resulted  in  a  meet- 
ing of  members  from  the  Slave 
States  ;  which  resulted  in  an  address 
to  their  constituents,  drafted  and 
reported  by  Mr.  Calhoun  ;  which  re- 
sulted in  nothing.  The  House  Com- 
mittee on  the  District,  being  Pro- 
Slavery,  of  course  took  good  care  not 
to  report  as  instructed  above. 

The  Territorial  bill  for  California, 
foreshadowed  and  commended  by 
Mr.  Root's  resolve,  was  reported  by 
Caleb  B.  Smith,  of  Indiana,  on  the 
20th,  and  that  for  New  Mexico  fol- 
lowed on  the  3d  of  January,  1849. 
An  effort  (January  15),  by  Mr.  Ju- 
lius Rockwell,  of  Massachusetts,  to 
make  the  former  a  special  order,  fail- 
ed, lacking  a  two-thirds  vote,  but  re- 
ceived the  vote  of  nearly  every  mem- 
ber from  the  Free  States — 114  to  .71. 
The  bill  was  finally  taken  out  of  Com- 
mittee of  the  Whole  on  the  2Gth  of 
February,  and  engrossed  for  a  third 
reading  next  day;  when  Mr.  R.  K. 
Meade,  of  Virginia,  moved  that  it  do 
lie  on  the  table,  which  was  decisive- 
ly negatived  ;  and  then  the  bill  pass- 
ed the  House  by  126  Yeas  to  87  Nays. 
Mr.  Aylett  Buckner  (Whig  of  Ken- 
tucky), who  had  made  a  forcible  and 
thorough-going  speech  in  favor  of  ex- 
cluding Slavery  from  the  Territories, 
voted  with  his  Whig  colleague,  Green 
Adams,  and  all  the  Whigs  and  all  but 
four 9  of  the  Democrats  from  the  Free 

9  Messrs.  Samuel  A.  Bridges  of  Pennsylvania, 
.and  "William  Kennon,  jr.,  John  K.  Miller,  and 


States,  in  the  affirmative  ;  while  all 
the  members  present  from  the  Slave 
States  but  Messrs.  Adams  and  Buck- 
ner voted  in  the  negative :  so  that  the 
House  divided  very  nearly  on  Mason 
and  Dixon's  line.  But  Mr.  Buckner 
paid  for  his  speech  and  vote  on  this 
occasion  with  his  seat.  He  had  suc- 
ceeded in  1847,  over  his  Democratic 
opponent,  by  386  majority ;  he  was 
thrown  out  in  1849  by  1140  majority. 
Mr.  Adams  did  not  stand  for  re-elec- 
tion. And  the  bill  thus  passed  was 
not  even  considered  in  the  Senate — 
a  motion  by  Mr.  Douglas  (February 
28),  that  it  be  taken  up  for  reference, 
having  been  promptly  voted  down  by 
28  Nays  to  25  Yeas. 

For  the  Pro-Slavery  majority  in 
that  Senate  had  already  resolved  on 
their  course,  and  it  did  not  lie  at  all 
in  this  direction.  They  believed  that 
their  opportunity  was  at  hand  ;  that 
the  more  especial  friends  of  the  in- 
coming Administration  were  anxious 
to  have  the  Slavery  question  settled 
— that  is,  the  opposition  to  Slavery 
Extension  defeated  or  withdrawn, 
that  being  the  way  such  questions 
were  usually  settled  —  in  order  to 
make  matters  smooth  and  pleasant 
for  the  powers  soon  to  be ;  and  they 
knew  that  the  irritation  of  the  North- 
ern Democrats  against  the  South  for 
giving  a  majority  of  its  votes  for  Gen. 
Taylor  as  against  Gen.  Cass  had  been 
gradually  dying  out  under  the  pres- 
sure of  social  influences  and  of  party 
necessities.  They  believed  that,  if  a 
proper  issue  were  made,  the  North- 
ern repugnance  to  the  organization 
of  the  Territories  in  profound  silence 
as  to  Slavery,  might  be  overcome. 
They  had,  therefore,  determined  to 

William  Sawyer,  of  Ohio.  Messrs.  Chaa.  Brown, 
Chas.  J.  Ingersoll,  and  other  such,  did  not  vote. 


FAILURE  TO   ORGANIZE   THE  TERRITORIES. 


195 


fasten  to  tlie  Civil  and  Diplomatic 
Appropriation  bill,  a  "  rider,"  organ- 
izing the  new  Territories  with  no 
restriction  on  or  impediment  to  the 
introduction  of  Slavery,  calculating 
that  a  sufficient  number  of  the  North- 
ern friends  of  the  Administration 
would  permit  this  to  pass  rather  than 
see  the  Government  crippled  and  the 
President  constrained  to  call  an  extra 
session  of  Congress — always  a  portent 
of  evil  to  the  party  in  power.  Ac- 
cordingly, the  great  Appropriation 
bill  having  passed  the  House,  and 
been  reported  to  and  several  days 
debated  in  the  Senate,  Mr.  Walker, 
of  Wisconsin,  moved  to  add  a  section 
extending  the  laws  of  the  United 
States  over  "  the  territory  west  of 
the  Rio  del  Norte,  acquired  from 
Mexico  by  the  treaty  of  February 
22,  1848,"  and  authorizing  the  Presi- 
dent to  "prescribe  and  establish  all 
proper  and  needful  regulations  for 
the  enforcement"  of  the  Constitution 
and  laws  in  said  Territory ;  as  also 
"  to  appoint  and  commission  such 
officers  as  may  be  necessary  to  ad- 
minister such  laws,"  etc.,  etc.  This 
passed  the  Senate  by  29  Yeas10  to  27 
Nays;  but  the  bill  being  thus  re- 
turned to  the  House,  the  Senate's 
'amendment  was  there  (March  2)  re- 
jected :  Yeas  100  (thirteen  of  them 
from  Free  States)  to  Nays  114  (all 
from  Free  States).  The  bill  was  then 
returned  in  its  original  shape  to  the 
Senate.  The  Senate  insisted  on  its 
amendment,  and  asked  a  conference, 
which  was  granted,  but  nothing  came 
of  it.  The  Committee  reported  to 
either  House  its  inability  to  agree, 
and  was  discharged. 

Mr.  McClernand  (Democrat),  of 


Illinois,  now  moved  that  the  House 
recede  from  its  non-concurrence  in 
the  Senate's  amendment,  which  pre- 
vailed— Yeas  111 ;  Nays  106  ;  where- 
upon Mr.  Richard  W.  Thompson 
(Whig),  of  Indiana,  moved  that  the 
House  do  concur  with  the  Senate 
with  an  amendment,  which  was,  in 
fact,  a  substitute  for  the  Senate's  pro- 
ject, and  of  which  the  gist  was  a  pro- 
vision that  "until  the  4th  of  July, 
1850,  unless  Congress  shall  sooner 
provide  for  the  government  of  said 
Territories,  the  existing  laws  thereof 
shall  he  retained  and  observed" — in 
other  words,  that  the  laws  of  Mexi- 
co, whereby  Slavery  was  abolished 
throughout  her  entire  area,  should 
continue  in  force  in  said  Territories 
of  New  Mexico  and  California.  The 
Senate's  amendment,  as  amended,  was 
then  agreed  to:  Yeas  110;  Nays  103. 
And  thus  the  bill,  late  at  night  of  what 
was  necessarily  the  last  day  of  the 
session,  was  returned  to  the  Senate. 

The  majority  of  that  body  were 
fairly  caught  in  their  own  snare. 
They  had  vociferously  protested  that 
Congress  should  not  adjourn  without 
providing  for  the  government  and 
quiet  of  the  new  territories;  and 
had  threatened  to  defeat  the  General 
Appropriation  bill  and  leave  the  Gov- 
ernment penniless  if  this  were  not 
acceded  to  by  the  House.  And  here 
was  the  bill  proposing  to  do  just  what 
they  had  insisted  must  be  done,  and 
could  not  with  safety  be  postponed. 
It  was  only  objectionable  in  that  it  pro- 
vided (as  was  done  in  the  case  of  Lou- 
isiana and  Florida)  that  the  social  con- 
ditions which  had  existed  prior  to  our 
acquisition  should  remain  unchanged 
until  Congress,  or  the  People  more 


10  Including  only  Messrs.  Dickinson  of  New- 
York,  A.  C.  Dodge  of  Iowa,  Douglas  of  Illinois, 


Fitzgerald  of  Michigan,  and  Hannegan  of  Indi- 
ana (all  Democrats),  from  Free  States. 


196  THE  AMERICA 

immediately  interested,  should  see  fit 
to  change  them.  But  this  was  exactly 
what  the  majority  determined  should 
not  be,  and  were  working  to  prevent. 
Yet  they  did  not  care  to  make  up  an 
issue  with  the  House  majority  on  this 
point,  and  go  to  the  country  on  the 
defeat  of  the  chief  Appropriation 
bill,  and  consequent  embarrassment 
of  the  Government,  for  no  other  rea- 
son than  that  the  House  had  refused 
to  unite  in  opening  the  Territories  to 
Slavery.  And  so,  after  spending  most 
of  the  night  in  heated  discussion — 
much  of  it  mere  talking  against  time 
— the  Senate,  toward  morning,  struck 
out  of  the  Appropriation  bill  its  ma- 
terially amended  amendment,  and 
passed  the  bill  as  it  originally  came 
from  the  House — at  all  events,  with 
no  provision  for  the  organization  or 
government  of  New  Mexico  and 
California.  And  thus  ended  the 
Administration  of  Mr.  Polk,  along 
with  the  XXXth  Congress. 

The  action  of  the  XXIXth  and 
XXXth  Congresses  respectively  with 
regard  to  the  Territory  of  Oregon, 
though  proceeding  simultaneously 
with  the  incidents  already  recorded 
in  this  chapter,  and  involving  essen- 
tially identical  principles,  requires  dis- 
tinct presentation,  that  the  two  diverse 
and  somewhat  conflicting  threads 
of  narrative  may  not  be  blended  in 
hopeless  entanglement.  That  action, 
briefly  summed  up,  was  as  follows  : 

At  the  first  session  of  the  XXIXth 
Congress,  Mr.  Stephen  A.  Douglas 
reported  to  the  House  (August  6, 
1846)  a  bill  organizing  the  Territory 
of  Oregon,  whereof  the  northern 
boundary  had  just  been  fixed  at  lati- 
tude 49°  by  treaty  with  Great  Bri- 
tain.   The   bill,  as  reported,  was 


N  CONFLICT. 

silent  respecting  Slavery ;  but,  while 
under  discussion  in  Committee  of 
the  "Whole,  the  following  amend- 
ment was  added : 

"And  neither  Slavery  nor  involuntary 
servitude  shall  ever  exist  in  said  Territory, 
except  for  crime,  whereof  the  party  shall 
have  been  duly  convicted." 

In  the  House,  on  coming  out  of 
Committee,  the  Yeas  and  Nays  were 
demanded  on  this  amendment,  which 
was  sustained:  Yeas  108;  Nays  44 
— only  three  or  four  Northern  Demo- 
crats and  five  or  six  Southern  "Whigs 
being  found  among  the  Nays,  where- 
of the  residue  were  Southern  Demo- 
crats. The  bill,  as  thus  amended, 
passed  the  House,  but  went  to  the 
Senate  so  near  the  close  of  the  ses- 
sion that,  though  referred  to  and 
reported  by  the  Committee  on  Ter- 
ritories, no  further  action  was  had 
thereon. 

On  the  assembling  of  this  Con- 
gress for  its  second  session,  Mr. 
Douglas  again  reported  to  the  House 
a  bill  to  provide  a  Territorial  Gov- 
ernment for  Oregon,  which  was  read 
twice,  and  sent  to  the  Committee  of 
the  Whole ;  where  it  was  debated 
through  the  11th,  12th,  and  14th  of 
January,  and  ordered  to  be  taken 
out  of  Committee  on  the  15th.  On 
that  day,  Gen.  Armistead  Burt,  of 
South  Carolina,  moved  (having  al- 
ready done  so  in  Committee  of  the 
"Whole)  this  addition  to  the  clause 
inhibiting  Slavery,  as  above  given  : 

"  Inasmuch  as  the  whole  of  the  said  Ter- 
ritory lies  north  of  thirty-six  degrees  thirty 
minutes  north  latitude,  known  as  the  line 
of  the  Missouri  Compromise." 

The  object  of  this  amendment  was 
to  obtain  from  the  House  a  recogni- 
tion of  the  parallel  36°  30'  as  a  divid- 
ing line  between  Slave  and  Free 
territory  across  the  entire  continent, 


ATTEMPT  TO  EXTEND 

or  so  far  as  our  possessions  might  ex- 
tend. The  House  voted  down  Gen. 
Burt's  proposition :  Yeas  82 ;  Nays 
114 — every  member  from  the  Slave 
States,  with  four11  Democrats  from 
Free  States,  voting  in  the  affirma- 
tive ;  while  every  Whig  from  the 
Free  States,  with  every  Democrat 
from  those  States  but  the  four  afore- 
said, voted  in  the  negative.  The 
bill  thereupon  passed  the  House  by 
134  Yeas  to  35  Nays — all  from  Slave 
States  ;  but,  on  reaching  the  Senate, 
it  was  referred,  reported,  sent  back 
again,  and  finally,  on  the  last  day  of 
the  session,  laid  on  the  table — Yeas 
26 ;  Nays  18 — there  to  sleep  the 
sleep  of  death. 

In  the  next  (XXXth)  Congress, 
Mr.  Caleb  B.  Smith  (Whig),  of  In- 
diana (since  Secretary  of  the  Inte- 
rior, under  President  Lincoln),  was 
chairman  of  the  Committee  on  Terri- 
tories ;  and  a  bill  creating  a  Territo- 
rial Government  for  Oregon,  and 
prohibiting  Slavery  therein,  was  re- 
ported by  him  on  the  9th  of  Febru- 
ary, 1848.  This  bill  was  made  a 
special  order  five  weeks  thereafter, 
but  was  so  pertinaciously  resisted  by 
the  Slavery  Extensionists  that  it 
could  not  be  got  out  of  Committee  till 
August  1 ;  when  an  amendment  made 
in  Committee,  striking  out  that  clause 
of  the  original  bill  whereby  the  provi- 
sions of  the  Ordinance  of  '87  were 
extended  to  this  Territory — in  other 
words,  Slavery  was  prohibited  there- 
in— was  negatived  ;  Yeas  88  ;  Nays 
114.  On  this  division,  Mr.  John  W. 
Houston  (Whig),  of  Delaware,  voted 

11  Pennsylvania. — Charles  J.  Ingersoll — 1. 
Illinois. — Stephen  A.  Douglas,  Robert  Smith 
— 2.    Iowa. — S.  C.  Hastings— 1.    In  all,  4. 

15  New  York. — Ausburn  Birdsall — 1.  Ohio. — 
William  Kennon,  jr.,  John  K.  Miller— 2.  Ilu- 


THE  LINE  OF  36°  30'.  197 

with  the  majority,  which  was  other- 
wise entirely  composed  of  members 
from  Free  States  ;  eight "  Democrats 
from  Free  States  voted  in  the  minor- 
ity, otherwise  composed  of  all  the 
members  from  Slave  States  present, 
Mr.  Houston,  of  Delaware,  excepted. 
The  bill  then  passed  the  House  by  a 
"sectional"  vote — Yeas  128;  1ST  ays 
71. 

In  the  Senate,  Mr.  Douglas13 
promptly  (August  5th)  reported  this 
bill  with  amendments,  and  a  proposi- 
tion from  Mr.  Foote,  of  Mississippi, 
that  it  "  do  lie  on  the  table,"  was  de- 
feated by  15  (ultra  Southern)  Yeas  to 
36  Nays.  Among  the  amendments 
reported  by  Mr.  Douglas  was  a  repro- 
duction in  substance  of  Gen.  Burt's, 
debated  the  year  before  in  the 
House,  which  now  received  but  two 
votes — those  of  Messrs.  Bright  and 
Douglas.  Mr.  Douglas  thereupon 
moved  to  amend  the  bill,  by  insert- 
ing as  follows : 

"  That  the  line  of  thirty-six  degrees  and 
thirty  minutes  of  north  latitude,  known  as 
the  Missouri  Compromise  line,  as  defined  in 
the  eighth  section  of  an  act  entitled,  'An 
Act  to  authorize  the  people  of  the  Missouri 
Territory  to  form  a  Constitution  and  State 
Government,  and  for  the  admission  of  such 
State  into  the  Union,  on  an  equal  footing 
with  the  original  States,  and  to  prohibit 
Slavery  in  certain  Territories,  approved 
March  6,  1820,'  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby, 
declared  to  extend  to  the  Pacific  Ocean ; 
and  the  said  eighth  section,  together  with 
the  compromise  therein  effected,  is  hereby 
revived,  and  declared  to  be  in  full  force,  and 
binding,  for  the  future  organization  of  the 
Territories  of  the  United  States,  in  the 
same  sense,  and  with  the  same  understand- 
ing, with  which  it  was  generally  adopted." 

This  was  carried  by  33  Yeas — in- 

kois.—  Orlando  B.  Ficklin,  John  A.  McClernand, 
William  A.  Richardson — 3.  Indiana. — John  L. 
Robinson,  William  W.  Wick— 2. 

13  Recently  transferred  from  the  House;  now 
chairman  of  the  Senate's  Committee  on  TerrL 
tories. 


198 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


eluding  Messrs.  Calhoun,  Jefferson 
Davis,  John  Bell,  Benton,  and  every 
member  present  from  the  Slave 
States,  with  Messrs.  Cameron,  of 
Pennsylvania  ;  Douglas,  of  Illinois ; 
Bright,  of  Indiana;  Dickinson,  of 
New  York  ;  and  Fitzgerald,  of  Michi- 
gan, from  Free  States — to  21  Nays, 
including  Messrs.  Webster,  of  Massa- 
chusetts, Hamlin,  of  Maine,  Dix, 
of  New  York,  and  Breese,  of  Illi- 
nois. The  bill,  thus  amended,  passed 
the  Senate  by  33  Yeas  to  22  Nays. 

But  the  House,  on  its  return,  thus 
amended,  utterly  refused  (August 
11th)  to  concur  in  any  such  partition 
of  the  territories  oi  the  Union,  on 
the  line  of  36°  30',  between  Free 
and  Slave  Labor.  The  proposition 
of  Mr.  Douglas,  above  cited,  was  re- 
jected by  the  decisive  majority  ot 
39  :  Yeas  82 ;  Nays  121— only  three 14 
members  from  Free  States  voting  in 


the  minority.  So  the  bill  was  re- 
turned to  the  Senate  with  its  amend- 
ment struck  out;  and  that  body 
thereupon  receded — Yeas  29  ;  Nays 
25 — from  its  amendment,  and  allow- 
ed the  bill  to  become  a  law  in  the 
shape  given  it  by  the  House.  On 
this  memorable  division,  Messrs. 
Benton,  Bright,  Cameron,  Dickinson, 
Douglas,  Fitzgerald,  Hannegan, 
Spruance,  of  Delaware,  and  Hous- 
ton, of  Texas,  voted  to  yield  to  the 
House,  leaving  none  but  Senators 
from  Slave  States,  and  not  all  of 
them,  insisting  on  the  partition  de- 
manded. So  Oregon  became  a  Ter- 
ritory, consecrated  to  Free  Labor, 
without  compromise  or  counterbal- 
ance ;  and  the  Free  States  gave 
fair  notice  that  they  would  not  divide 
with  Slavery  the  vast  and  hitherto 
free  territories  then  just  acquired 
from  Mexico. 


XV. 

THE    COMPEOMISE   OF   1  8  5  0. 


Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  was  inau- 
gurated as  President  on  the  4th  of 
March,  1849.  He  had  received,  as 
we  have  seen,  both  an  electoral  ma- 
jority and  a  popular  plurality,  alike 
in  the  Free  and  in  the  Slave  States, 
mainly  by  reason  of  his  persistent 
and  obstinate  silence  and  reserve  on 
the  vexed  question  of  Slavery  in  the 
Territories.  He  had  written  letters 
— not  always  wise  nor  judicious — 
during  the  canvass,  mainly  in  its 
early  stages ;  but  they  were  not  cal- 
culated, decisively,  to  alienate  either 
the  champions  or  the  opponents  of 


Slavery  Restriction.  It  is  among 
the  traditions  of  the  canvass  that  he, 
some  time  in  1848,  received  a  letter 
from  a  planter  running  thus  :  "  Sir  : 
I  have  worked  hard  and  been  frugal 
all  my  life,  and  the  results  of  my  in- 
dustry have  mainly  taken  the  form 
of  slaves,  of  whom  I  own  about  a 
hundred.  Before  I  vote  for  Presi- 
dent, I  want  to  be  sure  that  the 
candidate  I  support  will  not  so  act 
as  to  divest  me  of  my  property." 
To  which  the  General,  with  a  dex- 
terity that  would  have  done  credit  to 
a  diplomatist,  and  would  have  proved 


14  New  York. — Ausburn  Birdsall — 1.    Pennsylvania. — Charles  Brown,  Charles  J.  Ingersoll — 2. 


WHIG  ZEAL  FOR  SLAVERY  RESTRICTION. 


exceedingly  useful  to  Mr.  Clay,  re- 
sponded :  "  Sir  :  I  have  the' honor  to 
inform  you  that  7,  too,  have  been  all 
my  life  industrious  and  frugal,  and 
that  the  fruits  thereof  are  mainly 
invested  in  slaves,  of  whom  I 
own  three  hundred.  Yours,"  etc. 
South  Carolina  did  not  see  fit  to 
repose  her  faith  in  him  ;  no  more 
did  Texas :  his  own  son-in-law,  Jef- 
ferson Davis,  went  against  him :  so 
did  the  great  body  of  Slavery  Propa- 
gandists ;  yet  it  is,  nevertheless,  true 
that  he  received  many  more  votes  at 
the  South  than  would  have  been 
given  for  Mr.  Webster,  or  even  Mr. 
Clay. 

In  the  Free  States,  very  many 
Northern  Whigs 1  had  refused  to  sup- 
port him,  and  given  their  votes  to 
Yan  Buren  as  an  open,  unequivocal 
champion  of  Slavery  Restriction ; 
and  it  was  by  the  votes  thus  diverted 
from  Gen.  Taylor  that  Ohio,  with 
perhaps  Indiana  and  Wisconsin  also, 
were  given  to  Gen.  Cass.  The  great 
body  of  the  Northern  Whigs,  how- 
ever, had  supported  the  nominees  of 

1  Among  those  Whigs  who  took  this  course  in 
New  York  City,  the  names  of  Willis  Hall,  Joseph 
L.  White,  Philip  W.  Engs,  and  Wilson  G.  Hunt, 
are  conspicuous. 

2  The  following  are  extracts  from  Mr.  Web- 
ster's speech  at  Abingdon,  Mass.,  Oct.  9,  1848  : 

11  The  gentlemen  who  have  joined  this  new 
party,  from  among  the  Whigs,  pretend  that  they 
are  greater  lovers  of  Liberty  and  greater  haters 
of  Slavery  than  those  they  leave  behind  them. 
I  do  not  admit  it.  I  do  not  admit  any  such 
thing.  [Applause.]  I  think  we  are  as  good 
Free  Soil  men  as  they  are,  though  we  do  not  set 
up  any  such  great  preeminence  over  our  neigh- 
bors. *  *  *  There  was  an  actual  outbreak, 
years  ago,  between  these  two  parties  of  the 
Democracy  of  New  York,  and  this  4  Barnburn- 
ing'  party  existed  long  before  there  was  any 
question  of  Free  Soil  among  them — long  before 
there  was  any  question  of  the  Wilmot  Proviso, 
or  any  opposition  by  that  party  to  the  extension 
of  Slavery.  And,  up  to  the  Annexation  of 
Texas,  every  man  of  the  party  went  straightfor- 
ward for  that  Annexation,  Slavery  Extension 
and  all. 


199 

their  party,  not  fully  satisfied  with 
Gen.  Taylor's  position  on  the  Slavery 
question,  but  trusting  that  the  influ- 
ence necessarily  exerted  over  his 
Administration  by  the  desires  and 
convictions  of  the  far  greater  num- 
ber of  its  supporters,  whether  in  or 
out  of  Congress,  led  by  such  de- 
termined Slavery  Restrictionists  as 
Mr.  Webster  and  Gov.  Seward, 
would  insure  his  political  adhesion 
to  the  right  side.  Many  acted  or 
voted  in  accordance  with  this  view 
who  were  not  exactly  satisfied  with 
it;  and  the  Whig  canvassers  were 
doubtless  more  decided  and  thorough 
in  their  "Free  Soil"  inculcations 
than  they  would  have  been  had  their 
Presidential  candidate  been  one  of 
themselves.  Mr.  Webster  2  claimed 
"  Free  Soil"  as  a  distinctive  Whig 
doctrine,  and  declared  that,  were  the 
Whigs  to  join  the  peculiar  u  Free 
Soil"  organization,  they  would  only 
make  that  the  Whig  party  with 
Martin  Van  Buren  at  its  head. 
Gov.  Seward  3  declared  the  Slavery 
question  the  great,  living,  and  pre- 

"But  the  Whigs,  and  they  alone,  raised  a 
strong  opposition  to  the  measure.  I  say  the 
Whigs  alone — for  nobody  else,  either  in  the 
East,  West,  South,  or  North,  stirred  a  finger  in 
the  cause — or,  at  least,  made  so  small  an  effort 
that  it  could  not  be  discerned  until  the  Whigs 
roused  the  people  to  a  sentiment  of  opposition 
to  the  further  spread  of  the  Slave  Power.  Then 
this  portion  of  the  New  York  Loco-Focos,  these 
Barnburners,  seized  upon  this  Whig  doctrine, 
and  attached  to  it  their  policy,  merely  to  give 
them  the  predominance  over  their  rivals.  *  *  * 

"  In  this  Buffalo  platform,  this  Collect  of  the 
new  school,  there  is  nothing  new.  *  *  * 
Suppose  all  the  Whigs  should  go  over  to  the 
Free  Soil  party :  It  would  only  be  a  change  of 
name ;  the  principles  would  still  be  the  same. 
But  there  would  be  one  change  which,  I  admit, 
would  be  monstrous — it  would  -make  Mr.  Van 
Buren  the  head  of  the  Whig  parti/.  [Laughter.]" 

3  In  his  speech  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  October 
26,  1843,  Gov.  Seward  said: 

"  A  sixth  principle  is,  that  Slavery  must  be 
abolished.  I  think  these  are  the  principles  of 
the  Whigs  of  the  Western  Reserve  of  Ohio.  J 


200 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


dominant  issue  between  the  two 
National  parties,  and  urged  the  duty 
of  abolishing  Slavery  as  a  reason  for 
supporting  Gen.  Taylor.  Mr.  Wash- 
ington Hunt 4  wrote  an  elaborate  let- 
ter to  Ohio,  urging  the  duty  of  stand- 
ing by  Whig  principles  by  electing 
Gen.  Taylor,  and  by  choosing  at  the 
same  time  members  of  Congress  who 
would  inflexibly  resist,  and  legislate 
to  prohibit,  the  Extension  of  Slavery. 
At  no  time  previously,5  had  Whig  in- 
culcations throughout  the  Free  States 
been  so  decidedly  and  strongly  hostile 
to  the  Extension  of  Slavery,  and  so 
determined  in  requiring  its  inhibition 
by  Congress,  as  during  the  canvass 
of  1848. 

Among  the  results  of  that  canvass 
was — as  we  have  seen — a  temporary 

am  not  now  to  say  for  the  first  time  that  they 
are  mine.    *    *  * 

"  There  are  two  antagonistic  elements  of 
society  in  America,  Freedom  and  Slavery. 
Freedom  is  in  harmony  with  our  system  of 
government,  and  with  the  spirit  of  the  age,  and 
is  therefore  passive  and  quiescent.  Slavery  is 
in  conflict  with  that  system,  with  justice,  and 
with  humanity,  and  is  therefore  organized, 
defensive,  active,  and  perpetually  aggressive. 

"  Freedom  insists  on  the  emancipation  and 
development  of  labor ;  Slavery  demands  a  soil 
moistened  with  tears  and  blood — Freedom  a 
soil  that  exults  under  the  elastic  tread  of  man 
in  bis  native  majesty. 

"These  elements  divide  aud  classify  the 
American  people  into  two  parties.  Each  of 
these  parties  has  its  court  and  its  scepter.  The 
throne  of  one  is  amid  the  rocks  of  the  Alleghany 
Mountains ;  the  throne  of  the  other  is  reared  on 
the  sands  of  South  Carolina.  One  of  these 
parties,  the  party  of  Slavery,  regards  disunion 
as  among  the  means  of  defense,  and  not  always 
the  last  to  be  employed.  The  other  maintains 
the  Union  of  the  States,  one  and  inseparable, 
now  and  forever,  as  the  highest  duty  of  the 
American  people  to  themselves,  to  posterity,  to 
mankind,"  etc.,  etc. 

"The  party  of  Freedom  seeks  complete  and 
universal  emancipation." 

4  Then  a  Whig  member  of  Congress ;  since, 
Governor  of  New  York. 

5  Mr.  James  Brooks,  Editor  of  Tlie  New  York 
Express,  reported  to  the  New  York  Whig  State 
Convention  of  1847  (October  6th),  an  Address 
condemning  the  objects  of  the  Mexican  War 


alienation  of  many  Northern  Demo- 
crats from  their  former  devotion  to 
Southern  ideas  and  docility  to  South- 
ern leadership.  This  alienation  was 
further  evinced  in  the  coalitions 
formed  the  next  summer  between 
the  Democratic  and  Free  Soil  parties 
of  Yermont  and  Massachusetts,  which 
in  Yermont  proved  too  weak  to  over- 
come the  Whig  ascendency,  but  in 
Massachusetts  ultimately  triumphed 
in  the  election  of  George  S.  Boutwell 
(Democrat),  as  Governor,  and  Charles 
Sumner  (Free  Soil),  as  Senator.  In 
New  York,  a  fusion  was  with  diffi- 
culty effected  (in  1849)  of  the  parties 
which  had  in  1848  supported  Yan 
Buren  and  Cass  respectively  —  the 
nominal  basis  of  agreement  being  a 
resolve6  of  mutual  hostility  to  the 

then  raging,  which  was  unanimously  adopted. 
In  the  course  of  it,  he  said : 

"  Fellow  Citizens :  Disguise  the  Mexican  War 
as  sophistry  may,  the  great  truth  cannot  be  put 
down,  nor  lied  down,  that  it  exists  because  of  the 
Annexation  of  Texas ;  that  from  such  a  cause 
we  predicted  such  a  consequence  would  follow ; 
and  that,  but  for  that  cause,  no  war  would  have 
existed  at  all.  Disguise  its  intents,  purposes 
and  consequences,  as  sophistry  may  struggle  to 
do,  the  further  great  truth  cannot  be  hidden,  that 
its  main  object  is  the  conquest  of  a  market  for 
slaves,  and  that  the  flag  our  victorious  legions 
rally  around,  fight  under,  and  fall  for,  is  to  be 
desecrated  from  its  holy  character  of  Liberty  and 
Emancipation  into  an  errand  of  Bondage  and 
Slavery.  *  *  *  We  protest,  too,  in  the  name 
of  the  rights  of  Man  and  of  Liberty,  against  the 
further  extension  of  Slavery  in  North  America. 
The  curse  which  our  mother  country  inflicted 
upon  us,  in  spite  of  our  fathers'  remonstrances, 
we  demand  shall  never  blight  the  virgin  soil  of 
the  North  Pacific.  *  *  *  *  We  will  not 
pour  out  the-  blood  of  our  countrymen,  if  we  can 
help  it,  to  turn  a  Free  into  a  Slave  soil;  we  will 
not  spend  from  fifty  to  a  hundred  millions  of  dol- 
lars per  year  to  make  a  Slave  market  for  any 
portion  of  our  countrymen.  *  *  *  The 
Union  as  it  is,  the  whole  Union,  and  nothing  but 
the  Union,  we  will  stand  by  to  the  last — but  No 
More  Territory  is  our  watchword — unless  it  be 
Free." 

6  The  last  Convention  of  the  Cass  Democrats, 
or  "Hunkers,"  which«was  held  at  Syracuse  in 
September,  1849,  proposing  a  conciliatory  course 
toward  the  "Barnburners,"  as  an  overture  to- 


GEN.   TAYLOR  ON  TH 


E  NEW  TERRITORIES.  201 


Extension  of  Slavery.  There  were 
local  exceptions;  but  in  the  main 
the  Democratic  party  was  materially 
strengthened  by  the  rapid  and  gen- 
eral disintegration  of  the  Free  Soil 
party,  and  by  the  apparent  falling 
away  of  the  Whigs  of  the  Free  States 
from  a  decided,  open,  inflexible  main- 
tenance of  the  principle  of  Slavery 
Restriction.  Gen.  Taylor's  election 
had  exhausted  the  personal  popular- 
ity based  on  his  achievements  as  a 
soldier  ;  his  attitude  as  a  slaveholder, 
and  his  tacit  negation  of  the  princi- 
ple aforesaid,  were  awkward  facts; 
and,  though  the  President  himself 
could  not  be  justly  accused  of  doing 
or  saying  any  thing  clearly  objection- 
able, yet  each  successive  State  elec- 
tion of  1849  indicated  a  diminished 
and  declining  popularity  on  the  part 
of  the  new  Administration. 

Neither  Mr.  Webster  nor  Gov.  Sew- 
ard had  a  seat  in  Gen.  Taylor's  Cabi- 
net, though  either,  doubtless,  might 
have  had,  had  he  desired  it.  Mr. 
Webster  remained  in  the  Senate, 
where  Messrs.  Clay  and  Calhoun  still 
lingered,  and  Gov.  Seward  first  took 
his  seat  in  that  body  on  the  day  of 
Gen.  Taylor's  inauguration. 

The  proper  organization  of  the 
spacious  territories  recently  acquired 
from  Mexico  necessarily  attracted 
the  early  and  earnest  attention  of 
the  new  President  and  his  official 
counselors.  It  could  not  be  justifi- 
ably postponed,;  for  the  military  rule 
that  had  thus  far  been  endured  by 
those  territories,  exceptional  at  best, 
had  been  rendered  anomalous  and 

wards  a  neutral  basis  of.  reunion  with  them, 
adopted  the  following : 

"  Eesolved,  That  we  are  opposed  to  the  exten- 
sion of  Slavery  to  the  free  territories  of  the 
United  States ;  but  we  do  not  regard  the  Slavery 


indefensible  by  the  lapse  of  a  year 
since  the  complete  restoration  of 
peace.  Meantime,  the  discovery  of 
gold  in  California  was  already  at- 
tracting swarms  of  adventurers  to 
that  country  and  rendering  its  speedy 
and  extensive  colonization  inevitable. 
That  it  should  soon  receive  a  suitable 
and  legitimate  civil  government  was 
imperative.  New  Mexico,  likewise, 
having  a  population  of  sixty  thou- 
sand, mainly  native-born,  and  divest- 
ed by  our  conquest  of  a  civil  govern- 
ment substantially  of  her  own  choice, 
had  a  right  to  expect  an  early  and 
complete  deliverance  from  military 
rule. 

The  new  Administration  appears 
to  have  promptly  resolved  on  its 
course.  It  decided  to  invite  and 
favor  an  early  organization  of  both 
California  and  New  Mexico  (includ- 
ing all  the  vast  area  recently  ceded 
by  Mexico,  apart  from  Texas  proper) 
as  incipient  States,  and  to  urge  their 
admission,  as  such,  into  the  Union 
at  the  earliest  practicable  day.  Of 
course,  it  was  understood  that,  being 
thus  organized,  in  the  absence  of 
both  slaveholders  and  slaves,  they 
would  almost  necessarily  become 
Free  States. 

According  to  this  programme,  Mr. 
Thomas  Butler  King  7  was  dispatch- 
ed to  California  on  the  3d  of  April, 
1849,  as  a  special  agent  from  the  Ex- 
ecutive, with  instructions  to  favor  the 
early  formation  of  a  State  Constitu- 
tion and  Government.  The  President, 
in  a  Special  Message  to  Congress  on 
the  21st  of  January,  1850,  replying 
to  a  resolution  of  inquiry  from  the 

question,  in  any  form  of  its  agitation,  or  any 
opinion  in  relation  thereto^  as  a  test  of  political 
faith,  or  as  a  rule  of  party  action." 

7  For  most  of  the  ten  years  preceding,  a  Whig 
member  of  Congress  from  Georgia. 


202 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


House,  stated  that  lie  had  sent  Mr. 
King  "  as  bearer  of  dispatches,"  and 
added : 

"  I  did  not  hesitate  to  express  to  the  peo- 
ple of  those  territories  nay  desire  that  each 
territory  should,  if  prepared  to  comply  with 
the  requisitions  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  form  a  plan  of  a  State  consti- 
tution, and  submit  the  same  to  Congress, 
with  a  prayer  for  admission  into  the  Union 
as  a  State ;  but  I  did  not  anticipate,  suggest, 
nor  authorize,  the  establishment  of  any  such 
government  without  the  assent  of  Congress ; 
nor  did  I  authorize  any  government  agent 
or  officer  to  interfere  with,  or  exercise  any 
influence  or  control  over,  the  election  of  dele- 
gates, or  over  any  convention,  in  making  or 
modifying  their  domestic  institutions,  or  any 
of  the  provisions  of  their  proposed  constitu- 
tion. On  the  contrary,  the  instructions  giv- 
en by  my  orders  were,  that  all  measures  of 
domestic  policy  adopted  by  the  people  of 
California  must  originate  solely  with  them- 
selves ;  and,  while  the  Executive  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  was  desirous  to  protect  them  in 
the  formation  of  any  government,  republican 
in  its  character,  to  be,  at  the  proper  time, 
submitted  to  Congress,  yet  it  was  to  be  dis- 
tinctly understood  that  the  plan  of  such 
government  must,  at  the  same  time,  be  the 
result  of  their  own  deliberate  choice,  and 
originate  with  themselves,  without  the  inter- 
ference of  the  Executive." 

In  his  Annual  Message,  transmitted 
some  weeks  previously,  the  President 
had  said : 

"No  civil  government  having  been  pro- 
vided by  Congress  for  California,  the  people 
of  that  territory,  impelled  by  the  necessities 
of  their  political  condition,  recently  met  in 
convention,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a 
constitution  and  State  government,  which, 
the  latest  advices  give  me  reason  to  suppose, 
has  been  accomplished;  and  it  is  believed 
that  they  will  shortly  apply  for  the  admis- 
sion of  California  into  the  Union  as  a  sove- 
reign State.  Should  such  be  the  case,  and 
should  their  constitution  be  conformable  to 
the  requisitions  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  I  recommend  their  application 
to  the  favorable  consideration  of  Congress. 

"The  people  of  New  Mexico  will  also,  it 
is  believed,  at  no  very  distant  period,  present 
themselves  for  admission  into  the  Union. 
Preparatory  to  the  admission  of  California 
and  New  Mexico,  the  people  of  each  will 
have  instituted  for  themselves  a  republican 
form  of  government,  1  laying  its  foundations 
in  such  principles,  and  organizing  its  powers 


in  such  form,  as  to  them  shall  seem  most 
likely  to  effect  their  safety  and  happiness.' 

"  By  awaiting  their  action,  all  causes  of 
uneasiness  may  be  avoided,  and  confidence 
and  kind  feeling  preserved.  With  a  view  of 
maintaining  the  harmony  and  tranquillity  so 
dear  to  all,  we  should  abstain  from  the  intro- 
duction of  those  exciting  topics  of  a  section- 
al character  which  have  hitherto  produced 
painful  apprehensions  in  the  public  mind ; 
and  I  repeat  the  solemn  warning  of  the  first 
and  most  illustrious  of  my  predecessors 
against  furnishing*  '  any  ground  for  char- 
acterizing parties  by  geographical  discrimi- 
nations.' " 

It  would  seem  that  this  programme 
might  have  secured  the  support  of  a 
majority  in  Congress  and  commanded 
the  assent  of  the  country.  It  insured, 
almost  inevitably,  to  the  champions 
of  Free  Labor  a  practical  triumph 
in  the  organization  and  future  char- 
acter of  the  vast  territories  recently 
acquired,  while  according  full  scope 
to  that  "  Popular  Sovereignty"  where- 
of Gen.  Cass,  Mr.  Douglas,  and  other 
Democratic  chiefs,  were  such  resolute 
champions. 

But  Congress  was  not  disposed  to 
regard  with  favor  any  policy  recom- 
mended by  the  Administration ; 
while  the  Slave  Power  was  fully  de- 
termined, maugre  any  theory  or  pro- 
fession, to  exact  a  partition  of  the 
newly  acquired  territories,  or  a  con- 
sideration for  surrendering  the  al- 
leged right  to  plant  Slavery  therein. 
There  was  an  Opposition  majority  in 
the  Senate ;  and  the  House,  after  a 
tedious  contest,  wherein  the  especial 
"  Free  Soil"  or  Buffalo  Platform 
members  refused  to  support  either 
Mr.  Winthrop  (Whig),  or  Mr.  Cobb 
(Democrat),  for  the  speakership,  was 
finally  organized  under  the  Plurality 
rule,  whereby,  after  taking  three 
more  ballots,  the  highest  number  of 
votes  was  to  elect.  This  rule  was 
adopted,8  by  113  Yeas  to  106  Nays. 


8  December  22,  1849. 


ME.   CLAY'S  PLAN  OF 


COMPROMISE  IN  1  85  0. 


203 


after  nearly  three  weeks'  fruitless 
balloting,  and  under  it  Howell  Cobb, 
of  Georgia,  was  chosen  Speaker  on 
the  63d  ballot,  receiving  102  votes 
to  99  for  Winthrop,  and  20  scattering 
(mainly  on  the  Buffalo  platform).  Mr. 
Cobb 9  was  one  of  the  most  determined 
Democratic  advocates  of  Slavery  Ex- 
tension, and  constituted  the  Commit- 
tees of  the  House  accordingly. 

Gen.  B.  Riley,  the  Military  Govern- 
or of  California,  had  issued  10  a  Proc- 
lamation calling  a  Convention  of  the 
People  of  California  to  frame  a  State 
Constitution.  Such  Convention  was 
accordingly  held,  and  formed  a  State 
Constitution  whereby  Slavery  was 
expressly  prohibited.  State  officers 
and  members  of  Congress  (all  Demo- 
crats) were  in  due  course  elected  un- 
der it ;  and  Gen.  Taylor  communi- 
cated 11  the  Constitution  to  Congress, 
at  whose  doors  the  members  elect 
from  the  new  State  stood  for  many 
ensuing  months  patiently  awaiting 
their  admission  to  seats.  For,  among 
the  various  propositions  introduced  at 
this  session,  looking  to  the  same  end, 
Mr.  Clay  had  already  submitted 12  the 
following  basis  of  a  proposed  Com- 
promise of  all  differences  relating  to 
the  territories  and  to  Slavery : 

"  1.  Resolved,  That  California,  with  suita- 
ble boundaries  ought,  upon  her  application, 
to  be  admitted  as  one  of  the  States  of  this 
Union,  without  the  imposition  by  Congress 
of  any  restriction  in  respect  to  the  exclusion 
or  introduction  of  Slavery  within  those 
boundaries. 

"2.  Rexolved,  That,  as  Slavery  does  not 
exist  by  law,  and  is  not  likely  to  be  intro- 
duced into  any  of  the  territory  acquired  by 
the  United  States  from  the  Republic  of  Mexi- 
co, it  is  inexpedient  for  Congress  to  provide 
by  law,  either  for  its  introduction  into,  or 
exclusion  from,  any  part  of  the  said  terri- 
tory; and  that  appropriate  territorial  gov- 
ernments ought  to  be  established  by  Con- 

•  Since,  a  Confederate  Major-General. 

10  June  3,  1849.  11  February  13, 1850. 


gress  in  all  the  said  territory  not  assigned 
as  within  the  boundaries  of  the  proposed 
State  of  California,  without  the  adoption  of 
any  restriction  or  condition  on  the  subject 
of  Slavery.13 

"  5.  Resolved,  That  it  is  inexpedient  to 
abolish  Slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia, 
whilst  the  institution  continues  to  exist  in 
the  State  of  Maryland,  without  the  consent 
of  that  State,  without  the  consent  of  the 
people  of  the  District,  and  without  just  com- 
pensation to  the  owners  of  Slaves  within 
the  District. 

u  6.  But  Resolved,  That  it  is  expedient  to 
prohibit,  within  the  District,  the  Slave- 
Trade  in  slaves  brought  into  it  from  States 
or  pjaces  beyond  the  limits  of  the  District, 
either  to  be  sold  therein  as  merchandise,  or 
to  be  transported  to  other  markets  without 
the  District  of  Columbia. 

"7.  Resolved,  That  more  effectual  provi- 
sion ought  to  be  made  by  law,  according  to 
the  requirement  of  the  Constitution,  for  the 
restitution  or  delivery  of  persons  bound  to 
service  or  labor  in  any  State,  who  may  es- 
cape into  any  other  State  or  Territory  in 
the  Union.  And, 

"  8.  Resolved,  That  Congress  has  no 
power  to  prohibit  or  obstruct  the  trade  in 
slaves  between  the  slaveholding  States,  but 
that  the  admission  or  exclusion  of  slaves 
brought  from  one  into  another  of  them,  de- 
pends exclusively  upon  their  own  particular 
laws." 

The  debate  on  this  proposition  of 
compromise  was  opened  by  Southern 
Democrats,  all  speaking  in  disparage- 
ment of  its  leading  suggestions,  or  in 
scarcely  qualified  opposition  to  the 
whole  scheme.  Mr.  H.  S.  Foote,  of 
Mississippi,  condemned  especially  the 
proposition  "  that  it  is  inexpedient  to 
abolish  Slavery  in  the  District  of 
Columbia,"  as  implying  a  right  in 
Congress  to  legislate  on  that  subject, 
which  he  utterly  denied.  He  con- 
demned still  more  emphatically  the 
assertion  that  "  Slavery  does  not  now 
exist  by  law  in  the  territories  recent- 
ly acquired  from  Mexico insisting 
that  the  mere  fact  of  Annexation 
carried  the  Constitution,  with  all  its 
guaranties,  to  all  the  territories  ob- 

12  January  29,  1850. 

13  3,  4,  relate  to  Texas  and  her  boundary. 


204 


THE   AMERICAN"  CONFLICT. 


tained  by  treaty,  and  secured  the 
privilege  to  any  "  Southern  slave- 
holder to  enter  any  part  of  it,  attend- 
ed by  his  slave  property,  and  to  enjoy 
the  same  therein,  free  from  all  molest- 
ation or  hindrance  whatsoever."  He 
also  condemned  the  resolve  relating 
to  the  boundaries  of  Texas,  contend- 
ing that  "  her  right  to  that  part  of 
New  Mexico,  lying  east  of  the  Eio 
Grande,  was  full,  complete,  and  unde- 
niable." But  he  did  not  object  to 
abolishing  the  Slave-Trade  in  the 
District,  4 'provided  it  is  done  in  a 
delicate  and  judicious  manner  ;"  and 
he  would  consent  to  the  admission 
of  California,  "  above  the  line  of  36° 
30',"  "  provided  another  new  Slave 
State  can  be  laid  off  within  the  pres- 
ent limits  of  Texas,  so  as  to  keep  up 
the  present  equiponderance  between 
the  Slave  and  Free  States  of  the 
Union,  and  provided  further,  all  this 
is  done  by  way  of  compromise,  and 
in  order  to  save  the  Union — as  dear 
to  me  as  any  man  living."  Mr.  J. 
M.  Mason,  of  Virginia,  though  anx- 
ious to  do  his  utmost  for  "  adjusting 
these  unhappy  differences,"  still 
more  pointedly  dissented  from  Mr. 
Clay's  scheme.    He  said : 

"  Sir,  so  far  as  I  have  read  these  resolu- 
tions, there  is  but  one  proposition  to  which 
I  can  give  a  hearty  assent,  and  that  is  the 
resolution  which  proposes  to  organize  terri- 
torial governments  at  once  in  these  territo- 
ries, without  a  declaration,  one  way  or  the 
other,  as  to  their  domestic  institutions. 
But  there  is  another  which  I  deeply  regret 
to  see  introduced  into  this  Senate,  by  a 
Senator  from  a  Slaveholding  State ;  it  is 
that  which  assumes  that  Slavery  does  not 
now  exist  by  law  in  those  countries.  I  un- 
derstand one  of  these  propositions  to  de- 
clare that,  by  law,  Slavery  is  now  abolished 
in  New  Mexico  and  California.  That  was 
the  very  proposition  advanced  by  the  non- 
slaveholding  States  at  the  last  Session ; 
combated  and  disproved,  as  I  thought,  by 


gentlemen  from  the  Slaveholding  States, 
and  which  the  Compromise  bill 14  was  fram- 
ed to  test.  So  far,  I  regarded  the  question 
of  law  as  disposed  of;  and  it  was  very 
clearly  and  satisfactorily  shown  to  be 
against  the  spirit  of  the  resolution  of  the 
Senator  of  Kentucky.  If  the  contrary  is 
true,  I  presume  the  Senator  from  Kentucky 
would  declare  that,  if  a  law  is  now  valid  in 
the  territories  abolishing  Slavery,  it  could 
not  be  introduced  there,  even  if  a  law  was 
passed  creating  the  institution,  or  repealing 
the  statutes  already  existing — a  doctrine 
never  assented  to,  so  far  as  I  know,  until 
now,  by  any  Senator  representing  one  of 
the  slaveholding  States.  Sir,  I  hold  the 
very  opposite,  and  with  such  confidence, 
that,  in  the  last  Congress,  I  was  willing, 
and  did  vote  for  a  bill  to  test  this  question 
in  the  Supreme  Court.  Yet  this  resolution 
assumes  the  other  doctrine  to  be  true,  and 
our  assent  is  challenged  to  it  as  a  proposi- 
tion of  law." 

Mr.  Jefferson  Davis,  of  Mississippi, 
with  equal  energy,  objected  to  so 
much  of  Mr.  Clay's  propositions  as  re- 
late to  the  boundary  of  Texas,  to  the 
Slave-Trade  in  the  Federal  District, 
and  to  the  concession  that  Slavery- 
does  not  exist  by  law  in  the  newly 
acquired  territories.    He  added : 

u  But,  Sir,  we  are  called  upon  to  receive 
this  as  a  measure  of  compromise!  As  a 
measure  in  which  we  of  the  minority  are  to 
receive  something.  A  measure  of  com- 
promise! I  look  upon  it  as  but  a  modest 
mode  of  taking  that,  the  claim  to  which  has 
been  more  boldly  asserted  by  others ;  and, 
that  I  may  be  understood  upon  this  ques- 
tion, and  that  my  position  may  go  forth  to 
the  country  in  the  same  columns  that  con- 
vey the  sentiments  of  the  Senator  from 
Kentucky,  I  here  assert,  that  never  will  I 
take  less  than  the  Missouri  Compromise 
line  extending  to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  with 
the  specific  recognition  of  the  right  to  hold 
Slaves  in  the  territory  below  that  line  ;  and 
that,  before  such  territories  are  admitted 
into  the  Union  as  States,  slaves  may  be 
taken  there  from  any  of  the  United  States, 
at  the  option  of  the  owners.  I  can  never 
consent  to  give  additional  power  to  a  ma- 
jority to  commit  further  aggressions  upon 
the  minority  in  this  Union;  and  I  will 
never  consent  to  any  proposition  which  will 
have  such  a  tendency,  without  a  full  guar- 


14  That  of  Mr.  Clayton — laid  on  the  table  of  the  House,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Stephens,  of  Georgia. 


CLAY  AND  WEBSTER  FOR  COMPROMISE. 


205 


antee  or  counteracting  measure  is  connected 
with  it." 

Mr.  Clay,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Davis, 
spoke  as  follows : 

"  I  am  extremely  sorry  to  hear  the  Sena- 
tor from  Mississippi  say  that  he  requires, 
first,  the  extension  of  the  Missouri  Com- 
promise line  to  the  Pacific ;  and,  also,  that 
he  is  not  satisfied  with  that,  but  requires,  if 
I  understand  him  correctly,  a  positive  pro- 
vision for  the  admission  of  Slavery  south  of 
that  line.  And  now,  Sir,  coming  from  a 
Slave  State,  as  I  do,  I  owe  it  to  myself,  I 
owe  it  to  truth,  I  owe  it  to  the  subject,  to 
state  that  no  eartlily  power  could  induce 
me  to  vote  for  a  specific  measure  for  the  in- 
troduction of  Slavery  where  it  had  not  be- 
fore existed,  either  south  or  north  of  that 
line.  Coining,  as  I  do,  from  a  Slave  State, 
it  is  my  solemn,  deliberate,  and  well-matured 
determination  that  no  power — no  earthly 
power — shall  compel  me  to  vote  for  the 
positive  introduction  of  Slavery,  either 
south  or  north  of  that  line.  Sir,  while  you 
reproach,  and  justly,  too,  our  British  ances- 
tors, for  the  introduction  of  this  institution 
upon  the  continent  of  America,  I  am,  for 
one,  unwilling  that  the  posterity  of  the 
present  inhabitants  of  California  and  New 
Mexico  shall  reproach  us  for  doing  just 
what  we  reproach  Great  Britain  for  doing 
to  us.  If  the  citizens  of  those  territories 
choose  to  establish  Slavery,  I  am  for  ad- 
mitting them  with  such  provisions  in  their 
Constitutions ;  but  then  it  will  be  their  own 
work,  and  not  ours;  and  their  posterity 
will  have  to  reproach  them,  and  not  us,  for 
forming  Constitutions  allowing  the  institu- 
tion of  Slavery  to  exist  among  them.  These 
are  my  views,  Sir ;  and  I  choose  to  express 
them ;  and  I  care  not  how  extensively  and 
universally  they  are  known.  The  honora- 
ble Senator  from  Virginia  (Mr.  Mason)  has 
expressed  his  opinion  that  Slavery  exists  in 
these  territories ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
opinion  is  sincerely  and  honestly  entertained 
by  him ;  and  I  would  say,  with  equal  sin- 
cerity and  honesty,  that  I  believe  that 
Slavery  nowhere  exists  within  any  portion 
of  the  territory  acquired  by  us  from  Mexico. 
He  holds  a  directly  contrary  opinion  to 
mine,  as  he  has  a  perfect  right  to  do ;  and 
we  will  not  quarrel  about  that  difference  of 
opinion." 

Messrs.  William  R.  King,  of  Ala- 
bama, Downs,  of  Louisiana,  and 
Butler,  of  South  Carolina,  swelled 
the  chorus  of  denunciation.  They 


could  see  nothing  in  Mr.  Clay's 
proposition  that  looked  like  compro- 
mise ;  nothing  but  concession  and 
surrender  of  all  the  rights  of  the 
South  in  the  territories.  In  their 
view,  it  was  only  a  skillful  and 
plausible  device  for  reconciling  the 
South  to  the  sacrifice  of  its  rights, 
and  to  a  concession  of  all  the  new 
territories  to  Free  Labor.  They 
were,  therefore,  utterly  averse  to  it. 

The  most  remarkable  speech  eli- 
cited by  these  resolves  was  that  of 
Mr.  Webster,15  wherein  he  took 
ground  against  the  Abolitionists ; 
against  the  assumed  Right  of  Instruc- 
tion ;  against  further  legislation  pro- 
hibitory of  Slavery  in  the  Territories ; 
against  Secession  or  Disunion ; 
against  whatever  seemed  calculated 
to  produce  irritation  or  alienation 
between  the  North  and  the  South ; 
and  in  fawr  of  liberal  grants  by 
Congress  in  aid  of  the  colonization 
by  Slave  States  of  their  free  colored 
population.  His  reasons  for  oppos- 
ing any  prohibitive  legislation  with 
regard  to  Slavery  in  the  new  ter- 
ritories were  set  forth  as  follows : 

"  Now,  as  to  California  and  New  Mexico, 
I  hold  Slavery  to  be  excluded  from  those 
territories  by  a  law  even  superior  to  that 
which  admits  and  sanctions  it  in  Texas.  I 
mean  the  law  of  nature,  of  physical  geogra- 
phy, the  law  of  the  formation  of  the  earth. 
That  law  settles  forever,  with  a  strength 
beyond  all  terms  of  human  enactment,  that 
Slavery  cannot  exist  in  California  or  New 
Mexico.  Understand  me,  Sir;  I  mean 
Slavery  as  we  regard  it ;  the  Slavery  of  the 
colored  race  as  it  exists  in  the  Southern 
States.  I  shall  not  discuss  the  point,  but 
leave  it  to  the  learned  gentlemen  who  have 
undertaken  to  discuss  it;  but  I  suppese 
there  is  no  Slavery  of  that  description  in 
California  now.  I  understand  that  peonism, 
a  sort  of  penal  servitude,  exists  there,  or 
rather  a  sort  of  voluntary  sale  of  a  man  and 
his  offspring  for  debt — an  arrangement  of  a 
peculiar  nature  known  to  the  law  of  Mexico. 


*5  March  7,  1850. 


206 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


But  what  I  mean  to  say  is,  that  it  is  as  im- 
possible that  African  Slavery,  as  we  see  it 
among  us,  should  find  its  way,  or  be  intro- 
duced, into  California  and  New  Mexico,  as 
any  other  natural  impossibility.  California 
and  New  Mexico  are  Asiatic  in  their  forma- 
tion and  scenery.  They  are  composed  of 
vast  ridges  of  mountains,  of  great  hight, 
with  broken  ridges  and  deep  valleys.  The 
sides  of  these  mountains  are  entirely  barren ; 
their  tops  capped  by  perennial  snow.  There 
may  be  in  California,  now  made  free  by  its 
constitution,  and  no  doubt  there  are,  some 
tracts  of  valuable  land.  But  it  is  not  so  in 
New  Mexico.  Pray,  what  is  the  evidence 
which  every  gentleman  must  have  obtained 
on  this  subject,  from  information  sought  by 
himself  or  communicated  by  others?  I 
have  inquired  and  read  all  I  could  find,  in 
order  to  acquire  information  on  this  import- 
ant subject.  What  is  there  in  New  Mexico 
that  could,  by  any  possibility,  induce  any 
body  to  go  therewith  slaves?  There  are 
some  narrow  strips  of  tillable  land  on  the 
borders  of  the  rivers  ;  but  the  rivers  them- 
selves dry  up  before  midsummer  is  gone. 
All  that  the  people  can  do  in  that  region  is 
to  raise  some  little  articles,  some  little  wheat 
for  their  tortillas,  and  that  by  irrigation. 
And  who  expects  to  see  a  hundred  black 
men  cultivating  tobacco,  corn,  cotton,  rice, 
or  anything  else,  on  lands  in  New  Mexico 
made  fertile  only  by  irrigation  ? 

"  I  look  upon  it,  therefore,  as  a  fixed  fact, 
to  use  the  current  expression  of  the  day, 
that  both  California  and  New  Mexico  are 
destined  to  be  free,  so  far  as  they  are  set- 
tled at  all ;  which  I  believe,  in  regard  to 
New  Mexico,  will  be  but  partially  for  a 
great  length  of  time ;  free  by  the  arrange- 
ment of  things  ordained  by  the  Power  above 
us.  I  have,  therefore,  to  say,  in  this  respect 
also,  that  this  country  is  fixed  for  freedom, 
to  as  many  persons  as  shall  ever  live  in  it, 
by  a  less  repealable  law  than  that  which 
attaches  to  the  holding  of  slaves  in  Texas ; 
and  I  will  say  further,  that,  if  a  resolution 
or  a  bill  were  now  before  us  to  provide  a 
Territorial  government  for  New  Mexico,  I 
would  not  vote  to  put  any  prohibition  into 
it  whatever.  Such  a  prohibition  would  be 
idle,  as  it  respects  any  effect  it  would  have 
upon  the  Territory ;  and  I  would  not  take 
pains  uselessly  to  reaffirm  an  ordinance  of 
nature,  nor  to  reenact  the  will  of  God.  I 
would  put  in  no  Wilmot  Proviso  for  the 
mere  purpose  of  a  taunt  or  a  reproach.  I 
would  put  into  it  no  evidence  of  the  votes 
of  superior  power,  exercised  for  no  purpose 
but  to  wound  the  pride,  whether  a  just  and 
rational  pride,  or  an  irrational  pride,  of  the 
citizens  of  the  Southern  States.  I  have  no 
such  object,  no  such  purpose.  They  would 
think  it  a  taunt,  an  indignity ;  they  would 


think  it  to  be  an  act  taking  away  from  them 
what  they  regard  as  a  proper  equality  of 
privilege.  "Whether  they  expect  to  realize 
any  benefit  from  it  or  not,  they  would  think 
it  at  least  a  plain  theoretic  wrong ;  that 
something  more  or  less  derogatory  to  their 
character  and  their  rights  had  taken  place. 
I  propose  to  inflict  no  such  wound  upon 
any  body,  unless  something  essentially  im- 
portant to  the  country,  and  efficient  to  the 
preservation  of  liberty  and  freedom,  is  t<*  be 
effected.  I  repeat,  therefore,  Sir.  and,  as  I 
do  not  propose  to  address  the  Senate  often 
upon  this  subject,  I  repeat  it  because  I  wish 
it  to  be  distinctly  understood,  that,  for  the 
reasons  stated,  if  a  proposition  were  now 
here  to  establish  a  government  for  New 
Mexico,  and  if  it  was  moved  to  insert  a  pro- 
vision for  the  prohibition  of  Slavery,  I 
would  not  vote  for  it. 

"  Sir,  if  we  were  now  making  a  govern- 
ment for  New  Mexico,  and  any  body  should 
propose  a  Wilmot  Proviso,  I  should  treat  it 
exactly  as  Mr.  Polk  treated  that  provision 
for  excluding  Slavery  from  Oregon.  Mr. 
Polk  was  known  to  be,  in  opinion,  decidedly 
averse  to  the  Wilmot  Proviso ;  but  he  felt 
the  necessity  of  establishing  a  government 
for  the  territory  of  Oregon.  The  Proviso 
was  in  the  bill ;  but  he  knew  it  would  be 
entirely  nugatory,  since  it  took  away  no 
right,  no  describable,  no  tangible,  no  appre- 
ciable right  of  the  South;  he  said  he  would 
sign  the  bill  for  the  sake  of  enacting  a  law  to 
form  a  government  in  that  Territory,  and  let 
that  entirely  useless,  and,  in  that  connection, 
entirely  senseless,  proviso  remain.  Sir,  we 
hear  occasionally  of  the  Annexation  of  Cana- 
da; and,  if  there  be  any  man,  any  of  the 
Northern  Democracy,  or  any  one  of  the  Free 
Soil  party,  who  supposes  it  necessary  to  insert 
a  Wilmot  Proviso  in  a  territorial  government 
for  New  Mexico,  that  man  would,  of  course, 
be  of  opinion  that  it  is  necessary  to  protect 
the  everlasting  snows  of  Canada  from  the  foot 
of  Slavery  by  the  same  overspreading  wing 
of  an  act  of  Congress.  Sir,  wherever  there 
is  a  substantial  good  to  be  done,  wherever 
there  is  a  foot  of  land  to  be  prevented  from 
becoming  slave  territory,  I  am  ready  to  as- 
sert the  principle  of  the  exclusion  of  Slavery. 
I  am  pledged  to  it  from  the  year  1837 ;  I  have 
been  pledged  to  it  again  and  again ;  and  I 
will  perform  those  pledges;  but  I  will  not 
do  a  thing  unnecessarily  that  wounds  the 
feelings  of  others,  or  that  does  discredit  to 
my  own  understanding." 

It  seems  not  a  little  remarkable 
that  a  man  of  Mr.  Webster's  strength 
should  have  traversed  the  whole 
ground  of  controversy  so  thoroughly 


MR.  CLAY'S  FINAL  COMPROMISE. 


207 


in  a  speech  inevitably  calculated  to 
.  excite  deep  dissatisfaction  among  the 
great  mass  of  his  constituents,  without 
once  considering  or  even  touching  this 
question  :  "  What  need  exists  for  any 
compromise  whatever?"  Admitting 
the  correctness  of  his  views  and  gen- 
eral positions  with  regard  to  Califor- 
nia, New  Mexico,  Texas,  etc.,  why 
not  permit  each  subject  demanding 
legislation  to  be  presented  in  its  order, 
and  all  questions  respecting  it  to  be 
decided  on  their  intrinsic  merits  ?  He, 
of  course,  contended  throughout  that 
his  position  was  unchanged,  that  his 
views  were  substantially  those  he  had 
always  held;  yet  the  eagerness  and 
satisfaction  wherewith  his  speech 
was  received  and  reprinted  at 
Richmond,  Charleston,  JSTew  Or- 
leans, and  throughout  the  South, 
should,  it  seems,  have  convinced 
him,  if  the  disappointment  and  dis- 
pleasure of  his  constituents  did  not, 
that  either  he  had  undergone  a  great 
transformation,  or  nearly  every  one 
else  had.  His  speech,  though  it  con- 
tained little  or  nothing  referring  di- 
rectly to  the  compromise  proposed 
by  Mr.  Clay,  exerted  a  powerful 
influence  in  favor  of  its  ultimate 
triumph. 

Mr.  Douglas  having  reported16  a 
bill  for  the  admission  of  California 
into  the  Union,  as  also  one  to  estab- 
lish territorial  governments  for  Utah 
and  New  Mexico,  Col.  Benton  mov- 
ed 17  that  the  previous  orders  be  post- 
poned, and  the  California  bill  taken 
up.  Mr.  Clay  proposed  the  laying  of 
this  motion  on  the  table,  which  was 
carried  by  27  Yeas  to  24  Nays.  The 
Senate  now  proceeded,  on  motion  of 
Mr.  Foote,  of  Mississippi,  to  constitute 
a  Select  Committee  of  thirteen,  to 


consider  the  questions  raised  by  Mr. 
Clay's  proposition,  and  also  by  re- 
solves submitted  a  month  later  by  Mr. 
Bell,  of  Tennessee ;  and  on  the  19th 
this  Committee  was  elected  by  ballot 
and  composed  as  follows : 

Mr.  Henry  Clay,  of  Kentucky,  Chairman. 

Messrs.  Dickinson,  of  N.  Y.,  Cooper,  of  Pa., 

Phelps,  of  Vt,  Downs,  of  La., 

BelL  of  Tenn.,  King,  of  Ala., 

Cass,  of  Mich.,  Mangum,  of  N.  C, 

Webster,  of  Mass.,  Mason,  of  Va., 

Berrien,  of  Ga.,  Bright,  of  Ind. 

Mr.  Clay  reported 18  from  said  Com- 
mittee a  recommendation,  substan- 
tially, of  his  original  proposition  of 
compromise,  save  that  he  now  pro- 
vided for  organizing  Utah  as  a  dis- 
tinct Territory.  His  report  recom- 
mended the  following  bases  of  a 
general  Compromise  : 

"1.  The  admission  of  any  new  State  or 
States  formed  out  'of  Texas  to  be  postponed 
until  they  shall  hereafter  present  themselves 
to  be  received  into  the  Union,  when  it  will 
be  the  duty  of  Congress  fairly  and  faithfully 
to  execute  the  compact  with  Texas,  by  ad- 
mitting such  new  State  or  States. 

u2.  The  admission  forthwith  of  Califor- 
nia into  the  Union,  with  the  boundaries 
which  she  has  proposed. 

"  3.  The  establishment  of  Territorial  Gov- 
ernments, without  the  Wilmot  Proviso,  for 
New  Mexico  and  Utah,  embracing  all  the 
territory  recently  acquired  from  Mexico,  not 
contained  in  the  boundaries  of  California. 

"4.  The  combination  of  these  two  last 
measures  in  the  same  bill. 

"  5.  The  establishment  of  the  western  and 
northern  boundaries  of  Texas,  and  the  exclu- 
sion from  her  jurisdiction  of  all  New  Mexico, 
Avith  the  grant  to  Texas  of  a  pecuniary  equiv- 
alent; and  the  section  for  that  purpose  to  be 
incorporated  in  the  bill  admitting  California, 
and  establishing  Territorial  Governments  for 
Utah  and  New  Mexico. 

"  6.  More  effectual  enactments  of  law  to 
secure  the  prompt  delivery  of  persons  bound 
to  service  or  labor  in  one  State,  under  the 
laws  thereof,  who  escape  into  another  State ; 
and 

"7.  Abstaining  from  abolishing  Slavery, 
but,  under  a  heavy  penalty,  prohibiting  the 
Slave-Trade,  in  the  District  of  Columbia." 


16  March  25,  1850.  17  April  6th.  18  May  8th. 


208  THE  AMERICA 

And  still  the  debate  went  on, 
hardly  interrupted  by  the  death 
(July  10th)  of  Gen.  Taylor,  and  the 
accession  of  Vice-President  Fillmore 
to  the  Presidency.  Repeated  efforts 
to  cut  off  from  California  all  her 
territory  south  of  36°  30' ;  to  send 
back  her  constitution  to  a  new  con- 
vention of  her  people,  etc.,  etc.,  were 
made  by  Southern  ultras,  but  defeat- 
ed; and  finally19  the  bill  to  admit 
California  passed  the  Senate  by  34 
Yeas  to  18  Nays — all  Southern — 
and  the  bill  organizing  the  Territo- 
ries of  New  Mexico  and  Utah,  as 
proposed,  likewise  passed  two  days 
thereafter  :  Yeas  27  ;  Nays  10.  The 
other  measures  embraced  in  the  pro- 
position of  compromise  were  in  like 
manner  successively  carried  with  lit- 
tle serious  opposition. 

"When  these  measures  reached  the 
House,  they  encountered  a  spirited 
opposition ;  but  the  bill  organizing 
the  Territory  of  New  Mexico  was 
added  as  an  amendment  or  "  rider" 
to  the  bill  defining  the  Northern 
boundary  of  Texas,  and  paying  her 
ten  millions  for  assenting  to  such  de- 
markation.  This  was  moved  by  Mr. 
Linn  Boyd  (Democrat),  of  Kentucky, 
and  prevailed  by  Yeas  107,  Nays 
99.  The  bill,  as  thus  amended, 
was  first  defeated — Yeas  99 ;  Nays 
107 ;  but  Mr.  Howard,  of  Texas, 
who  had  voted  in  the  negative,  now 
moved  a  reconsideration,  which 
was  carried — Yeas  122;  Nays  84; 
whereupon  the  Previous  Question 
was  seconded — Yeas  115  ;  Nays 
97 ;  and  the  bill  passed20  as  amended 
—Yeas  108  ;  Nays  97.  The  Califor- 
nia bill  was  next91  taken  up  and 

J*  August  13th.        20  September  4th. 


N  CONFLICT. 

passed — Yeas  150  ;  Nays  56 — (all 
Southern);  and  then  the  Utah  bill 
was  in  like  manner  passed — Yeas  97 ; 
Nays  85 — (mainly  Northern  Free 
Soil).  The  bills  providing  more 
effectually  for  the  recovery  of  fugi- 
tive Slaves,  and  abolishing  the  Slave- 
trade  in  the  District,  were  likewise 
passed  by  decided  majorities ;  and 
the  Senate22  concurred  in  the  House 
amendment,  whereby  two  of  its  mea- 
sures had  been  welded  together — 
Yeas  31;  Nays  10  (Northern  Free 
Soil).  So  all  the  measures  originally 
included  in  Mr.  Clay's  proposition 
of  compromise  became  laws  of  the 
land. 

The  propelling  force,  whereby 
these  acts  were  pushed  through  Con- 
gress, in  defiance  of  the  original  con- 
victions of  a  majority  of  its  members, 
or  at  least  the  lubricating  oil  where- 
with the  ways  were  rendered  passa- 
ble, was  contained  in  that  article 
of  the  bill  proposing  to  the  State 
of  Texas  the  establishment  of  her 
Northern  boundary,  which  reads  : 

"Fourth.  The  United  States,  in  consider- 
ation of  said  establishment  of  boundaries, 
cession  of  claims  to  territory,  and  relin- 
quishment of  claims,  will  pay  to  the  State 
of  Texas  the  sum  of  ten  millions  of  dollars, 
in  a  stock  bearing  five  per  cent,  interest, 
and  redeemable  at  the  end  of  fourteen  years ; 
the  interest  payable  half-yearly,  at  the  Trea- 
sury of  the  United  States." 

By  this  article,  the  public  debt  of 
Texas,  previously  worth  in  market 
but  some  twenty  to  thirty  per  cent, 
of  its  face,  was  suddenly  raised  near- 
ly or  quite  to  par,  to  the  entire  satis- 
faction of  its  holders — many  of  them 
members  of  Congress,  or  their  very 
intimate  friends.    Corruption,  thinly 

si  September  7th.      22  September  9th. 


POLITICAL  COMPEOM 

disguised,  haunted  the  purlieus  and 
stalked  through  the  halls  of  the  Capi- 
tol ;  and  numbers,  hitherto  in  needy 
circumstances,  suddenly  found  them- 
selves rich.  The  great  majority,  of 
course,  were  impervious  to  such  in- 
fluences ;  but  the  controlling  and 
controllable  minority  were  not.  This 
was,  probably  the  first  instance  in 
which  measures  of  vital  consequence 
to  the  country  were  carried  or  de- 
feated in  Congress  under  the  direct 
spur  of  pecuniary  interest. 

Political  compromises,  though 
they  have  been  rendered  unsavory 
by  abuse,  are  a  necessary  incident  of 
mixed  or  balanced  governments — 
that  is,  of  all  but  simple,  unchecked 
despotisms.  Wherever  liberty  exists, 
there  diversities  of  judgment  will  be 
developed ;  and,  unless  one  will  domi- 
nates over  all  others,  a  practical 
mean  between  widely  differing  con- 
victions must  sometimes  be  sought. 
If,  for  example,  a  legislature  is  com- 
posed of  two  distinct  bodies  or  houses, 
and  they  differ,  as  they  occasionally 
will,  with  regard  to  the  propriety  or 
the  amount  of  an  appropriation  re- 
quired for  a  certain  purpose,  and 
neither  is  disposed  to  give  way,  a 
partial  concession  on  either  hand  is 
often  the  most  feasible  mode  of  prac- 
tical adjustment.  Where  the  object 
contemplated  is  novel,  or  non-essen- 
tial to  the  general  efficiency  of  the 
public  service — such  as  the  construc- 
tion of  a  new  railroad,  canal,  or  other 
public  work — the  repugnance  of 
either  house  should  suffice  entirely 
to  defeat,  or,  at  least,  to  postpone  it ; 
for  neither  branch  has  a  right  to  ex- 
act from  the  other  conformity  with 
its  views  on  a  disputed  point  as  the 
price  of  its  own  concurrence  in  mea- 
14 


ISES  — THEIR  ABUSE.  209 

sures  essential  to  the  existence  of  the 
Government.  The  attempt,  there- 
fore, of  the  Senate  of  February- 
March,  1849,  to  dictate  to  the  House, 
"  You  shall  consent  to  such  an  or- 
ganization of  the  territories  as  we 
prescribe,  or  we  will  defeat  the  Civil 
Appropriation  bill,  and  thus  derange, 
if  not  arrest,  the  most  vital  machin- 
ery of  the  Government,"  was  utterly 
unjustifiable.  Yet  this  should  not 
blind  us  to  the  fact  that  differences 
of  opinion  are  at  times  developed  on 
questions  of  decided  moment,  where 
the  rights  of  each  party  are  equal, 
and  where  an  ultimate  concurrence 
in  one  common  line  of  action  is  es- 
sential. Without  some  deference  to 
adverse  convictions,  no  confederation 
of  the  insurgent  colonies  was  attain- 
able— no  Union  of  the  States  could 
have  been  effected.  And  where  the 
Executive  is,  by  according  him  the 
veto,  clothed  with  a  limited  power 
over  the  making  of  laws,  it  is  inevi- 
table that  some  deference  to  his 
views,  his  convictions,  should  be 
evinced  by  those  who  fashion  and 
mature  those  laws.  Under  this  as- 
pect, compromise  in  government  is 
sometimes  indispensable  and  lauda- 
ble. 

But  what  is  known  in  State  legis- 
lation as  log-rolling  is  quite  another 
matter.  A.  has  a  bill,  which  he  is 
intent  on  passing,  but  which  ha&  no 
intrinsic  worth  that  commends  it  to 
his  fellow-members.  But  B.,  C,  D., 
and  the  residue  of  the  alphabet,  have 
each  his  "  little  bill not,  perhaps, 
specially  obnoxious  or  objectionable, 
but  such  as  could  not  be  passed  on 
its  naked  merits.  All  alike  must 
fail,  unless  carried  by  that  reciproci- 
ty of  support  suggested  by  their  com- 
mon need  and  peril.  An  understand- 


210 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ing  is  effected  between  their  several 
backers,  so  that  A.  votes  for  the  bills 
of  B.,  C,  D.,  etc.,  as  the  indispensable 
means  of  securing  the  passage  of  his 
own  darling  ;  and  thus  a  whole  litter 
of  bills  become  laws,  whereof  no  sin- 
gle one  was  demanded  by  the  public 
interest,  or  could  have  passed  without 
the  aid  of  others  as  unworthy  as  it- 
self. Such  is  substantially  the  pro- 
cess whereby  our  statute-books  are 
loaded  with  acts  which  subserve  no 
end  bat  to  fill  the  pockets  of  the  few, 
at  the  expense  of  the  rights  or  the 
interests  of  the  many. 

It  was  entirely  proper  that  Con- 
gress should  provide  at  once  for  the 
temporary  government  of  all  the  ter- 
ritories newly  acquired  from  Mex- 
ico ;  and  there  was  no  radical  objec- 
tion to  doing  this  in  one  bill,  if  that 
should  seem  advisable.  As  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  definite  boundary  be- 
tween New  Mexico  and  Texas  was 
essential  to  the  tranquillity  and 
security  of  the  Territory,  that  object 
might  fairly  be  contemplated  in  the 
.act  providing  a  civil  government 


therefor.  But  why  Texas  should  be 
paid  Ten  Millions  of  dollars  for  relin- 
quishing her  pretensions  to  territory 
never  possessed  by,  nor  belonging  to, 
her — territory  which  had  been  first 
acquired  from  Mexico  by  the  forces 
and  then  bought  of  her  by  the  mon- 
ey of  the  Union  —  is  not  obvious ; 
and  why  this  payment,  if  made  at  all, 
should  be  a  make- weight  in  a  bargain 
covering  a  variety  of  arrangements 
with  which  it  had  no  proper  connec- 
tion, is  still  less  explicable.  And 
when,  on  the  back  of  this,  was  piled 
an  act  to  provide  new  facilities  for 
slave-catching  in  the  Free  States,  os- 
tensibly balanced  by  another  which 
required  the  slave-traders  of  Wash- 
ington to  remove  their  jails  and  auc- 
tion-rooms across  the  Potomac  to  that 
dull  old  dwarf  of  a  city  which  had  re- 
cently been  retroceded  to  Virginia,  as 
if  on  purpose  to  facilitate  this  arrange- 
ment, the  net  product  was  a  corrupt 
monstrosity  in  legislation  and  morals 
which  even  the  great  name  of  Henry 
Clay  should  not  shield  from  lasting 
opprobrium. 


XVI. 

THE  EKA  OF  SLAYE-HUNTING. 


But,  whatever  theoretic  or  practi- 
cal objections  may  be  justly  made  to 
the  Compromise  of  1850,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  it  was  accepted  and  rati- 
fied by  a  great  majority  of  the  Ameri- 
can People,  whether  in  the  North  or  in 
the  South.  They  were  intent  on  busi- 
ness—  then  remarkably  prosperous 
— on  planting,  building,  trading,  and 
getting  gain — and  they  hailed  with 


general  joy  the  announcement  that 
all  the  differences  between  the  diverse 
4  sections'  had  been  adjusted  and  set- 
tled. The  terms  of  settlement  were, 
to  that  majority,  of  quite  subordinate 
consequence ;  they  wanted  peace  and 
prosperity,  and  were  nowise  inclined 
to  cut  each  other's  throats  and  burn 
each  other's  houses  in  a  quarrel  con- 
cerning (as  they  regarded  it)  only  the 


THE  SOUTH  SUSTAINS  T 


HE  COMPROMISE   OF   1  85  0.  211 


status  of  negroes.  The  Compromise 
had  taken  no  money  from  their  pock- 
ets ;  it  had  imposed  upon  them  no 
pecuniary  burdens  ;  it  had  exposed 
them  to  no  personal  and  palpable 
dangers:  it  had  rather  repelled  the 
gaunt  specter  of  Civil  War  and  Dis- 
union (habitually  conjured  up  when 
Slavery  had  a  point  to  carry),  and 
increased  the  facilities  for  making 
money,  while  opening  a  boundless 
vista  of  National  greatness,  security, 
and  internal  harmony.  Especially 
by  the  trading  class,  and  the  great 
majority  of  the  dwellers  in  seaboard 
cities,  was  this  view  cherished  with 
intense,  intolerant  vehemence. 

The  Compromise  had  been  violent- 
ly opposed  alike  from  the  South 
and  from  the  North — of  course,  on 
opposite  grounds.  The  "  Fire-Eat- 
ers," or  disciples  of  Mr.  Calhoun, 
regarded  it  as  surrendering  the  sub- 
stance of  all  that  was  in  dispute — 
the  newly  acquired  territories  —  to 
the  North,  while  amusing  the  South 
with  a  mere  shadow  of  triumph  in 
the  waiver  of  any  positive,  peremp- 
tory exclusion  of  Slavery  therefrom. 
They  resolved  not  to  submit  to  it,  but 
to  rouse  their  section  at  first  to  the- 
oretical, ultimately  to  forcible,  resist- 
ance. To  this  end,  a  direct  issue  was 
made  against  the  Compromise  in  Mis- 
sissippi— next  to  South  Carolina,  the 
most  intensely  Pro-Slavery  State  in 
the  Union — by  nominating  a  "  State 
Eights"  ticket,  headed  by  Jefferson 
Davis  for  Governor — Mr.  Davis  hav- 
ing opposed  the  Compromise  in  the 
Senate  with  determined  pertinacity. 
His  adversaries  accepted  the  chal- 
lenge, and  nominated  a  "  Union" 
ticket  in  opposition,  headed  by  Hen- 

1  Foote,  28,738;  Davis,  27,729. 

2  For   Cooperation,  25,098;    for  Secession, 


ry  S.  Foote  for  Governor — Mr.  Foote, 
as  Mr.  Davis's  colleague,  though  he 
demurred  to  Mr.  Clay's  programme 
at  the  outset,  having  supported  the 
Compromise  to  the  extent  of  his  abil- 
ity. The  election  occurred  early  in 
November,  1851;  when  the  "Union" 
party  won  a  complete  triumph — the 
vote  being  the  largest  ever  yet  polled, 
and  Mr.  Foote  elected  by  over  1,000 1 
majority.  The  rest  of  the  "  Union" 
State  ticket,  with  a  strongly  "  Union" 
Legislature,  succeeded  by  still  larger 
majorities.  Alabama,  likewise,  chose 
a  "  Union"  Legislature,  and  a  "  Uni- 
on" majority  of  Congressmen.  Loui- 
siana, this  year,  elected  a  "  Whig" 
Auditor  and  Legislature  —  meaning 
much  the  same  thing.  And  even 
South  Carolina — having  been  sum- 
moned by  her  chieftains  (Mr.  Cal- 
houn being  now  dead)  to  elect  a 
Convention,  whereby  her  course  in 
the  exigency  should  be  determined — 
gave  a  "  Cooperation"  majority  of 
over  7,000  on  the  popular2  vote, 
electing  114  "  Cooperationists"  to  54 
unqualified  "  Secessionists."  In  oth- 
er words,  she  voted  not  to  attempt 
Secession  without  the  concurrence 
and  support  of  her  Southern  sisters — 
this  being  the  shape  wherein  she  could, 
with  least  sacrifice  of  pride  or  consis- 
tency, indicate  her  disposition  not  to 
rush  madly  upon  the  perils  of  Dis- 
union and  Civil  War.  Thus  the  tri- 
umph of  the  Compromise  in  the  Slave 
States  was  complete ;  for  it  was  felt 
to  be  preposterous  to  make  the  issue 
in  any  other  States  if  it  could  not  be 
upheld  in  these. 

In  the  North,  likewise,  the  acqui- 
escence in  the  Compromise  was  gen- 
eral and  decisive  ;  though  here,  too, 

17,796.  These  totals  are  obtained  by  adding  up 
the  votes  for  delegates  in  the  several  "parishes." 


212 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


some  of  its  cardinal  provisions  pro- 
voked strenuous  opposition.  The 
new  Fugitive  Slave  Law  proved 
especially  obnoxious,  both  in  prin- 
ciple and  practice,  to  a  large  and 
earnest  minority.  It  had  been  ori- 
ginally drafted  by  Senator  Mason, 
of  Virginia — a  man  conspicuously 
charged  with  that  pro-Slavery  venom 
which  has  since  made  him  a  leading 
Rebel — and  who  had  already  signal- 
ized himself  by  his  efforts  to  render 
the  maintenance  of  the  Union  impos- 
sible on  any  other  terms  than  those 
of  the  most  utter  and  abject  devotion, 
on  the  part  of  the  North,  to  the  most 
extreme  Pro-Slavery  aspirations  and 
policy  of  the  South.  He  opposed,  as 
we  have  seen,  Mr.  Clay's  programme  of 
compromise,  as  entirely  too  favorable 
to  the  North ;  he  had  been  among 
the  foremost  of  the  Southern  ultras 
in  defeating  that  programme  in  its 
primitive  shape;  and  he  had  stub- 
bornly resisted  the  admission  of  Cali- 
fornia as  a  Free  State,  unless  and 
until  paid  for  by  concessions  on  the 
part  of  the  North.  Yet  his  draft  of 
a  Fugitive  Slave  Law  was  adopted 
by  the  great  Compromise  Committee, 
and  ultimately  rushed  through  the 
two  Houses  with  little  consideration 
and  less  scrutiny.  When  it  was 
reached  in  its  order  in  the  lower, 
Judge  James  Thompson3  obtained 
the  floor  4 — doubtless  by  prearrange- 
ment  with  Speaker  Cobb — and  spoke 
in  favor  of  the  measure  as  just  and 
necessary,  closing  his  remarks  by  a 
demand  of  the  Previous  Question. 
This  was  sustained  by  a  majority; 
and  the  bill — with  all  its  imperfec- 
tions on  its  head,  and  without  afford- 
ing any  opportunity  for  amendment — 

3  Democrat,  of  Erie,  Pa.  4  September,  12th. 
5  Samuel  A.  Eliot,  Massachusetts,  John  L. 


was  ordered  to  a  third  reading  by 
109  Yeas  to  75  Nays — every  member 
from  a  Slave  State  who  voted  at  all, 
voting  Yea,  with  28  Democrats  and 
3  5  Whigs  from  Free  States.  From 
the  Free  States  33,  from  the  Slave 
States  15  members  were  absent,  or 
withheld  their  votes ;  and,  as  the 
vote  in  the  Senate  stood  27  for  to  12 
against  it,  with  21  absent,  it  is  note- 
worthy that  it  passed  either  House 
by  the  votes  of  a  decided  minority 
of  the  members  thereof.  Still,  it  is 
hardly  probable  that,  had  every 
member  been  present  and  voted,  it 
would  have  been  defeated. 

This  measure,  so  inconsiderately 
adopted,  was  specially  objectionable 
to  the  humaner  instincts  of  the  Free 
States  in  these  particulars  : 

1.  It  directed  and  provided  for  the 
surrender  to  the  claimant  of  each 
alleged  fugitive  from  Slavery  with- 
out allowing  such  alleged  fugitive  a 
trial  by  jury;  though  the  Federal 
Constitution 6  expressly  provides  that 

"  In  snits  at  common  law,  where  the 
value  in  controversy  shall  exceed  twenty 
dollars,  the  right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be 
preserved:" 

So  that,  while  any  person,  of  whom 
damages  are  claimed  to  the  amount 
of  twenty  dollars,  is  entitled  to  a 
trial  of  the  issue  by  jury,  he  whose 
liberty,  or  whose  wife  and  children, 
are  in  jeopardy,  is  especially  denied 
that  right  by  this  act.  He  may  be 
entirely  and  unimpeachably  white — 
for  this  act  knows  nothing  of  color ; 
he  may  be  the  Governor  of  a  State, 
the  Bishop  of  a  great  Church ;  he 
may  be  General-in-Chief  of  the  arm- 
ies of  the  Union,  engaged  in  a  mo- 
mentous war  ;  but,  if  any  one  chooses 

Taylor,  Ohio,  Edward  W.  McGaughey,  In- 
diana. 6  Amendments — Article  VII. 


JOHN  VAN  BU 


REN'S  VIEWS. 


213 


to  swear  that  lie  is  a  slave  who  has  I 
escaped  from  his  owner's  service, 
he  cannot  require  a  trial  by  jury 
of  the  issue  so  raised,  although 
the  judge  or  commissioner  before 
whom  the  claimant  sees  fit  to  bring 
him  may  be  in  league  with  that 
claimant  to  get  him  out  of  the  pro- 
tection of  the  law  and  into  the  power 
of  his  deadly  enemies.  And  it  is 
specially  provided  by  this  act 7  that 

"In  no  trial  or  hearing  under  this  act 
shall  the  testimony  of  such  alleged  fugitive 
be  admitted  in  evidence." 

2.  It  did  not  even  allow  him  a 
hearing  before  a  judge ;  but  author- 
ized the  captor  to  take  him  at  once 
before  any  commissioner  appointed 
to  take  depositions,  etc.,  by  a  Judge 
of  the  Federal  Courts,  who  was 
clothed  by  this  act  with  plenary 
power  in  the  premises ;  on  whose 
rendition  and  certificate  he  might 
be  hurried  off  at  once  into  Slavery, 
without  stay  or  appeal. 

3.  Said  commissioner  was  to  re- 
ceive $10  for  his  services  in  case  he 
directed  the  surrender  of  the  alleged 
fugitive,  but  only  $5  in  case  he,  for 
any  cause,  decided  against  the  claim- 
ant. The  act  thus,  in  effect,  offered 
him  a  bribe  to  decide  against  the 
person  charged  with  owing  "  service 
or  labor." 8 

4.  The  persons  charged  with  the 
duty  of  arresting  the  alleged  fugitives 
were,  in  every  instance,  authorized 
and  empowered  by  the  act  to  "  sum- 
mon and  call  to  their  aid  the  by- 
standers, or  posse  comitatus  of  the 
proper  county,"  to  aid  them  in  their 
work ;  "  and  all  good  citizens  are 

7  Sec.  6. 

8  The  reason,  or,  at  least,  the  excuse,  offered 
for  this,  imported  that  the  labor  of  making  out 
the  necessary  papers  was  greater  in  case  of  a 
rendition  than  in  the  alternative. 


hereby  commanded  to  aid  and  assist 
in  the  prompt  and  efficient  execution 
of  this  law." 

Mr.  John  Yan  Buren,  in  a  letter9 
to  a  Massachusetts  Convention  of 
opponents  of  this  law,  while  admit- 
ting the  right  to  reclaim  and  the 
duty  of  surrendering  fugitives  from 
Slavery,  condemned  the  enactment 
in  all  its  more  important  features  : 
first,  as  an  assumption  by  Congress 
of  a  duty  properly  devolving  on  the 
States,10  and  to  be  rightfully  executed 
by  State  laws,  tribunals,  and  function- 
aries. The  demurrer  that  the  Su- 
preme Court  had  decided 11  adversely 
to  this  position  was  met  by  Mr.  Yan 
Buren  as  follows : 

"  By  this  decision,  judges  in  determining 
the  question  of  authority  would  probably 
be  concluded.  But,  in  a  popular  discussion 
of  the  propriety  of  a  law,  with  a  view  to  its 
repeal  or  modification,  I  suppose  we  are  at 
liberty  to  believe  in  opposition  to  a  decision 
of  the  Supreme  Court.  Even  the  executive 
and  legislative  departments  deny  its  au- 
thority to  bind  them.  The  Supreme  Court 
decided  that  the  Alien  and  Sedition  Law 
was  constitutional,  and  Matthew  Lyon  was 
imprisoned  under  it.  The  President,  Mr. 
Jefferson,  decided  that  it  was  not,  and  par- 
doned Mr.  Lyon.  The  Supreme  Court  de- 
cided that  Congress  could  constitutionally 
charter  a  Bank  of  the  United  States,  and 
that  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  doing  so 
were  to  be  judged  by  Congress.  The 
President,  Gen.  Jackson,  decided  that  such 
an  act  was  unconstitutional,  and  vetoed  it. 
With  these  examples  before  me,  I  feel  au- 
thorized to  express  the  opinion  which  I 
entertain,  that  the  Fugitive  Slave  Act  is 
unconstitutional,  because  Congress  has  no 
power  to  legislate  upon  the  subject." 

With  regard  to  the  denial  by  this 
act  of  all  semblance  of  a  jury  trial  to 
persons  claimed  under  it  as  fugitive 
slaves,  Mr.  Yan  Buren  was  equally 

9  Dated  New  York,  April  4,  1851. 

10  This  view  was  also  taken  by  many  South- 
rons of  the  "  State  Rights"  school,  especially  by 
several  eminent  South  Carolinians. 

11  In  the  case  of  Prigg  against  Pennsylvania. 


214 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


decided  and  forcible,  as  is  evinced  by 
these  further  extracts  from  his  letter : 

"  But,  to  those  who  regard  the  decision  of 
the  Supreme  Court  as  conclusive,  it  is  im- 
portant to  consider  other  objections  to  the 
act.  Conceding  the  power  of  Congress  to 
legislate  upon  this  subject,  I  think  the  act 
in  question  is  unconstitutional,  because  it 
does  not  give  the  person  seized  a  trial  by 
jury  at  the  place  where  he  is  so  seized,  and 
before  he  is  put  in  the  custody  of  the  claim- 
ant, with  a  warrant  to  transport  him.  *  *  * 

"In  my  judgment,  the  claim  of  service 
secured  by  the  Constitution,  if  it  requires  a 
law  to  enforce  it,  and  if  Congress  can  pass 
such  a  law,  can  only  be  provided  for  by  an 
act  which  secures  the  trial  of  a  question  in 
a  regular  suit  before  a  jury.  The  seventh 
amendment  to  the  Constitution  provides 
that,  '  in  suits  at  common  law,  where  the 
value  in  controversy  shall  exceed  twenty 
dollars,  the  right  of  trial  by  jury  shall  be 
preserved,'  etc.  This  amendment,  as  well 
as  the  fifth,  which  declares  that  'no  person 
shall  be  deprived  of  life,  liberty,  or  proper- 
ty, without  due  process  of  law,'  grew  out 
of  the  opposition  manifested  to  the  adoption 
of  the  Constitution,  because  it  did  not,  in 
terms,  provide  for  the  trial  by  jury  in  civil 
cases.  It  is  needless  to  remind  an  American 
of  the  anxiety  with  which  this  institution 
has  been  watched.  It  is  well  described  by 
Mr.  Justice  Story,  in  the  case  of  Parsons  vs. 
Bedford,  3  Peters,  446.  Justice  Story  also 
explains  what  is  meant  by  'a  suit  at  com- 
mon law,'  in  the  section  quoted.  It  covers 
all  suits  except  those  of  equity,  admiralty, 
or  maritime  jurisdiction  ;  and  the  Judiciary 
Act  of  1789  (chapter  20,  sections  9,  12,  and 
13),  carries  this  construction  into  practical 
operation.  It  will  hardly  be  claimed  that 
Congress  can  take  a  case  which  entitles  a 
party  to  a  jury,  and  deprive  him  of  a  jury 
by  converting  it  into  a  summary  proceed- 
ing, or  that  they  can,  in  the  same  way,  de- 
prive him  of  his  liberty  or  property  without 
due  process  of  law.  If  they  could  do  this, 
the  trial  by  jury  and  the  due  process  of  law 
secured  by  the  Constitution  become  a  mock- 
ery. Treating  this  as  a  mere  question  of 
property  exceeding  twenty  dollars  in  value, 
I  entertain  no  doubt  that  it  is  a  case  where 
a  jury  trial  is  secured  by  the  Constitution. 

"  It  may  be  said  that  a  person  seized  can 
try  the  question  of  his  right  to  freedom  by 
a  jury  at  the  place  whence  he  fled.  This  is 
a  consolation,  to  be  sure,  to  a  man  whose 
freedom  has  been  destroyed  by  seizure  and 
transportation  from  his  home ;  and,  if  he 
could  get  his  witnesses  to  the  place  where 
the  claimant  concludes  to  take  him,  he 
could  have  a  trial.  But  the  act  in  question 
provides  no  jury  trial  anywhere ;  there  is  no 


obligation  on  the  claimant  to  take  the  per- 
son he  seizes  to  any  particular  place  ;  and  if 
I  have  a  right  to  try  the  question  of  title  to 
property  I  hold  at  the  place  where  the  prop- 
erty is,  and  where  the  demand  is  made, 
how  can  it  be  argued  that  I  have  no  such 
right  when  the  demand  made  is  for  my 
thews  and  sinews? 

"  It  is  urged  that  juries  would  not  render 
verdicts  in  favor  of  claimants,  where  the 
right  was  established.  This  does  not  cor- 
respond with  my  observation  of  jury  trials. 
On  the  contrary,  whatever  prejudice  jurors 
may  feel  against  the  law,  I  have  hardly  ever 
known  them  to  fail  in  obeying  the  directions 
of  the  Court  upon  a  point  of  law. 

"  It  is  also  suggested,  that  the  expense  of 
recovering  a  fugitive  by  this  mode  would 
amount  to  a  destruction  of  the  right.  If 
such  an  evil  exists,  it  is  incident  to  this  un- 
fortunate relation.  It  certainly  furnishes 
no  reason  why  the  Constitution  should  be 
violated,  and  a  safeguard  broken  down  in 
reference  to  the  liberty  of  a  human  being, 
which  is  secured  to  him  in  defending  a 
horse  or  a  bale  of  cotton." 

That  the  provisions  of  this  act 
were  harsh  and  cruel  is  certain  ;  but 
that  any  act  providing  for  the  recov- 
ery of  fugitives  from  Slavery  could 
have  been  at  once  humane  and  effi- 
cient, is  not  obvious.  And,  as  the 
capture  and  rendition  of  alleged 
slaves  under  this  act  claimed  a  large 
share  of  public  attention  during  the 
three  or  four  years  immediately  fol- 
lowing its  passage,  while  the  residue 
of  the  Compromise  measures  evoked 
no  special  excitement,  and  had  none 
other  than  a  noiseless,  passive  opera- 
tion, it  is  not  remarkable  that  greater 
success  in  slave-hunting,  with  greater 
alacrity  on  the  part  of  the  Free 
States  in  ministering  to  such  success, 
seemed  to  the  general  Northern 
mind  the  sum  and  substance,  the 
"  being's  end  and  aim,"  of  the  Com- 
promises of  1850.  And,  as  the  Fed- 
eral Administration,  whereof  Mr. 
Fillmore  remained  the  official  head, 
and  Mr.  Webster  became  the  ani- 
mating soul,  gave  prominence  and 
emphasis  to  the  exertions  of  its  sub- 


SLAVE-HUNTING 


IN  FULL  BLAST. 


215 


ordinates  in  aid  of  slave-catching, 
the  alienation  from  it  of  anti-Slavery 
Whigs  became  more  and  more  decid- 
ed and  formidable. 

Numerous  arrests  of  alleged  fu- 
gitives were  made  in  various  parts 
of  the  country,  but  not  with  uniform 
success.  In  New  York  City,  Phila- 
delphia, and  other  marts  largely  en- 
gaged in  Southern  trade,  no  serious 
resistance  was  offered ;  though  in  one 
case  a  black  man  remanded  to  Mary- 
land as  a  fugitive  was  honorably  re- 
jected and  set  at  liberty  by  the 
claimant,  as  not  the  slave  for  whom 
he  had  been  mistaken.  In  Boston, 
serious  popular  repugnance  to  ren- 
dition was  repeatedly  manifested; 
and  in  one  case  a  negro  known  as 
Shadrach,  who  had  been  arrested  as 
a  fugitive,  was  rescued  and  escaped. 
In  other  cases,  however,  and  con- 
spicuously in  those  of  Thomas  Sims 12 
and  Anthony  Burns,13  the  State  and 
City  authorities,  the  Judiciary,  the 
Military,  the  merchants,  and  proba- 
bly a  decided  majority  of  the  citi- 
zens, approved  and  aided  the  surren- 
der. There  were .  cases,  however, 
wherein  the  popular  sentiment  of  the 
country  was  on  the  side  of  the  hunted 
blacks — as  was  evinced  at  Syracuse,14 
N.  Y.,  in  the  rescue  of  Jerry  Loguen, 
an  alleged  fugitive,  from  the  hands 
of  the  authorities,  and  his  protection 
by  alternately  hiding  and  forward- 
ing him  until  he  made  his  escape 
into  Canada.  At  Christiana,  Lan- 
caster Co.,  Pa.,15  where  a  considerable 
number  of  negroes  were  compactly 
settled,  Edward  Gorsuch,  a  Mary- 
land slaveholder,  who  attempted, 
with  two  or  three  accomplices,  to 
seize  his  alleged  slaves,  four  in  num- 


ber, was  resisted  by  the  alarmed,  in- 
dignant blacks,  and  received  a  ball 
from  a  musket  fired  by  one  of  them 
which  proved  fatal ;  and  his  son, 
who  had  accompanied  him,  was 
wounded.  And  in  Milwaukee,  Wis., 
Sherman  M.  Booth  having  been  con- 
victed in  the  U.  S.  District  Court  of 
aiding  in  the  rescue  of  Joshua  Glo- 
ver, a  fugitive  from  St.  Louis,  the 
Supreme  Court  of  that  State,  on  a 
habeas  corpus  sued  out  in  his  behalf, 
decided  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  un- 
constitutional and  void,  and  set  him 
at  liberty.  This  decision  was  over- 
ruled, however,  by  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  in  a  unani- 
mous decision  affirming  the  validity 
of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  and  di- 
recting that,  though  a  State  Court 
might  properly  grant  a  habeas  corpus 
in  behalf  of  a  person  imprisoned 
under  Federal  authority,  yet  that  the 
custodian  in  such  case  had  only  to 
make  return  that  he  was  sq  held,  and 
that  this  return,  being  proved  truth- 
ful, must  be  accepted  by  the  State 
Court  as  sufficient  and  conclusive — ■ 
the  Federal  and  State  jurisdictions 
being  each  sovereign  within  its  pro- 
per sphere,  and  each  entitled  to 
entire  respect  from  the  other,  though 
operative  over  the  same  territory. 
And  this  remains  to  this  day  the  ad- 
judicated law  of  the  land. 

The  activity  and  universality  of 
slave-hunting,  under  the  act  of  1850, 
were  most  remarkable.  That  act 
became  a  law  on  the  18th  of  Septem- 
ber ;  and,  within  ten  days  thereafter, 
a  negro  named  James  Hamlet  had 
been  seized  in  the  city  of  New  York, 
and  very  summarily  dispatched  to  a 
woman  in  Baltimore,  who  claimed 


12  April  12,  1851.  13  May  27,  1854. 


14  October  1,  1851.        15  September  11, 1851. 


216  THE  AMERICA 

him  as  her  slave.  Before  the  act  was 
a  month  old,  there  had  been  several 
arrests  nnder  it,  at  Harrisburg  and 
near  Bedford,  Pa.,  in  Philadelphia, 
at  Detroit,  and  in  other  places. 
Within  the  first  year  of  its  existence, 
more  persons,  probably,  were  seized 
as  fugitive  slaves  than  during  the 
preceding  sixty  years.  Many  of  these 
seizures  were  made  under  circum- 
stances of  great  aggravation.  Thus, 
in  Philadelphia,  Euphemia  "Williams, 
who  had  lived  in  Pennsylvania  in 
freedom  all  her  life,  as  she  affirmed, 
and  had  there  become  the  mother  of 
six  living  children,  of  whom  the  old- 
est was  seventeen,  was  arrested  in 
1851  as  the  slave  of  a  Marylander 
named  Purnell,  from  whom  she  was 
charged  with  escaping  twenty-two 
years  before.  Her  six  children  were 
claimed,  of  course,  as  also  the  prop- 
erty of  her  alleged  master.  Upon 
a  full  hearing,  Judge  Kane  decided 
that  she  was  not  the  person  claimed 
by  Burnell  as  his  slave  Mahala.  But 
there  were  several  instances  in  which 
persons  who  had  lived  in  unchalleng- 
ed freedom  from  fifteen  to  twenty- 
five  years  were  seized,  surrendered, 
and  carried  away  into  life-long  Sla- 
very. 

The  needless  brutality  with  which 
these  seizures  were  often  made,  tend- 
ed to  intensify  the  popular  repug- 
nance which  they  occasioned.  In 
repeated  instances,  the  first  notice 
the  alleged  fugitive  had  of  his  peril 
was  given  him  by  a  blow  on  the 
head,  sometimes  with  a  heavy  club 
or  stick  of  wood ;  and,  being  thus 
knocked  down,  he  was  carried,  bleed- 
ing and  insensible,  before  the  facile 
commissioner,  who  made  short  work 
of  identifying  him,  and  earning  his 
ten  dollars,  by  remanding  him  into 


N  CONFLICT. 

Slavery.  In  Columbia,  Pa.,  March, 
1852,  a  negro,  named  William 
Smith,  was  seized  as  a  fugitive  by  a 
Baltimore  police  officer,  while  work- 
ing in  a  lumber-yard,  and,  attempt- 
ing to  escape,  the  officer  drew  a  pis- 
tol and  shot  him  dead.  In  Wilkes- 
barre,  Pa.,  a  deputy  marshal  and  three 
or  four  Yirginians  suddenly  came 
upon  a  nearly  white  mulatto  waiter 
at  a  hotel,  and,  falling  upon  him 
from  behind  with  a  club,  partially 
shackled  him.  He  fought  them  off 
with  the  hand-cuff  which  they  had 
secured  to  his  right  wrist,  and,  cover- . 
ed  with  blood,  rushed  from  the 
house  and  plunged  into  the  Susque- 
hanna, exclaiming:  "I  will  be 
drowned  rather  than  taken  alive!" 
He  was  pursued  to  the  river-bank, 
and  thence  fired  upon  repeatedly,  at 
a  very  short  distance,  as  he  stood  in 
the  water,  up  to  his  neck,  until  a  ball 
entered  his  head,  instantly  covering 
his  face  with  blood.  The  by-stand- 
ers,  who  had  by  this  time  collected, 
were  disgusted  and  indignant,  and 
the  hunters,  fearing  their  interposi- 
tion, retired  for  consultation.  He 
thereupon  came  out  of  the  water, 
apparently  dying,  and  lay  down  on 
the  shore.  One  of  his  pursuers  re- 
marked that  "  dead  niggers  were  not 
worth  taking  South."  His  clothes 
having  been  torn  off  in  the  scuffle, 
some  one  brought  a  pair  of  panta- 
loons, and  put  them  on  him,  and  he 
was  helped  to  his  feet  by  a  negro 
named  Pex ;  on  seeing  which,  the 
hunters  returned  and  presented  their 
revolvers,  driving  him  again  into  the 
river,  where  he  remained  more  than 
an  hour,  with  only  his  head  above 
the  water.  His  claimants  dared  not 
come  within  his  powerful  grasp,  as 
he  afterward  said,  "he  would  have 


FREE  BLACKS 

died  contented,  could  lie  have  car- 
ried two  or  three  of  them  down  with 
him."  And  the  hunters  were  deter- 
red or  shamed  by  the  spectators  from 
further  firing.  Preparations  being 
made  to  arrest  them  as  rioters,  they 
absconded ;  whereupon,  their  victim 
waded  some  distance  up  the  stream, 
and  was  soon  after  found  by  some 
women,  lying  flat  on  his  face  in  a 
corn-field,  insensible.  He  was  then 
duly  cared  for,  and  his  wounds 
dressed,  which  was  the  last  that  was 
seen  of  him.  His  assailants  were 
afterward  arrested  in  Philadelphia, 
on  a  charge  of  riot,  on  a  warrant 
issued  on  due  complaint  by  a  State 
magistrate  ;  but  Justice  Grier,  of  the 
United  States  Supreme  Court,  arrest- 
ed the  proceedings  as  an  unauthor- 
ized interference  with  Federal  offi- 
cers in  the  discharge  of  their  duty. 
In  his  opinion,  discharging  the  pris- 
oners, he  said : 

"  We  are  unable  to  perceive  in  this  trans- 
action anything  worthy  of  blame  in  the 
conduct  of  these  officers,  in  their  unsuccess- 
ful endeavors  to  fulfill  a  most  dangerous  and 
disgusting  duty;  except,  perhaps,  a  want 
of  sufficient  courage  and  perseverance  in 
the  attempt  to  execute  the  writ!" 

Of  course,  a  law  affording  such 
facilities  and  temptations  to  kidnap- 
ping was  not  allowed  to  pass  unim- 
proved by  the  numerous  villains  who 
regarded  negroes  as  the  natural  and 
lawful  prey  of  whites  under  all  cir- 
cumstances. The  Kentucky  Yeo- 
man, a  Democratic  pro-Slavery 
organ,  once  remarked  that  the  work 
of  arresting  fugitives  had  become  a 
regular  business  along  the  border 
line  between  the  Slave  and  Free 
States,  and  that  some  of  those  engag- 
ed in  it  were  not  at  all  particular  as 
to  the  previous  slavery  or  freedom  of 
those  they  arrested.    How  could  it 


KIDNAPPED.  217 

be  expected  that  they  should  be  ?  In 
many  instances,  free  colored  girls 
were  hired  for  household  service  at 
some  point  distant  from  that  where 
they  had  previously  resided,  and 
were  known ;  and,  being  thus  unsus- 
pectingly spirited  away  from  all  who 
could  identify  them,  were  hurried 
off  into  Slavery.  Sometimes,  though 
not  often,  negroes  were  tempted  by 
heavy  bribes  to  betray  their  brethren 
into  the  hands  of  the  slave-hunters. 
In  one  instance,  a  clerk  in  a  dry- 
goods  store  in  western  New  York, 
who  was  of  full  age,  a  member  of  a 
church,  and  had  hitherto  borne  a  re- 
spectable character,  hired  two  colored 
boys  to  work  for  him  in  a  hotel  in 
Ohio,  and  on  his  way  thither  sold 
them  as  fugitive  slaves  to  three  Ken- 
tuckians,  who  appear  to  have  be- 
lieved his  representations.  One  of 
the  intended  victims,  detecting  the 
plot,  escaped  from  the  cars,  knocking 
down  the  Kentuckian  who  under- 
took to  prevent  him.  The  other  was 
sold  for  $750  to  an  honorable  slave- 
holder in  Warsaw,  Ky.,  who,  upon 
proof  of  the  outrage,  promptly  and 
cheerfully  returned  him  to  freedom. 
One  girl,  who  was  hired  from  New 
York,  to  live  as  a  servant  in  Newark, 
N.  J.,  was  taken  directly  through 
Newark  to  Washington,  and  there 
offered  to  a  slave-trader  for  $600,  but 
not  accepted ;  when  she,  having  be- 
come alarmed,  appealed  to  the  hotel- 
keeper  for  protection ;  whereupon 
the  kidnappers  abandoned  her,  but 
were  ultimately  arrested  at  Ellicott's 
Mills,  Md.,  and  returned  to  New- 
York,  where  the  husband  was  con- 
victed, and  sent  to  the  penitentiary. 
In  one  instance,  a  negro,  near  Ed- 
wardsville,  Ills.,  who  had  been  em- 
ployed in  the  work  of  capturing  sev- 


218  THE  AMERICA 

erai  alleged  fugitives,  finally  met  a 
white  man  on  the  highway,  present- 
ed a  pistol,  and  arrested  him  as  a 
runaway  slave,  for  whom  a  reward 
of  $200  had  been  offered.  The 
white  man  happened,  however,  to  be 
acquainted  in  Edwardsville,  and  was 
thus  enabled  to  establish  his  right  to 
himself. 

The  business  of  slave-hunting  be- 
came so  profitable  that  the  sheriff  of 
Montreal,  Canada,  received,  in  Janu- 
ary, 1855,  a  letter  from  a  police  offi- 
cer and  constable,  in  Frederick,  Md., 
making  him  this  tempting  proposi- 
tion : 

"  Vast  numbers  of  slaves,"  says  the  Frede- 
rick official,  "  escaping  from  their  masters  or 
owners,  succeed  in  reaching  your  Provinces, 
and  are,  therefore,  without  the  pale  of  the 
4  Fugitive  Slave  Law,'  and  can  only  be  re- 
stored by  cunning,  together  with  skill. 
Large  rewards  are  offered,  and  will  be  paid, 
for  their  return ;  and,  could  I  find  an  effi- 
cient person  to  act  with  me,  a  great  deal  of 
money  could  be  made,  as  I  would  equally 
divide.  *  *  *  The  only  apprehension 
we  have  of  approaching  too  far  into  Canada 
is  the  fear  of  being  arrested ;  and,  had  I  a 
good  assistant  in  your  city,  who  would  in- 
duce the  negroes  to  the  frontier,  I  would  be 
there  to  pay  the  cash.  On  your  answer,  I  can 
furnish  names  and  descriptions  of  negroes." 

Some  of  the  judicial  decisions 
evoked  by  this  carnival  of  man-hunt- 
ing were  most  remarkable.  In  San- 
dusky, Ohio,  four  men  and  women, 
with  several  children,  were  seized 
from  a  boat  about  to  leave  for  De- 
troit, by  one  who  claimed  to  be  their 
owner.  Mr.  Rush  E.  Sloane,  a  law- 
yer, was  employed  to  act  as  their 
counsel.  As  no  one  claimed  custody 
of  these  persons,  or  produced  any 
right  or  warrant  justifying  their  de- 
tention, Mr.  Sloane  declared  to  the 
bystanders  that  their  seizure  seemed 
to  be  unjustifiable ;  whereupon,  a 
rush  was  made  for  the  door.  A  man 
who  had  hitherto  been  silent,  now 


N  CONFLICT. 

said  :  "  Here  are  the  papers ;  I  own 
the  slaves ;  I  will  hold  you  individu- 
ally responsible  for  their  escape." 
They  did  escape,  and  Mr.  Sloane 
was  thereupon  prosecuted  for  their 
value,  and  compelled  by  the  judg- 
ment of  a  Federal  Court  to  pay  the 
sum  of  $3,950  and  costs.  In  Califor- 
nia, then  completely  under  the  domi- 
nation of  the  Slave  Power,  which 
was  especially  strong  in  the  selection 
of  judges,  matters  were  carried  with 
a  very  high  hand.  In  several  instan- 
ces, masters  who  had  migrated  or  sent 
their  sons  to  that  region  attended  by 
slaves,  undertook  to  reclaim  them  as 
fugitives  and  return  them  by  force  to 
the  banks  of  the  lower  Mississippi ; 
and  the  Supreme  Court  of  that  State 
became  their  accomplices  for  this 
purpose.  The  violation  of  law  to 
this  end  was  so  palpable  and  shame- 
less as  to  excite  general  remark,  if 
not  general  indignation.  In  one 
leading  case,  the  Court  ruled,  in  ef- 
fect, that  the  petitioner  being  young, 
in  bad  health,  and  probably  unadvis- 
ed of  the  constitutional  provision  of 
that  State  making  all  its  inhabitants 
free,  "is  permitted  to  take  Archy 
back  to  Mississippi."  An  old  lawyer 
dryly  remarked,  while  all  around 
were  stigmatizing  this  decision  as 
atrocious,  that  "  he  thought  it  a  very 
fair  compromise,  since  it  gave  the 
law  to  the  North  and  the  negro  to 
the  South." 

On  Sunday,  January  27, 1856,  two 
slaves,  with  their  wives  and  four  chil- 
dren, escaped  from  Boone  County, 
Ky.,  drove  sixteen  miles  to  Coving- 
ton, and  crossed  to  Cincinnati  on  the 
ice.  They  were  missed  before  night- 
fall, and  the  master  of  five  of  them 
followed  rapidly  on  horseback.  Af- 
ter a  few  hours'  inquiry,  he  traced 


THE    CASE    OF    MARGARET  GARNER. 


219 


them  to  the  house  of  a  negro  named 
Kite,  and,  procuring  the  necessary 
warrants,  with  a  marshal  and  assist- 
ants, proceeded  thither  on  Monday. 
He  summoned  them  to  surrender. 
They  refused.  Whereupon  the  offi- 
cers broke  in  the  door,  and  were 
assailed  with  clubs  and  pistols  by 
the  desperate  fugitives.  Only  one  of 
the  marshal's  deputies  was  struck, 
and  he  not  seriously  injured ;  the 
negroes  being  disarmed  before  they 
could  reload. 

On  a  first  survey  of  the  premises 
they  had  captured,  a  horrible  sight 
met  the  officers'  eyes.  In  one  corner 
of  the  room,  a  child  nearly  white  lay 
bleeding  to  death,  her  throat  cut 
from  ear  to  ear.  A  scream  from  an 
adjoining  room  drew  their  attention 
thither,  when  a  glance  revealed  a  ne- 
gro woman  holding  a  knife  dripping 
with  gore  over  the  heads  of  two  chil- 
dren, who  were  crouched  upon  the 
floor,  uttering  cries  of  pain  and  terror. 
"Wresting  the  knife  from  her  hand, 
they  discovered  that  the  children 
were  cut  across  the  head  and  shoul- 
ders, but,  though  bleeding  freely,  not 
dangerously  wounded.  The  woman 
proclaimed  herself  the  mother  of  the 
dead  child,  as  also  of  these,  whom  she 
desired  also  to  kill  rather  than  see 
them  returned  to  Slavery.  All  were 
secured  and  taken  to  the  marshal's 
office,  where  they  sat  quiet  and  de- 
jected, answering  all  questions  in 
monosyllables,  or  not  answering  at 
all.  An  excellent  character  was 
given  to  the  adults  by  their  owners. 
The  mother  of  the  dead  child,  Mar- 
garet Garner,  a  dark  mulatto,  twenty- 
three  years  of  age,  seemed  simply  stu- 
pefied and  dumb  from  excess  of  agony ; 
but,  on  being  complimented  on  the 
looks  of  her  little  boy  beside  her, 


quickly  replied,  "  You  should  have 
seen  my  little  girl  that — that — that 
died.  That  was  the  bird  !"  That  girl 
was  almost  white,  and  of  rare  beauty. 
The  mother  alleged  cruel  treat- 
ment on  the  part  of  her  master,  and 
said  she  had  resolved  to  kill  all  her 
children  and  then  herself,  in  order 
to  escape  the  horrors  of  Slavery.  A 
coroner's  jury  having  rendered  a  ver- 
dict, in  the  case  of  the  dead  child, 
that  it  was  killed  by  its  mother, 
Margaret  Garner,  with  a  knife,  great 
efforts  were  made  by  the  State  au- 
thorities to  hold  her  for  trial  on  a 
charge  of  murder.  All  the  adult 
slaves  declared  that  they  would  go 
dancing  to  the  gallows  rather  than  be 
sent  back  to  Slavery.  But  Judges 
McLean  and  Leavitt,  of  the  Federal 
Court,  decided  that  they  were  in  the 
custody  of  the  U.  S.  Marshal,  and 
could  not  be  taken  out  of  it  by  the 
habeas  corpus  of  a  State  Court,  whe- 
ther under  a  civil  or  criminal  process ; 
so  they  were  all  returned  to  Slavery. 
The  owner  of  Margaret  pledged  him- 
self to  hold  her  subject  to  a  requisition 
from  the  Governor  of  Ohio  to  answer 
the  charge  of  crime  ;  but  he  failed  to 
keep  his  promise,  and  sent  her,  with 
the  rest  of  the  fugitives,  down  the 
river  for  sale,  where  all  trace  of  her 
was  lost.  The  cost  to  the  Federal 
Treasury  of  this  single  rendition 
was  about  $22,000,  whereof  at  least 
$20,000  was  shamefully  squandered 
or  embezzled,  as  $2,000  would  have 
amply  sufficed. 

The  surrender  of  Anthony  Burns 
probably  excited  more  feeling  than 
that  of  any  other  alleged  fugitive,  in 
that  it  attained  unusual  publicity, 
and  took  place  in  New  England  after 
the  North  had  begun  to  feel  the  first 
throbs  of  the  profound  agitation  ex- 


220 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


cited  by  the  repudiation  of  the  Mis- 
souri Compromise  in  the  passage  of 
the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill. 16 

In  this  protracted  and  angry  con- 
troversy respecting  the  surrender  of 
Fugitive  Slaves,  the  advocates  of 
such  surrender  uniformly  treated  it 
as  a  high  moral  and  political  duty. 
Mr.  Webster,17  in  announcing  his  de- 
termination to  vote  for  Mr.  Mason's 
Fugitive  Slave  bill,  used  this  strong 
language : 

"  I  desire  to  call  the  attention  of  all 
sober-minded  men  at  the  North,  of  all 
conscientious  men,  of  all  men  who  are 
not  carried  away  by  some  fanatical  idea, 
or  some  false  impression,  to  their  consti- 
tutional obligations.  I  put  it  to  all  the 
sober   and   sound   minds    at    the  North 


as  a  question  of  morals  and  a  question  of 
conscience,"  etc.,  etc. 

And  on  this  theme  he  discoursed 
every  variation,  in  speeches,  in  let- 
ters, and  in  personal  intercourse, 
during  the  brief  remainder  of  his  life. 
And  every  "  conservative"  pulpit 
and  rostrum  resounded  with  feebler 
and  duller  imitations,  in  drift  and 
substance,  of  this  language — the  pur- 
port of  all  being  that  whoever  failed 
to  do  "  with  alacrity,"18  whatever  he 
could  toward  securing  the  return  of 
fugitive  slaves  to  their  masters,  was 
guilty  of  a  flagrant  breach,  not  only 
of  constitutional,  but  of  moral  obli- 
gation. 


16  On  the  2d  of  June,  1854 — the  repudiation 
of  the  Missouri  compact  having  recently  been 
consummated  in  the  passage  and  Presidential 
approval  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill — Anthony 
Burns  having  been  adjudged  a  fugitive  at  Bos- 
ton, President  Pierce  ordered  the  U.  S.  cutter 
Morris  to  take  him  from  that  city  to  life-long 
bondage  in  Virginia.  The  following  spirited 
stanzas  thereupon  appeared  (Jane  13th)  in  The 
New  York  Tribune : 

HAIL  TO  THE  STARS  AND  STRIPES. 

Hail  to  the  Stars  and  Stripes ! 

The  boastful  flag  all  hail ! 
The  tyrant  trembles  now, 

And  at  the  sight  grows  pale  ; 
The  Old  World  groans  in  pain, 

And  turns  her  eye  to  see, 
Beyond  the  Western  Main, 

The  emblem  of  the  Free. 

Hail  to  the  Stars  and  Stripes ! 

Hope  beams  in  every  ray  ! 
And,  shining  through  the  bars 

Of  gloom,  points  out  the  way  : 
The  Old  World  sees  the  light 

That  shall  her  cells  illume  ; 
And,  shrinking  back  to  night, 

Oppression  reads  her  doom. 

Hail  to  the  Stars  and  Stripes  1 

They  float  in  every  sea  ; 
The  crystal  waves  speed  on 

The  emblem  of  the  Free ! 
Beneath  the  azure  sky 

Of  soft  Italia' s  clime, 
Or  where  Auroras  die 

In  solitude  sublime. 

All  hail  the  flaunting  Lie ! 

The  Stars  grow  pale  and  dim — 


The  Stripes  are  bloody  scars, 
A  lie  the  flaunting  hymn ! 

It  shields  the  pirate's  deck, 
It  binds  a  man  in  chains ; 

It  yokes  the  captive's  neck, 
And  wipes  the  bloody  stains. 

Tear  down  the  flaunting  Lie  I 

Half-mast  the  starry  flag  1 
Insult  no  sunny  sky 

With  Hate's  polluted  rag ! 
Destroy  it,  ye  who  can ! 

Deep  sink  it  in  the  waves  I 
It  bears  a  fellow-man 

To  groan  with  fellow-slaves. 

Awake  the  burning  scorn  ! 

The  vengeance  long  and  deep, 
That,  till  a  better  morn, 

Shall  neither  tire  nor  sleep ! 
Swear  once  again  the  vow, 

0,  freeman  !  dare  to  do  1 
God's  will  is  ever  now  ! 

May  His  thy  will  renew  1 

Enfurl  the  boasted  Lie  ! 

Till  Freedom  lives  again, 
To  reign  once  more  in  truth 

Among  untrammeled  men  1 
Boll  up  the  starry  sheen — 

Conceal  its  bloody  stains ; 
For  in  its  folds  are  seen 

The  stamp  of  rusting  chains. 

Be  bold,  ye  heroes  all  1 

Spurn,  spurn  the  flaunting  Lie, 
Till  Peace,  and  Truth,  and  Love 

Shall  fill  the  bending  sky; 
Then,  floating  in  the  air, 

O'er  hill,  and  dale,  and  sea, 
'T  will  stand  forever  fair, 

The  emblem  of  the  Free  ! 

17  In  his  7th  of  March  speech.    18  Ibid. 


ALACRITY  IN  S 


LATE-HUNTING-. 


221 


In  the  South,  where  every  adult 
white  male  was  accustomed  to  join 
instinctively  and  eagerly  in  the  hunt 
for  a  fugitive  slave,  precisely  as 
though  he  were  some  domestic  ani- 
mal that  had  escaped  from  his  own- 
er's inclosure,  and  taken  to  the  high- 
way or  the  woods,  such  language 
might  have  been  used  with  consisten- 
cy :  In  the  North,  it  was  otherwise  ; 
and  for  this  reason :  The  essence  of 
obedience  to  law  is  the  acceptance 
of  the  obligation,  not  in  its  letter 
merely,  but  in  its  spirit.  In  other 
words,  he  only  can  render  full,  effect- 
ive obedience  to  a  law  who  recog- 
nizes in  such  obedience  the  fulfill- 
ment of  an  intrinsic  obligation — of 
a  Divine  requirement.  Let  us  sup- 
pose, now,  that  Mr.  Webster,  while 
riding  on  one  of  the  highways  near 
Boston,  or  near  Washington,  had  en- 
countered a  black  mother  with  a 
child  in  her  arms,  fleeing  on  foot, 
with  all  possible  speed,  and  had  seen 
in  the  distance  three  or  four  white 
men,  mounted  and  armed,  fiercely 
pursuing.  He  would,  of  course,  have 
comprehended  at  once  that  the  wo- 
man and  child  were  presumptively 
fugitive  slaves,  and  that  the  pursuers 
were  her  master,  or  his  agent,  with 
assistants,  in  quest  of  her.  But  would 
he  have  thereupon  attempted,  "  with 
alacrity,"  to  stop  the  fleeing  woman, 
and  forcibly  detain  her,  until  they 
should  overtake  and  seize  her  ?  Nay, 
if  he  had  seen  her,  while  in  a  hollow 
out  of  their  sight,  make  a  dexterous 
plunge  into  a  wood,  so  as  to  throw 
them  completely  off  her  track,  would 
he  have  ridden  to  tell  them  where 
she  had  left  the  road,  and  how  they 

19  It  is  within  the  personal  knowledge  of  the 
writer  that  politicians  who  declaimed  loudly  in 
public  of  our  constitutional  obligations  to  surren- 


must  vary  their  course  to  catch  her  % 
It  would  be  a  libel  on  his  memory 
to  suppose  him  capable  of  any  such 
baseness.19  He  might  have  refrained 
from  giving  the  woman  a  hint,  by 
nodding  or  finger-pointing,  as  to  the 
proper  place  at  which  to  leave  the 
road;  he  probably  would  have  re- 
frained from  misleading  her  pursuers, 
by  wink  or  sign,  as  to  the  course  she 
had  actually  taken ;  but  he  would 
have  rendered  them  no  positive  aid. 
His  soul  would  have  instinctively  re- 
volted from  becoming  a  volunteer 
personal  accomplice  of  the  woman- 
hunters.  Yet  to  refuse  this  was  to 
withhold  a  genuine  and  hearty  obe- 
dience to  the  vaunted  constitutional 
obligation,  that  fugitives  from  Slave- 
ry "  shall  be  delivered  up  on  claim" 
of  their  masters.  It  was  to  repudiate 
in  acts  what  he  so  stoutly  affirmed 
in  words.  It  was  to  "  keep  the  word 
of  promise  to  the  ear,  but  break  it  to 
the  hope."  And  hence — for  this  dis- 
crepancy was  general  and  obvious — 
the  yard-stick  clamor  throughout  the 
North  for  a  vigorous  and  thorough 
execution  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  law 
was  calculated  rather  to  disgust  than 
conciliate  the  Slave  Power,  every 
day  quietly  inclining  more  and  more 
to  the  desperate  expedient  of  Dis- 
union. It  widened  and  deepened 
the  Southern  impression  that  the 
North  was,  at  heart,  thoroughly  anti- 
Slavery,  but  would  profess  or  do  any- 
thing base  in  its  own  eyes  for  the 
sake  of  securing  the  immense  pecu- 
niary advantages  derived  by  it  from 
the  Union. 


The  National  Conventions  of  the 

der  fugitives,  and  reproached  their  neighbors  for 
infidelity  thereto,  privately  gave  money  to  aid 
the  escape  of  fugitive  slaves  to  Canada. 


222 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


rival  Whig  and  Democratic  parties 
for  1852  were  not  held  till  very  late 
— convening  in  Baltimore,  the  Demo- 
cratic on  the  1st,  and  the  Whig,  on 
the  16th  of  June.  But  it  had  alrea- 
dy been  made  manifest  that  a  new 
article — acquiescence  in  the  Com- 
promise of  1850 — was  to  be  interpo- 
lated into  the  creed  of  one  or  both 
of  these  parties,  if  the  strength  of 
its  champions  should  be  found  suffi- 
cient. Indeed,  a  public  pledge  had, 
several  months  before,  been  signed 
by  Henry  Clay,  Howell  Cobb,  and 
some  fifty  other  members  of  Con- 
gress, of  either  party,  that  they  would 
support  no  candidate  thereafter  who 
did  not  approve  and  agree  to  abide 
by  that  Adjustment.  And  this  Com- 
promise, according  to  the  interpreta- 
tion now  put  upon  it  by  its  leading 
supporters,  was  in  essence  a  compact 
to  refrain  from  and  oppose  all  future 
"  agitation"  or  discussion  adverse  to 
the  security,  or  the  presumed  inter- 
ests, of  Human  Slavery. 

In  the  Democratic  National  Con- 
vention, on  the  first  ballot  for  a 
Presidential  candidate,  Gen.  Cass  re- 
ceived 117  votes,  Mr.  Buchanan  93, 
and  there  were  78  scattered  among 
eight  others,  of  whom  Gov.  Marcy 
and  Mr.  Douglas  were  foremost.  On 
the  third  ballot,  Gen.  Cass  received 
119  ;  but  he  then  began  to  decline ; 
and  on  the  thirteenth  his  vote  had 
sunk  to  99,  while  Mr.  Douglas's  had 
risen  to  50,  and  his  friends  had  high 
hopes.  On  the  fourteenth  ballot, 
Mr.  Douglas's  vote,  which  had  risen 
gradually,  was  92  ;  while  Gen.  Cass's 
had  settled  to  33.  On  the  next  bal- 
lot, Mr.  Douglas  for  the  first  time 
fell  off;  the  result  announced  being — 
Douglas  92  ;  Buchanan  83  ;  Cass  64 ; 
all  others  53.    On  the  thirty-third, 


Gen.  Cass  ran  up  again  to  123  ;  and 
on  the  thirty -fifth  to  131,  which  was 
his  highest — Mr.  Douglas  dropping 
to  60  on  the  thirty-third,  and  to  53 
on  this.  Franklin  Pierce,  of  New 
Hampshire,  was  first  named  on  this 
ballot,  receiving  15  votes.  He  ran 
up  to  30  on  the  next ;  fell  back  to  29 
on  the  following ;  and  there  stood 
till  the  forty-sixth,  when  he  received 
44 ;  while  Gov.  Marcy  received  97 ; 
Gen.  Cass  78;  Mr.  Buchanan  28; 
and  Mr.  Douglas  32,  with  8  scatter- 
ing. On  the  forty-eighth,  Gen. 
Pierce  received  55,  and  on  the  next 
232  votes — being  all  that  were  cast 
but  six — and  was  declared  the  candi- 
date. For  Yice-President,  William 
P.  King,  of  Alabama,  received  126 
on  the  first  ballot,  to  174  scattered 
among  nine  rivals ;  and  on  the  se- 
cond ballot  he  had  277  to  11  for  Jef- 
ferson Davis,  and  was  nominated. 

This  Convention,  beside  reaffirm- 
ing the  more  essential  propositions 
of  its  three  predecessors,  and  one  or 
two  others  condemning  Nativism,  in- 
dorsing the  famous  Kentucky  and 
Virginia  Resolutions  of  1798  and 
1799,  etc.,  etc. ;  with  reference  to 
Slavery, 

"  Resolved,  That  Congress  has  no  power 
under  the  Constitution  to  interfere  with  or 
control  the  domestic  institutions  of  the  sev- 
eral States,  and  that  such  States  are  the  sole 
and  proper  judges  of  everything  appertain- 
ing to  their  own  affairs,  and  not  prohibited 
by  the  Constitution ;  that  all  efforts  of 
Abolitionists  or  others,  made  to  induce  Con- 
gress to  interfere  with  questions  of  Slavery, 
or  to  take  incipient  steps  in  relation  thereto, 
are  calculated  to  lead  to  the  most  alarming 
and  dangerous  consequences ;  and  that  all 
such  efforts  have  an  inevitable  tendency  to 
diminish  the  happiness  of  the  people,  and  to 
endanger  the  stability  and  permanency  of 
the  Union,  and  ought  not  to  be  countenanced 
by  any  friend  of  our  political  institutions. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  foregoing  proposition 
covers,  and  is  intended  to  embrace,  the 
whole  subject  of  Slavery  agitation  in  Con- 


THE  WHIGS  ON   THE    COMPROMISE  PLATFORM. 


223 


gress ;  and,  therefore,  the  Democratic  party 
of  the  Union,  standing  on  this  National  plat- 
form, will  abide  by  and  adhere  to  a  faithful 
execution  of  the  acts  known  as  the  Compro- 
mise measures  settled  by  the  last  Congress 
— the  act  for  reclaiming  fugitives  from  ser- 
vice or  labor  included  ;  which  act,  being  de- 
signed to  carry  out  an  express  provision  of 
the  Constitution,  cannot,  with  fidelity  there- 
to, be  repealed,  nor  so  changed  as  to  destroy 
or  impair  its  efficiency. 

"Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  party 
will  resist  all  attempts  at  renewing,  in  Con- 
gress or  out  of  it,  the  agitation  of  the  Sla- 
very question,  under  whatever  shape  or  col- 
or the  attempt  may  be  made." 

The  "Whig  National  Convention 
met  in  Baltimore  two  weeks  later 
than  its  rival,  and  a  caucus  of  the 
Southern  delegates,  held  the  night 
before  its  organization,  unanimously 
resolved  to  insist  on  making  the  wis- 
dom and  finality  of  the  Compromise 
of  1850  a  plank  in  the  Whig  plat- 
form to  be  constructed  by  the  Con- 
vention. They  agreed  upon  a  full 
draft  of  what  they  believed  the  Whig 
platform  should  be  ;  which,  on  being 
presented  to  the  friends  of  Mr.  Web- 
ster, was  accepted  by  them,  and  thus 
had  a  majority  of  the  Convention 
pledged  to  it  in  advance  of  any  gen- 
eral consultation  on  the  subject. 

On  the  first  ballot  for  a  Presiden- 
tial candidate,  Mr.  Fillmore  had  133 
votes,  Gen.  Scott  131,  Mr.  Webster 
29.  On  the  next,  Gen.  Scott  had  133, 
and  Mr.  Fillmore  but  131.  These 
proportions  were  nearly  preserved 
through  three  or  four  days  —  Gen. 
Scott  gaining  slightly  and  unsteadily 
on  Mr.  Fillmore — till,  on  the  fiftieth 
ballot,  Gen.  Winfield  Scott  receiv- 
ed 142,  and  on  the  fifty-second  148. 
On  the  next,  he  was  nominated ;  hav- 
ing 159  votes  to  112  for  Mr.  Fillmore 
and  21  for  Mr.  Webster.  William 
A.  Graham,  of  North  Carolina,  was, 
on  the  second  ballot,  nominated  for 
Vice-President. 


The  Southern  platform  had  already 
been  imposed  on  the  Convention — 
the  Slavery  plank  by  a  vote  of  164 
Yeas  to  117  Nays.    It  is  as  follows  : 

"  Eighth,  That  the  series  of  acts  of  the 
XXXlst  Congress"  known  as  the  Compro- 
mise Measures  of  1850 — the  act  known  as 
the  Fugitive  Slave  law  included — are  re- 
ceived and  acquiesced  in  by  the  Whig  party 
of  the  United  States  as  a  settlement,  in  prin- 
ciple and  substance,  of  the  dangerous  and 
exciting  questions  which  they  embrace  ;  and, 
so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  we  will  main- 
tain them,  and  insist  on  their  strict  enforce- 
ment, until  time  and  experience  shall  demon- 
strate the  necessity  of  further  legislation  to 
guard  against  the  evasion  of  the  laws  on  the 
one  hand,  and  the  abuse  of  their  powers  on 
the  other — not  impairing  their  present  effi- 
ciency ;  and  we  deprecate  all  further  agita- 
tion of  the  question  thus  settled,  as  danger- 
ous to  our  peace,  and  will  discountenance  all 
efforts  to  continue  or  renew  such  agitation, 
whenever,  wherever,  or  however,  the  at- 
tempt may  be  made;  and  we  will  main- 
tain this  system  as  essential  to  the  national- 
ity of  the  Whig  party,  and  the  integrity  of 
the  Union." 

Gen.  Scott  made  haste  to  plant 
himself  unequivocally  and  thoroughly 
on  the  platform  thus  erected,  which 
was  in  undoubted  accordance  with 
his  own  feelings  and  convictions.  But 
his  success  in  the  canvass  was  by  no 
means  commensurate  with  the  expec- 
tations of  his  friends.  Many  of  the 
anti-Slavery  Whigs,  by  whose  efforts 
he  had  been  nominated,  supported 
him  coldly  because  of  the  platform ; 
while  the  intense  j?n?-Slavery  section 
of  the  party  did  not  support  him  at 
all — distrusting,  not  him,  but  the  in- 
fluences which,  they  apprehended, 
might  guide  his  councils. 

The  "  Free  Soil  Democracy,"  who 
yet  maintained  a  National  organiza- 
tion on  the  basis  of  open  and  thorough 
hostility  to  Slavery  Extension  and  all 
pro-Slavery  compromises,  held  their 
nominating  Convention  at  Pittsburg, 
Pennsylvania,  on  the  11th  of  August ; 
presented  John  P.  Hale,  of  New 


224 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Hampshire,  for  President,  and  George 
W.  Julian,  of  Indiana,  for  Vice-Presi- 
dent; and,  though  they  carried  no 
State,  they  polled  a  far  stronger  vote 
than  they  would  or  could  have  done 
but  for  the  Whig  platform  aforesaid ; 
and  they  made  their  gain  wholly  at 
the  expense  of  Gen.  Scott.  When  the 
polls  were  closed  and  the  result  made 
manifest,  it  appeared  that  he  had 
carried  only  the  States  of  Massachu- 
setts, Vermont,  Kentucky,  and  Ten- 
nessee— four  in  all,  choosing  42  Elec- 
tors; while  Gen.  Pierce  had  carried 
twenty-seven  States,  choosing  254 
Electors.  Never  before  was  there 
such  an  overwhelming  defeat  of  a  par- 
ty that  had  hoped  for  success.  Even 
little  Delaware  had,  for  the  first  time 
— save  only  in  the  reelection  of  Mon- 
roe— voted  for  a  '  Democratic'  Presi- 


dent. But  quite  a  number  of  States 
had  been  carried  for  Gen.  Pierce  by 
very  close  votes ;  so  that  the  popular 
preponderance  of  his  party  was  by  no 
means  so  great  as  the  electoral  result 
would  seem  to  indicate.  In  all  the 
States  except  South  Carolina  (where 
the  Electors  are  not  chosen  by  the 
people,  but  where  there  was  no  seri- 
ous opposition  to  Pierce  and  King) 
the  popular  vote  summed  up  as  fol- 
lows :  For  Pierce,  1,601,274;  for 
Scott,  1,386,580  ;  for  Hale,  155,825  ; 
Pierce  over  Scott,  214,694 ;  over 
Scott  and  Hale  together,  58,896. 
And,  whatever  else  the  Election 
might  have  meant,  there  was  no 
doubt  that  the  popular  verdict  was 
against  '  Slavery  agitation,'  and  in 
favor  of  maintaining  the  Compro- 
mise of  1850.20 


XVII. 


THE  NEBEASKA-KANSAS  STRUGGLE. 


FRAiTExm  Pierce  was  inaugurated 
President  on  the  4th  of  March,  1853. 
Never  were  the  visible  omens  more 
auspicious  of  coming  years  of  politi- 
cal calm  and  National  prosperity. 
Though  a  considerable  Public  Debt 
had  been  incurred  for  the  prosecution 
and  close  of  the  Mexican  War,  yet 
the  Finances  were  healthy  and  the 
Public  Credit  unimpaired.  Industry 
and  Trade  were  signally  prosperous. 


The  Tariff  had  ceased  to  be  a  theme 
of  partisan  or  sectional  strife.  The 
immense  yield  of  gold  by  California 
during  the  four  preceding  years  had 
stimulated  Enterprise  and  quickened 
the  energies  of  Labor,  and  its  volume 
showed  as  yet  no  signs  of  diminution. 
And,  though  the  Fugitive  Slave  law 
was  still  denounced,  and  occasionally 
resisted,  by  Abolitionists  in  the  Free 
States,  while  Disunionists  still  plot- 


20  On  the  day  before  that  of  the  choice  of  Pres- 
idential Electors  by  the  people,  the  writer  met 
an  old  friend  whom  he  had  not  before  seen  for 
years,  but  whom  he  had  formerly  known  as  an 
ardent  and  active  Whig.  Speaking  to  him  of 
the  morrow's  contest,  in  the  undoubting  confi- 
dence of  a  political  compatriot,  he  was  met  at 
first  by  blank  reserve,  and  then  a  frank  asser- 
tion: 'I  shall  not  vote  this  year  as  I  formerly 


did.'  'What  does  that  mean?'  'Why,  I  have 
been  down  South  since  I  last  saw  you,  and  I 
don't  think  Slavery  so  bad  as  I  once  did.1  No 
question  of  Slavery  had  ever  been  broached  be- 
tween us ;  and  there  was  now  no  Slavery  issue 
between  the  great  National  parties ;  yet  an  in- 
stinct stronger  than  logic  had  taught  him  that,  if 
he  would  uphold  and  maintain  Slavery,  he  must 
vote  the  Democratic  ticket. 


FIRST    EFFORTS    TO  0 


RGANI ZE  NEBRASKA. 


225 


ted  in  secret,  and  more  openly  pre- 
pared in  Southern  Commercial  Con- 
ventions (having  for  their  ostensible 
object  the  establishment  of  a  general 
exchange  of  the  great  Southern  sta- 
ples directly  from  their  own  harbors 
with  the  principal  European  marts, 
instead  of  circuitously  by  way  of 
New  York  and  other  Northern  At- 
lantic ports),  there  was  still  a  goodly 
majority  at  the  South,  with  a  still 
larger  at  the  North  and  Northwest, 
in  favor  of  maintaining  the  Union, 
and  preserving  the  greatest  prac- 
ticable measure  of  cordiality  and  fra- 
ternity between  the  Free  and  the 
Slave  States,  substantially  on  the 
basis  of  the  Compromise  of  1850. 

The  region  lying  directly  westward 
and  northwestward  of  the  State  of 
Missouri,  and  stretching  thence  to  the 
Rocky  Mountains,  was  vaguely  known 
as  the  "  Platte  Country"  (from  the 
chief  river  intersecting  it),  and  its 
eastern  frontier  was  mainly  covered 
by  Indian  ^reservations,  on  which 
whites  were  forbidden  to  settle,  down 
to  a  period  so  late  as  1850.  Two 
great  lines  of  travel  and  trade  stretch- 
ed across  it  —  one  of  them  tending 
southwestward,  and  crossing  the 
Arkansas  on  its  way  to  Santa  Fe 
and  other  villages  and  settlements 
in  New  Mexico ;  the  other  leading 
up  the  Platte,  North  Platte,  and 
Sweetwater,  to  and  through  the 
South  Pass  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains, where  it  divides  —  one  trail 
leading  thence  northwestward  to  the 
Columbia  and  to  Oregon  ;  the  other 
southwestward  to  Salt  Lake,  the 
Humboldt,  and  California.  The 
western  boundary  of  Missouri  was 
originally  a  line  drawn  due  north 


as  well  as  south  from  the  point  where 
the  Kansas  or  Kaw  river  enters  the 
Missouri ;  but  in  1836  a  considerable 
section  lying  west  of  this  line,  and 
between  it  and  the  Missouri,  was  qui- 
etly detached  from  the  unorganized 
territory  aforesaid  and  added  to  the 
State  of  Missouri,  forming  in  due 
time  the  fertile  and  populous  coun- 
ties of  Platte,  Buchanan,  Andrew, 
Holt,  Nodaway,  and  Atchison,  which 
contained  in  1860  70,505  inhabitants, 
of  whom  6,699  were  slaves.  This 
conversion  of  Free  into  Slave  territo- 
ry, in  palpable  violation  of  the  Mis- 
souri Compromise,  was  effected  so 
dexterously  and  quietly  as  to  attract 
little  or  no  public  attention. 

At  the  first  session  of  the  XXXIId 
Congress  (1851-2)  petitions  were  pre- 
sented for  a  territorial  organization 
of  the  region  westward  of  Missouri 
and  Iowa;  but  no  action  was  had 
thereon  until  the  next  session,  when 
Mr.  Willard  P.  Hall,  of  Missouri,  sub- 
mitted 1  to  the  House  a  bill  organizing 
the  Territory  of  Platte,  comprising 
this  region.  This  bill  being  referred 
to  the  Committee  on  Territories,  Mr. 
William  A.  Richardson,  of  Illinois, 
from  said  Committee,  reported 2  a  bill 
organizing  the  Territory  of  Nebraska 
(covering  the  same  district);  which 
bill,  being  sent  to  the  Committee  of 
the  Whole  and  considered  therein, 
encountered  a  formidable  and  unex- 
pected Southern  opposition,  and  was 
reported3  from  said  Committee  with 
a  recommendation  that  it  be  rejected. 
An  attempt  by  Mr.  John  Letcher,  of 
Yirginia,  to  lay  it  on  the  table,  was 
defeated  by  a  call  of  the  Yeas  and 
Nays ;  when  it  was  engrossed,  read 
a  third  time,  and  passed :  Yeas  98 ; 
Nays  43. 


1  December  13,  1852. 

15 


2  February  2,  1853. 


3  February  10th. 


226 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


The  bill  now  went  to  the  Senate, 
with  ample  notice  that  a  pro-Slavery 
cabal  had  been  secretly  formed  to  re- 
sist the  organization  of  a  new  Territo- 
ry on  soil  consecrated  to  Free  Labor, 
as  this  had  solemnly  been,  until  a 
counterpoise  could  be  found  or  devis- 
ed, through  the  partition  of  Texas  or 
otherwise.  It  reached  the  Senate  on 
the  11th,  and  was  sent  to  the  Com- 
mittee on  Territories,  from  which  Mr. 
Stephen  A.  Douglas  reported  it  on 
the  17th  without  amendment.  On 
the  2d  of  March  (being  the  last  day 
but  one  of  the  session),  he  moved 
that  it  be  taken  up ;  which  was  re- 
sisted and  beaten :  Yeas  20 ;  Nays 
25  —  the  Nays  nearly  all  from  the 
South.  He  tried  again  next  day, 
when  Mr.  Solon  Borland,  of  Ark- 
ansas, moved  that  it  do  lie  on  the 
table,  which  prevailed :  Yeas  23  ; 
Nays  17 — as  before.  So  the  South 
defeated  any  organization  at  this 
time  of  a  territory  west  of  Missouri. 
No  Senators  from  Slave  States  but 
those  from  Missouri  sustained  the 
bill;  and  Mr.  Atchison,  of  that 
State,  in  supporting  a  motion  to 
take  up  the  bill,  to  which  Mr.  Rusk, 
of  Texas,  had  objected,  said : 

"  I  must  ask  the  indulgence  of  the  Senate 
to  say  one  word  in  relation  to  this  matter. 
Perhaps  there  is  not  a  State  in  the  Union 
more  deeply  interested  in  this  question  than 
the  State  of  Missouri.  If  not  the  largest,  I 
will  say  the  hest  portion  of  that  Territory — 
perhaps  the  only  portion  of  it  that  in  half  a 
century  will  become  a  State — lies  immedi- 
ately west  of  the  State  of  Missouri.  It  is 
only  a  question  of  time,  whether  we  will  or- 
ganize the  Territory  at  this  session  of  Con- 
gress, or  whether  we  will  do  it  at  the  next 
session  ;  and,  for  my  own  part,  I  acknow- 
ledge now  that,  as  the  Senator  from  Illinois 
well  knows,  when  I  came  to  this  city,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  last  session,  I  was  perhaps  as 
much  opposed  to  the  proposition  as  the  Sen- 
ator from  Texas  now  is.    The  Senator  from 


j  Iowa  [Mr.  A.  C.  Dodge]  knows  it ;  and  it 
was  for  reasons  I  will  not  not  now  men  Hon 
or  suggest.    But,  Sir,  I  have,  from  reflection 

I  and  investigation  in  my  own  mind,  and  from 

i  the  opinions  of  others  —  my  constituents, 
whose  opinions  I  am  bound  to  respect  — 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  now  is  the  time 

|  for  the  organization  of  this  Territory.  It  is 
the  most  propitious  time.  The  treaties  with 
the  various  Indian  tribes,  the  titles  to  whose 
possessions  must  be  extinguished,  can  better 
be  made  now  than  at  any  future  time ;  for,  as 
the  question  is  agitated,  and  as  it  is  under- 
stood, white  men,  speculators,  will  interpose 
and  interfere,  and  the  longer  it  is  postponed 
the  more  Ave  will  have  to  fear  from  them, 
and  the  more  difficult  it  will  be  to  extinguish 
the  Indian  title  in  that  country,  and  the  hard- 
er the  terms  to  be  imposed.  Therefore,  Mr. 
President,  for  this  reason,  without  going  into 
detail,  I  am  willing  now  that  the  question 
should  be  taken,  whether  we  will  proceed  to 
the  consideration  of  this  bill  or  not." 

Here  was  a  distinct  intimation,4 
from  a  leading  propagandist  of  Sla- 
very, that  he  was  aware  of  a  South- 
ern conspiracy  to  prevent  the  organ- 
|  ization,  westward  of  the  Missouri,  of 
a  new  Territory  which  must  necessa- 
rily be  Free  ;  but  he  had  no  faith  in 
its  success,  and  was  anxious,  for  urgent 
local  reasons,  to  have  the  organization 
proceed.  But  he  was  overborne,  and 
the  bill  defeated. 

The  XXXIIId  Congress  met  De- 
cember 5,  1853.  There  was  an  over- 
whelming Democratic  majority  in 
either  branch.  Linn  Boyd,  of  Ken- 
tucky, was  chosen  Speaker  of  the 
House.  President  Pierce,  as  he  in 
his  Inaugural  had  been  most  em- 
phatic in  his  commendation  of  the 
Compromise  of  1850,  and  in  insisting 
that  "  the  rights  of  the  South"  should 
be  upheld,  and  "  that  the  laws  to  en- 
force them  be  respected  and  obeyed, 
not  with  reluctance  encouraged  by 
abstract  opinions  as  to  their  propri- 
ety in  a  different  state  of  society,  but 
cheerfully,  and  according  to  the  de- 


*  December  15,  1852. 


MR.  DOUGLAS  ON  NEBRASKA. 


227 


cisions  of  the  tribunal  to  which  their 

exposition  belongs,"  so  now,  in  his 

first  Annual  Message,  he  reiterated 

these  recommendations,  and  added : 

"  Notwithstanding  differences  of  opinion 
and  sentiment  which  then  existed  in  relation 
to  details  and  specific  provisions,  the  acqui- 
escence of  distinguished  citizens,  whose  de- 
votion to  the  Union  can  never  be  doubted, 
has  given  renewed  vigor  to  our  institutions, 
and  restored  a  sense  of  repose  and  security 
to  the  public  mind  throughout  the  confeder- 
acy. That  this  repose  is  to  suffer  no  shock 
during  my  official  term,  if  I  have  power  to 
avert  it,  those  who  placed  me  here  may  be  as- 
sured." 

Mr.  Augustus  C.  Dodge,  of  Iowa, 
submitted 5  to  the  Senate  a  bill  "  to 
organize  the  Territory  of  Nebraska," 
embracing  (as  before)  the  region  lying 
westward  of  Missouri  and  Iowa,  which 
was  referred  to  the  Committee  on 
Territories;  from  which  Mr.  Doug- 
las, of  Illinois,  reported6  it  with 
amendments.  Still,  no  word  in  this 
bill  proposed  to  repeal  or  meddle 
with  the  interdict  on  Slavery  in  this 
region  laid  by  the  Missouri  Compro- 
mise of  1820.  On  the  contrary,  Mr. 
Douglas's  Report  accompanying  the 
bill,  while  it  raised  the  question 
of  the  original  validity  of  the  Mis- 
souri Restriction  aforesaid,  contained 
no  hint  that  said  Restriction  had 
been  removed  by  the  legislation  of 
1850.  The  material  portion  of  that 
Report  is  as  follows : 

"  A  question  has  arisen  in  regard  to  -the 
right  to  hold  slaves  in  the  Territory  of  Ne- 
braska, when  the  Indian  laws  shall  be  with- 
drawn, and  the  country  thrown  open  to  emi- 
gration and  settlement.  By  the  8th  section 
of  '  an  act  to  authorize  the  people  of  Mis- 
souri Territory  to  form  a  Constitution  and 
State  Government,  and  for  the  admission  of 
such  State  into  the  Union  on  an  equal  foot- 
ing with  the  original  States,  and  to  prohibit 
Slavery  in  certain  territories,'  approved  March 
6,  1820,  it  was  provided;  'That  in  all  that 
territory  ceded  by  France  to  the  United 
States  under  the  name  of  Louisiana,  which 


lies  north  of  36  degrees  30  minutes  north  lati- 
tude, not  included  within  the  limits  of  the 
State  contemplated  by  this  act,  Slavery  and 
involuntary  servitude,  otherwise  than  in  pun- 
ishment of  crimes  whereof  the  parties  shall 
have  been  duly  convicted,  shall  be,  and  are 
hereby,  prohibited:  Provided  always,  That 
any  person  escaping  into  the  same,  from 
wrhom  labor  or  service  is  lawfully  claimed  in 
any  State  or  Territory  of  the  United  States, 
such  fugitive  may.be  lawfully  reclaimed,  and 
conveyed  to  the  persons  claiming  his  or  her 
labor  or  service  as  aforesaid.1 

"  Under  this  section,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Mexican  law  in  New  Mexico  and  Utah,  it  is 
a  disputed  point  whether  Slavery  is  prohib- 
ited in  the  Nebraska  country  by  valid  enact- 
ment. The  decision  of  this  question  involves 
the  constitutional  power  of  Congress  to  pass 
laws  prescribing  and  regulating  the  domestic 
institutions  of  the  various  Territories  of  the 
Union.  In  the  opinion  of  those  eminent 
statesmen  who  hold  that  Congress  is  invest- 
ed with  no  rightful  authority  to  legislate 
upon  the  subject  of  Slavery  in  the  territo- 
ries, the  8th  section  of  the  act  preparatory 
to  the  admission  of  Missouri  is  null  and 
void ;  while  the  prevailing  sentiment  in 
large  portions  of  the  Union  sustains  the  doc- 
trine that  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  secures  to  every  citizen  an  inalienable 
right  to  move  into  any  of  the  Territories 
with  his  property,  of  whatever  kind  and  de- 
scription, and  to  hold  and  enjoy  the  same 
under  the  sanction  of  law.  Your  Commit- 
tee do  not  feel  themselves  called  upon  to  en- 
ter upon  the  discussion  of  these  controverted 
questions.  They  involve  the  same  grave  is- 
sues which  produced  the  agitation,  the  sec- 
tional strife,  and  the  fearful  struggle,  of 
1850.  As  Congress  deemed  it  wise  and  pru- 
dent to  refrain  from  deciding  the  matters  in 
controversy  then,  either  by  affirming  or  re- 
pealing the  Mexican  laws,  or  by  an  act  de- 
claratory of  the  true  intent  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, and  the  extent  of  the  protection  afforded 
by  it  to  Slave  property  in  the  Territories,  so 
your  Committee  are  not  prepared  to  recom- 
mend a  departure  from  the  course  pursued 
on  that  memorable  occasion,  either  by  affirm- 
ing or  repealing  the  8th  section  of  the  Mis- 
souri act,  or  by  any  act  declaratory  of  the 
meaning  of  the  Constitution  in  respect  to  the 
legal  points  in  dispute." 

This  would  seem  conclusive;  yet 

it  is  but  fair  to  add  the  following, 

from  near  the  close  of  the  Report : 

"  From  these  provisions,  it  is  apparent  that 
the  Compromise  measures  of  1850  affirm,  and 
rest  upon,  the  following  propositions  : 


6  Dec.  14,  1853. 


e  January  4,  1854. 


228 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"  First, — That  all  questions  pertaining  to 
Slavery  in  the  Territories,  and  the  new 
states  to  be  formed  therefrom,  are  to  be  left 
to  the  decision  of  the  people  residing  there- 
in, by  their  appropriate  representatives,  to 
be  chosen  by  them  for  that  purpose." 

The  bill  thus  reported  was  soon  after, 
on  Mr.  Douglas's  motion,  recommit- 
ted, and  on  the  23d  reported  again  by 
him  from  his  Committee  on  Territo- 
ries, with  material  alterations.  For, 
meantime,6  Mr.  Archibald  Dixon,7  of 
Kentucky,  had  given  due  notice  that, 
whenever  this  bill  should  come  up,  he 
would  offer  the  following  amendment : 

"  Seo.  22.  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That 
so  much  of  the  8th  section  of  an  act  approv- 
ed March  6,  1820,  entitled  1  An  Act  to  au- 
'  thorize  the  people  of  the  Missouri  Territory 
'to  form  a  constitution  and  State  govern- 
'ment,  and  for  the  admission  of  such  State 
'into  the  Union  on  an  equal  footing  with  the 
'  original  States,  and  to  prohibit  Slavery  in 
'certain  territories,'  as  declares  '  That,  in  all 
'  that  territory  ceded  by  France  to  the  Uni- 
'ted  States,  under  the  name  of  Louisiana, 
'  which  lies  north  of  36  degrees  30  minutes 
'  north  latitude,  Slavery  and  involuntary  ser- 
'vitude,  otherwise  than  in  the  punishment 
'  of  crimes  whereof  the  party  shall  have 
'  been  duly  convicted,  shall  be  forever  pro- 
'hibited,'  shall  not  be  so  construed  as  to  ap- 
ply to  the  Territory  contemplated  by  this 
act,  or  to  any  other  Territory  of  the  United 
States;  but  that  the  citizens  of  the  several 
States  or  Territories  shall  be  at  liberty  to 
take  and  hold  their  slaves  within  any  of  the 
Territories  or  States  to  be  formed  there- 
from, as  if  the  said  act,  entitled  as  aforesaid, 
and  approved  as  aforesaid,  had  never  been 
passed." 

This  blunt  proposition  that  the 
Missouri  Compromise,  in  so  far  as  its 
stipulations  favored  the  consecration 
of  the  Territories  to  Free  Labor,  be 
utterly  repudiated,  now  that  so  much 
of  it  as  strengthened  Slavery  had 
taken  full  and  vigorous  effect,  was 
received  with  more  surprise  than  sat- 
isfaction by  the  engineers  of  the  origi- 
nal measure.  The  Union,  then  the 
Democratic  organ  at  Washington, 
promptly  denounced  it  as  a  Whig 


device  to  divide  and  disorganize  the 
Democratic  party.  It  received  no 
hearty  welcome  from  any  quarter — 
certainly  none  from  Mr.  Douglas,  or 
any  supporter  of  his  Presidential  as- 
pirations. It  had  evidently  been  ex- 
pected by  them  that  his  proposal  to 
organize  these  territories,  so  expressly 
contemplated  and  covered  by  the  in- 
hibition of  bondage  contained  in  the 
Missouri  act,  in  blank  silence  on  the 
subject  of  Slavery,  would  be  deemed 
a  concession  to  Southern  prejudices, 
if  not  to  Southern  interests.  Yet,  in 
the  presence  of  this  bolder,  stronger, 
larger,  and  more  practical  concession, 
that  of  Mr.  Douglas  dwindled  by  con- 
trast into  insignificance. 

Mr.  Douglas,  thus  outbid,  resolved 
to  start  afresh.  On  the  23d  aforesaid, 
he  reported  from  his  Committee  a  bill 
so  different  from  its  predecessor  as 
hardly  to  resemble  it,  save  that  it 
contemplated  the  same  region.  In- 
stead of  one  Territory,  to  be  called 
Nebraska,  and  stretching  from  the 
parallel  of  36°  30'  north  latitude 
on  the  south  to  that  of  43°  30'  on  the 
north,  and  from  the  western  boun- 
dary of  Missouri  and  Iowa  on  the 
east  to  the  crests  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains on  the  west,  he  now  proposed  to 
create  two  Territories,  one  to  be  com- 
posed of  so  much  of  said  region  a3 
was  directly  west  of  the  State  of 
Missouri,  to  be  known  as  Kansas  ; 
the  other  to  comprise  the  residue,  and 
be  known  as  Nebraska.  (The  south 
line  of  Kansas  was  moved  northward 
fromlatitude  36°  30'to latitude  37°,in 
order  to  make  it  conform  to  the  boun- 
dary between  the  lands  of  the  Chero- 
kees  and  those  of  the  Osages.)  And, 
with  reference  to  Slavery,  the  new 
bill  contained  these  provisions : 


6  January  16th,  1854. 


1  Elected  as  a  Whig — afterward  a  Democrat. 


MR.    DOUGLAS  MODIFIE 


S    HIS    NEBRASKA  BILL. 


229 


"Seo.  21.  And  be  it  further  enacted, 
That,  in  order  to  avoid  all  misconstruction, 
it  is  hereby  declared  to  be  the  true  in- 
tent and  meaning  of  this  act,  so  far  as  the 
question  of  Slavery  is  concerned,  to  carry 
into  practical  operation  the  following  prop- 
ositions and  principles,  established  by  the 
Compromise  measures  of  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  and  fifty,  to  wit : 

"First.  That  all  questions  pertaining  to  Sla- 
very in  the  Territories,  and  in  the  new  States 
to  be  formed  therefrom,  are  to  be  left  to  the 
decision  of  the  people  residing  therein, 
through  their  appropriate  representatives. 

"  Second.  That  '  all  cases  involving  title 
4 to  slaves,'  and  'questions  of  personal  free- 
4  dom,'  are  referred  to  the  adjudication  of 
the  local  tribunals,  with  the  right  of  appeal 
to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States. 

"  Third.  That  the  provisions  of  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws  of  the  United  States,  in 
respect  to  fugitives  from  service,  are  to  be 
carried  into  faithful  execution  in  all  the 
'organized  Territories,'  the  same  as  in  the 
States." 

Proceeding  to  that  section  which 
provides  for  the  election  of  a  delegate 
to  Congress  from  Kansas,  instead  of 
the  original  stipulation — 

"That  the  Constitution,  and  all  laws  of 
the  United  States  which  are  not  locally  in- 
applicable, shall  have  the  same  force  and 
effect  within  the  said  Territory  as  elsewhere 
in  the  United  States" — 

The  following  important  reserva- 
tion was  now  added : 

"  Except  the  section  of  the  act  prepara- 
tory to  the  admission  of  Missouri  into  the 
Union,  approved  March  G,  1820,  which  was 
superseded  by  the  principles  of  the  Legisla- 
tion of  1850,  commonly  called  the  Compro- 
mise measures,  and  is  declared  inoperative." 

The  section  which  authorized  Ne- 
braska to  send  a  delegate  was  amend- 
ed in  precisely  the  same  manner. 

Mr.  Douglas  called  up  his  new  bill 
for  consideration  next  morning ;  when 
not  only  Messrs.  Chase  and  Sumner, 
but  Mr.  Norris,  of  New  Hamp- 
shire, Gen.  Cass,  and  other  Demo- 
crats, desired  that  time  be  given  to 
consider  the  grave  changes  which 


had  just  been  made  in  the  vital 
character  of  the' measure.  On  the 
other  hand,  Messrs.  Dawson,  of 
Georgia,  and  Dixon,  of  Kentucky, 
were  ready  to  sustain  Mr.  Douglas 
throughout.  Mr.  Dixon,  expressing 
entire  satisfaction  with  the  new 
shape  given  to  the  bill,  said  : 8 

"  I  think  it  due  to  the  Senate  that  they 
should  have  an  opportunity  of  understanding 
precisely  the  bearings  and  the  effect  of  the 
amendment  which  has  been  recently  incor- 
porated into  the  bill,  as  originally  reported 
by  the  Committee — I  mean  that  portion  of 
the  amendment  which  alludes  to  Slavery 
within  the  Territories  to  be  organized — Ne- 
braska and  Kansas.  So  far  as  I  am  individ- 
ually concerned,  I  am  perfectly  satisfied 
with  the  amendment  reported  by  the  Sen- 
ator from  Illinois,  and  which  has  been  in- 
corporated into  the  bill.  If  I  understand  it, 
it  reaches  a  point  which  I  am  most  anxious 
to  attain — that  is  to  say,  it  virtually  repeals 
the  act  of  1820,  commonly  called  the  Mis- 
souri Compromise  act,  declaring  that  Slavery 
should  not  exist  north  of  the  line  of  36°  30' 
north  latitude. 

"  I  here  take  occasion  to  remark,  merely 
with  a  view  of  placing  myself  right  before 
the  Senate,  that  I  think  my  position  in  re- 
lation to  this  matter  has  been  somewhat 
misunderstood. 

"  I  have  been  charged,  through  one  of 
the  leading  journals  9  of  this  city,  with  hav- 
ing proposed  the  amendment  which  I  noti- 
fied the  Senate  I  intended  to  offer,  with  a 
view  to  embarrass  the  Democratic  party. 
It  was  said  that  I  was  a  Whig  from  Ken- 
tucky, and  that  the  amendment  proposed 
by  me  should  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion 
by  the  opposite  party.  Sir,  I  merely  wish 
to  remark  that,  upon  the  question  of  Slavery, 
I  know  no  Whiggery,  and  I  know  no  De- 
mocracy. I  am  a  pro- Slavery  man.  I  am 
from  a  slaveholding  State;  I  represent  a 
slaveholding  constituency ;  and  I  am  here 
to  maintain  the  rights  of  that  people 
whenever  they  are  presented  before  the 
Senate. 

"  The  amendment  which  I  notified  the 
Senate  that  I  should  offer  at  the  proper 
time,  has  been  incorporated  by  the  Senator 
from  Illinois  into  the  bill  which  he  has  re- 
ported to  the  Senate.  The  bill,  as  now 
amended,  meets  my  views,  and  I  have  no 
objection  to  it.  I  shall,  at  the  proper  time, 
as  far  as  I  am  able  to  do  so,  aid  and  assist 
the  Senator  from  Illinois,  and  others  who 


8  January  24,  1854. 


9  The  Union. 


230  THE  AMERICA 

are  anxious  to  carry  through  this  proposi- 
tion, with  the  feeble  abilities  I  may  be  able 
to  bring  to  bear  upon  it.  I  think  it  due  to 
myself  to  make  this  explanation,  because  I 
do  not  wish  it  to  be  understood  that,  upon 
a  question  like  this,  I  have,  or  could  have, 
any  motive  except  that  which  should  influ- 
ence a  man  anxious  to  secure  what  he  be- 
lieves to  be  a  great  principle — that  is,  Con- 
gressional non-interference  in  all  the  Ter- 
ritories, so  far  as  this  great  question  of 
Slavery  is  concerned. 

"  I  never  did  believe  in  the  propriety  of 
passing  the  Missouri  Compromise.  I  thought 
it  was  the  result  of  necessity.  I  never 
thought  that  the  great  Senator  from  Ken- 
tucky (Mr.  Clay),  when  he  advocated  that 
measure,  did  so  because  his  judgment  ap- 
proved it,  but  because  it  was  the  result  of  a 
combination  of  circumstances  which  drove 
him  to  the  position  he  assumed ;  and  I 
have  never  thought  that  that  measure  re- 
ceived the  sanction  either  of  his  heart  or  of 
his  head. 

"  The  amendment,  then,  which  I  gave 
notice  that  I  would  propose — and  which  I 
intended  to  have  proposed,  if  it  had  not 
been  rendered  wholly  unnecessary  by  the 
amendment  reported  by  the  Senator  from 
Illinois,  from  the  Committee  on  Territories, 
of  which  he  is  the  honored  Chairman — I 
intended  to  offer,  under  the  firm  conviction 
that  I  was  carrying  out  the  principles  set- 
tled in  the  Compromise  acts  of  1850  ;  and 
which  leave  the  whole  question  of  Slavery 
with  the  people,  and  without  any  Congres- 
sional interference.  For,  over  the  subject 
of  Slavery,  either  in  the  States  or  Territories 
of  the  United  States,  1  have  always  believed, 
and  have  always  contended,  that  Congress 
had  no  power  whatever,  and  that,  conse- 
quently, the  act  of  1820,  commonly  known 
as  the  Missouri  Compromise  act,  is  uncon- 
stitutional;  and,  at  the  proper  time,  I  shall 
endeavor  to  satisfy  the  Senate  and  the 
country  of  the  truth  of  these  propositions." 

To  which  Mr.  Douglas  responded 
as  follows : 

"  As  this  discussion  has  begun,  I  feel  it 
to  be  my  duty  to  say  a  word  in  explanation. 
I  am  glad  to  hear  the  Senator  from  Ken- 
tucky say  that  the  bill,  as  it  now  stands, 
accomplishes  all  that  he  desired  to  accom- 
plish by  his  amendment,  because  his  amend- 
ment seemed  to  myself,  and  to  some  with 
whom  I  have  consulted,  to  mean  more  than 
what  he  now  explains  it  to  mean,  and 
what  I  am  glad  he  did  not  intend  it  should 
mean. 

"  We  supposed  that  it  not  only  wiped  out 
the  legislation  which  Congress  has  hereto- 
fore aiopted,  excluding  Slavery,  but  that  it 


N  CONFLICT. 

affirmatively  legislated  Slavery  into  the 
Territories.  The  object  of  the  Committee 
was  neither  to  legislate  Slavery  in  or  out  of 
the  Territories;  neither  to  introduce  nor 
exclude  it ;  but  to  remove  whatever  ob- 
stacle Congress  had  put  there,  and  apply 
the  doctrine  of  Congressional  non-interven- 
tion, in  accordance  with  the  principles  of 
the  .Compromise  measures  of  1850,  and  al- 
low the  people  to  do  as  they  pleased  upon 
this,  as  well  as  all  other  matters  affecting 
their  interests. 

"  The  explanation  of  the  honorable  Sen- 
ator from  Kentucky  shows  that  his  mean- 
ing was  not  what  many  supposed  it  to  be, 
who  judged  simply  from  the  phraseology  of 
the  amendment.  I  deem  this  explanation 
due  to  the  Senator  and  to  myself." 

Messrs.  Webster,  Clay,  and  Cal- 
houn had  all  passed  from  the  earth 
since  the  inception  of  Mr.  Clay's 
Compromise  in  1850.  Not  one  of 
them  lived  to  hear  that  that  Compro- 
mise had  lifted  the  interdict  of  Sla- 
very from  the  whole  region  solemn- 
ly guaranteed  to  Free  Labor  forever 
by  the  Compromise  of  1820.  Mr. 
Webster,  certainly,  never  dreamed 
of  such  a  thing,  when  he  vehemently 
denounced,  as  insane,  malignant  fol- 
ly, the  attempt  to  fasten  a  like  pro- 
hibition on  the  bill  organizing  New 
Mexico — as  an  effort  to  debar  slave- 
holding  on  snowy  crags  and  arid 
deserts  where  no  slave  could  be  sub- 
sisted— as  a  superserviceable  attempt 
to  "  reenact  the  laws  of  God,"  as  if 
their  Author  were  unequal  to  the 
task  He  had  undertaken. 

In  the  accord  of  Messrs.  Douglas 
and  Dixon,  an  undertone  of  discord 
may  be  detected.  Mr.  Dixon  repu- 
diates the  restrictive  provision  of  the 
Compromise  of  1820  as  void  ah  in- 
itio, for  want  of  constitutional  power 
to  enact  it.  Congress  could  not  law- 
fully exclude  Slavery  from  the  Fed- 
eral domain — therefore,  did  not,  to 
any  purpose.  Mr.  Clay  consented 
to  that  Restriction  because  he  must, 
not  because  he  would — (as  if  this 


/         DOUGLAS  AND  DIXOX 

were  not  always  the  case  in  com- 
promises—  each  party  conceding 
something  he  would  gladly  retain, 
in  order  to  secure  something  else 
that  is  otherwise  beyond  his  reach.) 
But  that  Mr.  Clay  deliberately  bar- 
gained to  secure  what  he  greatly 
desired  (the  admission  of  Missouri), 
knowing  that  the  stipulated  consid- 
eration was  utterly  beyond  the  power 
of  Congress,  therefore  a  blank  nul- 
lity— that,  Mr.  Dixon  did  not  assert, 
nor  would  any  true  friend  of  the 
great  Kentuckian's  memory  insinu- 
ate it.  Whatever  Mr.  Dixon's  be- 
lief on  the  subject,  it  is  certain  that 
Mr.  Clay  deemed  the  Missouri  Com- 
promise a  valid  contract,  and  that 
he  never  dreamed  that  it  was  either 
unauthorized  by  the  Constitution  or 
superseded  by  the  Compromise  of 
1850.  No  champion,  no  adversary, 
of  this  latter  arrangement  ever  sug- 
gested, whether  as  an  argument  for, 
or  an  objection  to,  this  scheme,  that 
one  of  its  effects  or  incidents  would 
be  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  Re- 
striction, and  a  consequent  opening 
to  Slavery  of  the  region  stretching 
westward  and  north-westward  from 
Missouri. 

Mr.  Douglas,  it  will  be  seen,  in- 
dorses none  of  Mr.  Dixon's  assump- 
tions. He  had  misunderstood  Mr. 
Dixon's  original  proposition,  suppo- 
sing that  it  intended  to  "legislate 
Slavery  into  the  Territory."  He  could 
mean  by  this  nothing  more  nor  other 
than  that  he  misunderstood  Mr.  Dix- 
on's as  a  proposition  to  legislate  Slave 
law — that  is,  law  under  which  slaves 

9  "  Is  it  not  hard,"  asked  Mr.  Badger,  of  North 
Carolina,  during  the  debate  on  the  Kansas-Ne- 
braska bill,  "if  I  should '  choose  to  emigrate  to 
Kansas,  that  I  should  be  forbidden  to  take  my 
old  mammy  [slave-nurse]  along  with  me?" — 
"The  Senator  entirely  mistakes  our  position," 


ON   THE    COMPROMISES.  231 

could  be  legally  held  to  service — into 
said  Territory ;  the  act  of  planting  Sla- 
very in  fact  there,  being  one  which 
legislation  might  facilitate  and  invite, 
but  which  individual  action  must  initi- 
ate and  achieve.  And  he  did  not  now 
contend  that  the  legislation  of  1850 
had  even  removed  the  obstacle  to 
such  establishment,  but  only  that  the 
action  he  proposed  was  "  in  accord- 
ance with  the  principles  of  the  Com- 
promise measures  of  1850" — that  is 
to  say,  it  applied  to  Kansas  and  Ne- 
braska— Territories  secured,  upon  due 
consideration,  to  Free  Labor,  by  sa- 
cred agreement  in  1820 — a  principle 
which  Congress  had,  under  very  dif- 
ferent circumstances,  applied  to  ISTew 
Mexico — a  most  unlike  and  peculiar 
region — in  1850. 

Mr.  Dixon,  it  will  be  remarked, 
had  not  yet  attained  to  the  ultimate 
orthodoxy  of  the  South  with  respect 
to  the  rights  of  slaveholders  in  the 
Territories.  He  only  held  that  Con- 
gress had  no  right  to  exclude  them 
with  their  human  chattels.9  That  it 
was  bound  to  recognize  and  protect 
their  property  in  slaves,  and  that  the 
people  of  the  Territories  could  have 
no  right,  prior  to  their  organization 
as  a  State,  to  exclude  or  inhibit  Sla- 
very, were  dogmas  as  yet  confined  to 
the  more  ardent  devotees  of  Calhoun- 
ism,  and  so  far  from  being  accepted, 
that  they  were  scarcely  comprehend- 
ed by  the  great  body  of  the  support- 
ers of  the  Compromise. 

The  amended  bill,  thus  reported 
by  Mr.  Douglas,  was   debated  at 

responded  Mr.  Wade,  of  Ohio.  "We  have  not 
the  least  objection,  and  would  oppose  no  obsta- 
cle, to  the  Senator's  migrating  to  Kansas,  and 
taking  his  'old  mammy'  along  with  him.  We 
only  insist  that  he  shall  not  be  empowered  to  sell 
her  after  taking  her  there.'' 


232  THE  AMERICA 

length,  and  ably,  by  Messrs.  Douglas 
and  several  others  in  favor,  and  by 
Messrs.  Chase,  Seward,  Sumner,  Wade, 
and  others,  in  opposition.  But  the 
disparity  in  numbers  between  its  sup- 
porters and  its  opponents  was  too  great 
— nearly  three  for  to  one  against  it — 
to  allow  much  interest  to  attach  to  the 
successive  discussions  and  divisions, 
save  as  they  serve  to  cast  light  on  the 
real  character  of  the  measure,  espe- 
cially with  respect  to  Slavery.  A 
few  of  these  will  here  be  noted. 

Mr.  Chase,  having  attempted10  to 
strike  out  so  much  of  the  clause  last 
quoted  as  declares  the  Restriction  of 
1820  "  superseded"  by  the  Compro- 
mise of  1850,  and  been  beaten  by  30 
Nays  to  13  Yeas,  Mr.  Douglas11  him- 
self moved  that  said  clause  be  stricken 
out,  and  replaced  by  the  following : 

"  Which  being  inconsistent  with  the  prin- 
ciple of  Non-Intervention  by  Congress  with 
Slavery  in  the  States  and  Territories,  as  rec- 
ognized by  the  legislation  of  1850  (commonly 
called  the  Compromise  measures),  is  hereby 
declared  inoperative  and  void ;  it  being  the 
true  intent  and  meaning  of  this  act  not  to 
legislate  Slavery  into  any  Territory  or  State, 
nor  to  exclude  it  therefrom,  but  to  leave  the 
people  thereof  perfectly  free  to  form  and 
regulate  their  domestic  institutions  in  their 
own  way,  subject  only  to  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States." 

This,  of  course,  prevailed:  Yeas 

35  ;  Nays  10  :  whereupon  Mr.  Chase 

moved 12  to  add  thereto  as  follows : 

"  Under  which,  the  people  of  the  Territory, 
through  their  appropriate  representatives, 
may,  if  they  see  ft,  prohibit  the  existence  of 
Slavery  therein." 

This  touchstone  of  the  true  nature 

and  intent  of  the  measure  was  most 

decisively  voted  down ;  the  Yeas  and 

]STays  being  as  follows : 

Yeas — Fessenden  and  Hamlin,  of  Maine ; 
Sumner,  of  Massachusetts;  Foot,  of  Ver- 

10  February  6th.    11  February  15th. 
J2  March  2d. 

13  G-en.  Cass,  the  inventor  of  "  Popular  Sove- 


N  CONFLICT. 

mont;  Smith,  of  Connecticut;  Fish  and 
Seward,  of  New  York ;  Chase  and  Wade,  of 
Ohio ;  Dodge  (Henry),  of  Wisconsin — 10. 

Nats — Norris  and  Williams,  of  New 
Hampshire;  Toucey,  of  Connecticut ;  Brod- 
head,  of  Pennsylvania;  Clayton,  of  Dela- 
ware; Stuart,13  of  Michigan;  Pettit,  of  Indi- 
ana ;  Douglas  and  Shields,  of  Illinois ;  Dodge 
(A.  C.)  and  Jones,  of  Iowa ;  Walker,  of  Wis- 
consin ;  Hunter  and  Mason,  of  Virginia ; 
Pratt,  of  Maryland ;  Badger,  of  North  Caro- 
lina; Butler  and  Evans,  of  South  Carolina; 
Dawson,  of  Georgia;  Fitzpatrick  and  C.  C. 
Clay,  of  Alabama;  Adams  and  Brown,  of 
Mississippi;  Benjamin  and  Slidell,  of  Louis- 
iana ;  Morton,  of  Florida ;  Houston  and  Rusk, 
of  Texas;  Dixon,  of  Kentucky;  Bell  and 
Jones,  of  Tennessee ;  Atchison,  of  Missouri ; 
Sebastian  and  Johnson,  of  Arkansas ;  Gwin 
and  Weller,  of  California — 36. 

So  the  Senate  decisively  voted  that 
the  people  of  the  new  Territories, 
formed  by  this  act  from  the  region 
shielded  from  Slavery  by  the  Com- 
promise of  1820,  should  not  have  the 
right,  under  this  organization,  to  pro- 
hibit Slavery,  should  they  see  fit. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Badger,  of  North 
Carolina,  it  was  further  (Yeas  35, 
Nays  6) 

"  Provided,  That  nothing  herein  shall  be 
construed  to  revive  or  put  in  force  any  law 
or  regulation  which  may  have  existed  prior  to 
the  act  of  6th  of  March.  1820,  either  protect- 
ing, establishing,  prohibiting,  or  abolishing 
Slavery." 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Clayton,  of  Del- 
aware, it  was  further  provided  that  im- 
migrants from  foreign  countries  who 
had  merely  declared  their  intention 
to  become  naturalized  citizens  should 
not  be  voters  in  these  Territories.  On 
this  proposition,  the  Yeas  were  23 
(all  from  Slave  States) ;  the  Nays  21 
(all  from  Free  States). 

Mr.  Chase  now  moved  an  amend- 
ment fixing  a  day  of  election,  ap- 
pointing commissioners  to  lay  off 
Counties,  etc.,  etc.,  and  enabling  the 

reignty,"  who  was  in  his  seat  and  voted  just  be- 
fore, did  not  respond  to  the  call  of  his  name  on 
this  occasion. 


THE  NEBRASKA  BILL    IN    THE  HOUSE. 


233 


people  of  these  Territories  to  choose 
their  own  Governor  as  well  as  Legis- 
lature,— which  was  rejected;  Yeas 
10  ;14  Nays  30. 

So  far,  the  bill  had  been  acted  on 
as  in  Committee  of  the  Whole.  On 
coming  out  of  Committee,  Mr.  Clay- 
ton's amendment,  above  mentioned, 
was  disagreed  to — 22  to  20 — and  the 
bill  engrossed  for  its  third  reading  by 
29  to  12 — and,  at  a  late  hour  of  the 
night 15 — or  rather,  morning — passed : 
Yeas  37 ;  Nays 16  14 :  whereupon  the 
Senate,  exhausted  by  struggle  and 
excitement,  adjourned  over  from  Fri- 
day to  the  following  Tuesday. 

In  the  House,  this  bill  was  not 
taken  up  for  more  than  two  months 
after  it  had  passed  the  Senate.  There 
were  scruples  to  vanquish,  objections 
to  remove  or  to  soften,  and  machinery 
to  adjust,  in  order  to  give  the  meas- 
ure a  chance  of  success.  Meantime, 
the  hum  of  public  dissatisfaction  rose 
louder  and  louder,  and  members  who 
were  soon  to  face  Northern  constituen- 
cies were  reasonably  reluctant  to  vote 
for  it,  unless  the  Democratic  majori- 
ties in  their  districts  were  well-nigh 
impregnable. 

A  House  bill  (nearly  a  copy  of 
that  of  Mr.  Douglas)  having  be^n 
reported17  by  Mr.  Richardson,  of  Il- 
linois, from  the  Committee  on  Ter- 
ritories, Mr.  English,  of  Indiana — a 
most  unflinching  Democrat — from 
the  minority  of  said  Committee,  pro- 
posed to  strike  out  the  clause  which 

14  Messrs.  Chase,  Fessenden,  Foot,  Hamlin, 
Norris,  Seward,  Shields,  Smith,  Sumner,  Wade 
—10. 

is  March  3d. 

16  Messrs.  Bell,  of  Tennessee,  Houston,  of  Tex- 
as, and  Walker,  of  Wisconsin,  who  had  voted 
against  Mr.  Chase's  amendment  above  cited,  and 
Mr.  James,  of  Rhode  Island,  who  had  not  voted 


we  have  seen  reported  by  Mr.  Doug- 
las to  the  Senate,  and  adopted  by 
that  body,  repealing  the  8th  section 
of  the  Missouri  act,  and  insert  instead 
the  following : 

u  Provided,  That  nothing  in  this  act  shall 
be  so  construed  as  to  prevent  the  people  of 
said  Territory,  through  the  properly  consti- 
tuted legislative  authority,  from  passing 
such  laws,  in  relation  to  the  institution  of 
Slavery,  as  they  may  deem  best  adapted  to 
their  locality,  and  most  conducive  to  their 
happiness  and  welfare  ;  and  so  much  of  any 
existing  act  of  Congress  as  may  conflict 
with  the  above  right  of  the  people  to  regu- 
late their  domestic  institutions  in  their 
own  way,  be,  and  the  same  is  hereby, 
repealed." 

It  is  highly  probable  that  this 
proposition  could  not  have  been  de- 
feated on  a  call  of  the  Yeas  and 
Nays  in  the  House — which  was 
doubtless  the  reason  why  it  was 
never  acted  on.  The  House  bill  was 
never  taken  up,  save  at  a  late  day,18 
so  as  to  enable  the  Senate  bill  to  be 
moved  as  an  amendment. 

There  was  a  violent  struggle  in 
the  House  for  and  against  closing 
the  debate  on  this  measure,  and  it 
was  finally  agreed  that  said  debate 
should  terminate  on  Saturday  the 
20th.  And  now,  Mr.  Alex.  H.  Ste- 
phens, of  Georgia,  originated,  and 
was  enabled  to  execute,  a  parlia- 
mentary maneuver  which,  if  recog- 
nized as  legitimate,  must  prove  an 
important  aid  to  party  despotism 
and  a  screen  to  vicious  legislation 
through  all  future  time.  The  right 
of  a  majority  to  prescribe  a  reason- 
able limit  to  discussion — to  afford 

on  it  at  all,  now  voted  Nay.  Messrs.  Bayard, 
of  Delaware,  Cass,  of  Michigan,  Thompson,  of 
Kentucky,  Geyer,  of  Missouri,  Thomson,  of  New 
Jersey,  who  did  not  vote  for  or  against  Gov. 
Chase's  amendment,  whereon  we  have  given  the 
Yeas  and  Nays,  were  now  present  and  voted  for 
the  bill. 

17  January  31st.  18  May  8th. 


234  THE  AMERICA 

fair  opportunity  for  debate,  but  in- 
sist that  it  shall  close  at  a  definite 
and  not  too  distant  day  and  hour — 
has  become  a  part  of  our  parliament- 
ary law.  But  the  right  of  a  minority 
to  seek  to  improve  what  it  deems  a 
vicious  and  mistaken  measure — to 
soften,  if  it  may,  objectionable  fea- 
tures which  it  is  unable  wholly  to 
remove — is  still  sacred;  and  it  has 
accordingly  been  established,  after 
much  experience  of  the  evils  of  the 
opposite  rule,  that  even  a  vote  of  the 
House,  enforcing  the  Previous  Ques- 
tion on  a  reluctant,  struggling  mi- 
nority, does  not  cut  off  amendments 
which  may  have  already  been  pro- 
posed, but  only  arrests  debate  and 
brings  the  House  to  vote  successively 
on  all  the  propositions  legitimately 
before  it,  including,  it  may  be,  the 
engrossment  of  the  bill.  But  Mr. 
Stephens,  when  the  hour  for  closing 
the  debate  in  Committee  had  arrived, 
moved  that  the  enacting  clause  of  the 
hill  he  stricken  out,  which  was  carried 
by  a  preconcerted  and  uncounter- 
acted  rally  of  the  unflinching  friends 
of  the  measure.  Of  course,  all  pend- 
ing amendments  were  thus  disposed 
of — the  bill  being  reported  as  dead. 
Having  thus  got  the  bill  out  of 
Committee  and  before  the  House, 
Messrs.  Stephens  &  Co.  voted  not  to 
agree  to  the  report  of  the  Committee 
of  the  Whole,19  thus  bringing  the 
House  to  an  immediate  vote  on  the 
engrossment  of  the  bill.  Mr.  Rich- 
ardson now  moved  an  amendment 
in  the  nature  of  a  substitute  (being, 
in   effect,   the   Senate's   bill),  and 

19  Teas  (for  agreeing)  97  ;  Nays  117. 

20  Virginia. — John  S.  Millson — 1.  North 
Carolina. — Richard  C.  Puryear,  Sion  H.  Rog- 
ers— 2.  Tennessee. — Robert  M.  Bugg,  William 
Cullom,  Emerson  Etheridge,  Nathaniel  G-.  Tay- 
lor— Louisiana. — Theodore  G.  Hunt — 1. 


N  CONFLICT. 

thereupon  called  the  Previous  Ques- 
tion, which  was  seconded :  Yeas 
116 ;  Nays  90 ;  when  his  amend- 
ment was  adopted — Yeas  115  ;  Nays 
95  ;  the  bill  ordered  to  be  engrossed 
— Yeas  112  ;  Nays  99  ;  the  Previous 
Question  again  ordered  and  sus- 
tained ;  and  the  bill  finally  passed : 
Yeas  113;  Nays  100.  Thus  the 
opponents  of  the  measure  in  the 
House  were  precluded  from  pro- 
posing any  amendments  or  modifi- 
cations whatever,  when  it  is  morally 
certain  that,  had  they  been  permit- 
ted to  do  so,  some  such  amendment 
as  Gov.  Chase's  or  Mr.  English's 
would  have  been  carried. 

The  Free  States  contributed  44 
votes — all  cast  by  Democrats — to  the 
support  of  this  measure.  From  the 
Slave  States,  12  Whigs  and  57  Dem- 
ocrats sustained  it.  Against  it  were 
91  members  from  Free  States,  of 
whom  44  were  chosen  as  Whigs, 
three  as  "  Free  Soil"  proper,  and  44 
as  Democrats.  So  that  precisely  as 
many  Democrats  from  Free  States 
voted  for  as  against  the  final  passage 
of  the  Nebraska  bill.  Only  nine20 
members  from  Slave  States  opposed 
it,  of  whom  but  two21  had  been  re- 
garded as  Democrats;  and  of  these 
Col.  Benton  was  not  so  regarded 
thereafter.  Of  the  Whigs  who  so 
voted,  but  two22  were  returned  to  the 
next  House. 

The  bill  had  thus  passed  the  House 
in  form  as  an  original  measure  of 
that  body,  although  it  was  in  essence 
the  amended  Senate  bill.  Being 
sent23  to  the  Senate  as  such,  an  at- 

Missouri. — Thomas  H.  Benton — 1.  Other 
Southern  States. — None.    Total — 9. 

21  Messrs.  Millson,  of  Virginia,  and  Benton, 
of  Missouri 

22  Messrs.  Puryear,  of  North  Carolina,  and 
Etheridge,  of  Tennessee.  23  May  24th. 


MISSOURI  ATTEMPTS  TO 


MONOPOLIZE  KANSAS. 


235 


tempt  to  amend  it  was  voted  down, 
and  the  bill  ordered  to  be  engrossed, 
by  35  Yeas  to  13  Nays.  It  was  im- 
mediately passed,  and,  being  ap- 
proved by  President  Pierce,  became 
a  law  of  the  land. 


The  straggle  which  ensued  for  the 
practical  possession  of  Kansas  was 
one  which  Congress  had  thus  clearly 
provoked  and  invited. 

When  the  bill  organizing  Kansas 
and  Nebraska  was  first  submitted  to 
Congress  in  1853,  all  that  portion  of 
Kansas  which  adjoins  the  State  of 
Missouri,  and,  in  fact,  nearly  all  the 
accessible  portion  of  both  Territories, 
was  covered  by  Indian  reservations, 
on  which  settlement  by  whites  was 
strictly  forbidden.  The  only  excep- 
tion was  that  in  favor  of  Government 
agents  and  religious  missionaries ; 
and  these,  especially  the  former,  were 
nearly  all  Democrats  and  violent 
partisans  of  Slavery.  Among  the 
missionaries  located  directly  on  the 
border  was  the  Rev.  Thomas  John- 
son, of  the  Methodist  Church  South, 
who  was  among  the  few  who  had 
already  introduced  and  then  held 
slaves  in  the  territory  which  is  now 
Kansas,  in  defiance  of  the  Missouri 
Restriction.  He  was  a  violent  poli- 
tician of  the  Missouri  border  pattern, 
and  in  due  time  became  President 
of  the  Council  in  the  first  Territorial 
Legislature  of  Kansas — elected  al- 
most wholly  by  non-resident  and 
fraudulent  votes.  Within  the  three 
months  immediately  preceding  the 
passage  of  the  Kansas  bill  aforesaid, 
treaties  were  quietly  made  at  Wash- 
ington with  the  Delawares,  Otoes, 
Kickapoos,  Kaskaskias,  Shawnees, 
Sacs,  Foxes,  and  other  tribes,  where- 
by the  greater  part  of  the  soil  of 


Kansas  lying  within  one  or  two  hun- 
dred miles  of  the  Missouri  border 
was  suddenly  opened  to  White  ap- 
propriation and  settlement.  These 
simultaneous  purchases  of  Indian 
lands  by  the  Government,  though 
little  was  known  of  them  elsewhere, 
were  thoroughly  understood  and  ap- 
preciated by  the  Missourians  of  the 
Western  border,  who  had  for  some 
time  been  organizing  "  Blue  Lodges," 
"  Social  Bands,"  "  Sons  of  the  South," 
and  other  societies,  with  intent  to. 
take  possession  of  Kansas  in  behalf 
of  Slavery.  They  were  well  assured, 
and  they  fully  believed,  that  the  ob- 
ject contemplated  and  desired,  in 
lifting,  by  the  terms  of  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  bill,  the  interdict  of  Sla- 
very from  Kansas,  was  to  authorize 
and  facilitate  the  legal  extension  of 
Slavery  into  that  region.  Within  a 
very  few  days  after  the  passage  of 
the  Kansas-Nebraska  act,  hundreds 
of  leading  Missourians  crossed  into 
the  adjacent  Territory,  selected  each 
his  quarter-section  or  larger  area  of 
land,  put  some  sort  of  mark  on  it, 
and  then  united  with  his  fellow- ad- 
venturers in  a  meeting  or  meetings 
intended  to  establish  a  sort  of  Mis- 
souri preemption  upon  all  this  re- 
gion. Among  the  resolves  passed 
at  one  of  these  meetings,  were  the 
following : 

"That  we  will  afford  protection  to  no 
abolitionist  as  a  settler  of  this  Territory. 

u  That  we  recognize  the  institution  of 
Slavery  as  already  existing  in  this  Territory, 
and  advise  slaveholders  to  introduce  their 
property  as  early  as  possible." 

Information  being  received,  soon 
after  this,  that  associations  were  be- 
ing formed  in  the  Eastern  States, 
designed  to  facilitate  and  promote 
the  migration  of  citizens  of  those 


236  THE  AMERICA 

States  to  Kansas,  with  intent  to 
make  her  a  Free  State,  a  violent 
and  general  indignation  of  the  bor- 
derers was  thereby  excited.  Among 
others,  a  meeting  was  held  at  West- 
port,  Mo.,  early  in  July,  1854,  which 
adopted  the  following : 

"  Resolved,  That  this  association  will, 
whenever  called  upon  by  any  of  the  citi- 
zens of  Kansas  Territory,  hold  itself  in 
readiness  together  to  assist  and  remove 
any  and  all  emigrants  who  go  there  under 
the  auspices  of  the  Northern  Emigrant  Aid 
Societies. 

"  Resolved,  That  we  recommend  to  the 
citizens  of  other  Counties,  particularly  those 
bordering  on  Kansas  Territory,  to  adopt 
regulations  similar  to  those  of  this  asso- 
ciation, and  to  indicate  their  readiness  to 
cooperate  in  the  objects  of  this  first  reso- 
lution." 

Before  the  passage  of  these  re- 
solves, at  least  one  person,  who  had 
strayed  into  the  Territory  with  intent 
to  settle  there,  and  who  was  unable 
to  convince  the  "  Border  Ruffians," 
already  in  possession,  that  he  was 
one  with  them  in  faith  and  spirit, 
was  seized  by  them,  placed  in  a 
canoe  without  oars,  and  sent  float- 
ing down  the  Missouri. 

The  first  company,  about  thirty 
in  number,  of  Eastern  emigrants, 
under  the  auspices  of  the  New  Eng- 
land Emigrant  Aid  Society,  reached 
Kansas  before  the  end  of  July,  and 
located  on  the  site  now  known  as 
Lawrence.24  Two  weeks  later,  they 
were  joined  by  a  second  and  larger 
company,  numbering  sixty  or  sev- 
enty. While  these  were  still  living 
in  tents,  but  busily  employed  in 
erecting  temporary  houses,  they  were 
visited  by  a  party  of  Missourians, 
one  hundred  strong,  who  were  re- 
inforced next  day  by  one  hundred 
and  fifty  more,  who  pitched  their 
camp  just  across  a  ravine  from  the 


N  CONFLICT. 

young  canvas  city,  and  sent  over 
formal  notification  that  "  the  Abo- 
litionists must  leave  the  Territory, 
never  more  to  return  to  it."  The 
settlers  must  have  all  their  effects 
gathered  together  preparatory  to 
leave  by  ten  o'clock.  The  time  was 
afterward  extended  to  one  o'clock, 
with  abundant  professions  of  a  de- 
sire to  prevent  the  effusion  of  blood. 
The  Yankees,  meantime,  had  organ- 
ized and  armed  as  a  militia  company, 
and  were  quietly  drilling  amid  their 
tents,  sending  civil  but  decided  an- 
swers to  the  repeated  messages  ^ent 
to  them.  Finally,  having  satisfied 
themselves  that  they  could  only  pre- 
vent bloodshed  by  letting  the  Yan- 
kees alone,  and  going  about  their 
own  business,  the  ruffians  broke  up 
their  camp  by  piecemeal  and  stole 
away,  at  evening  and  during  the 
night,  back  to  their  dens  in  Mis- 
souri. 

President  Pierce  appointed  An- 
drew H.  Reeder,  of  Pennsylvania, 
Governor,  and  Daniel  Woodson,  of 
Arkansas,  Secretary  of  Kansas,  with 
judicial  officers  of  whom  a  majority 
were  from  Slave  States — one  of  them 
taking  a  number  of  slaves  with  him 
into  the  Territory.  These  officers 
reached  Kansas,  and  established  a 
Territorial  Government  there,  in  the 
autumn  of  1854.  All  of  them  were, 
of  course,  Democrats ;  but  Gov. 
Reeder's  soundness  on  the  vital  ques- 
tion was  early  suspected  at  the 
South.  The  Union  (Washington), 
President  Pierce's  immediate  organ, 
promptly  rebuked  these  suspicions, 
as  follows  : 

"  A  gentleman  in  Virginia  calls  our  atten- 
tion to  the  fact  that  the  enemies  of  President 


24  So  named  after  Amos  A.  Lawrence,  Treasurer  of  the  Society. 


POPULAR  SOVEREIGNTY   RAMPANT  IN  KANSAS.  237 


Pierce  in  the  South  lay  particular  stress  upon 
his  appointment  of  Gov7.  Reeder  as  proof  of 
his  willingness  to  favor  Free-Soilers,  and 
asks  us  whether,  at  the  time  of  his  appoint- 
ment, Gov.  Reeder  was  regarded  as  a  sound 
national  Democrat.  It  is  in  our  power  to 
answer  this  question  with  entire  confidence, 
and  to  say  that,  down  to  the  time  that  Gov. 
Reeder  went  to  Kansas  to  assume  the  duties 
of  Governor  of  the  Territory,  there  had  not 
been,  so  far  as  we  have  ever  heard,  or  so  for 
as  the  President  ever  heard,  a  breath  of  sus- 
picion as  to  his  entertaining  Free-Soil  senti- 
ments. He  was  appointed  under  the  strong- 
est assurances  that  he  was  strictly  and  hon- 
estly a  national  man.  We  are  able  to  state, 
further,  on  very  reliable  authority,  that, 
whilst  Gov.  Reeder  was  in  Washington,  at 
the  time  of  his  appointment,  he  conversed 
with  Southern  gentlemen  on  the  subject  of 
Slavery,  and  assured  them  that  he  had  no 
more  scruples  in  buying  a  slave  than  a,  horse, 
and  he  regretted  that  he  had  not  money  to 
purchase  a  number  to  carry  with  him  to 
Kansas.  We  have  understood  that  he  re- 
peated the  same  sentiments  on  his  way  to 
Kansas.  We  will  repeat  what  we  have  had 
occasion  to  say  more  than  once  before— that 
no  man  has  ever  been  appointed  by  Presi- 
dent Pierce  to  office  who  was  not  at  the 
time  understood  by  him  to  be  a  faithful  ad- 
herent to  the  Baltimore  platform  of  1852, 
on  the  subject  of  Slavery.  If  any  appoint- 
ment was  made  contrary  to  this  rule,  it  was 
done  under  a  misapprehension  as  to  the  ap- 
pointment. We  may  add  that  the  evidences 
of  Gov.  Reeder's  soundness  were  so  strong 
that  President  Pierce  was  slower  than  many 
others  to  believe  him  a  Free-Soiler  after  he 
had  gone  to  Kansas.  It  is,  therefore,  the 
grossest  injustice  to  refer  to  Gov.  Reeder's 
appointment  as  proof  of  the  President's 
willingness  to  favor  Free-Soilers." 

An  election  for  Delegate  from 
Kansas  was  held  near  the  close  of 
November.  There  were  probably 
less  than  two  thousand  adult  white 
males  then  resident  in  the  Territory; 
yet  2,871  votes  were  cast,  whereof 
1,114  were  afterward  ascertained  to 
have  been  legal,  while  1,729  were 
cast  by  residents  of  Missouri.  At 
one  poll,  known  as  "  110,"  604  votes 
were  cast,  of  which  20  were  legal 
and   584  were  illegal.     John  W. 

25  A  Tennesseean;  last  heard  from  in  the 
Confederate  army. 


Whitfield, 25  an  Indian  agent,  the 
Missouri  candidate,  had  597  of  them. 
He  received  2,268  in  all,  to  570  for 
all  others.  David  R.  Atchison,  then 
a  U.  S.  Senator  from  Missouri,  in  a 
speech  in  Platte  County,  Mo.,  a  few 
weeks  before  the  election,  said : 

"  When  you  reside  within  one  day's  jour- 
ney of  the  Territory,  and  when  your  peace, 
your  quiet,  and  your  property,  depend  upon 
your  action,  you  can,  without  any  exertion, 
send  five  hundred  of  your  young  men  who  will 
vote  in  favor  of  your  institutions.  Should 
each -county  in  the  State  of  Missouri  only  do 
its  duty,  the  question  will  be  decided  quietly 
and  peaceably  at  the  ballot-box.  If  we  are 
defeated,  then  Missouri  and  the  other  South- 
ern States  will  have  shown  themselves  recre- 
ant to  their  interests,  and  will  deserve  their 
fate." 

The  city  of  Atchison,  named  after 
this  distinguished  Senator,  was  found- 
ed 26  about  this  time  by  gentlemen  of 
his  faith,  who  established  The  Squat- 
ter Sovereign  as  their  organ.  One  of 
its  early  issues  contained  the  follow- 
ing significant  paragraph : 

"  We  can  tell  the  impertinent  scoundrels 
of  The  Tribune  that  they  may  exhaust  an 
ocean  of  ink,  their  Emigrant  Aid  Societies 
spend  their  millions  and  billions,  their  repre- 
sentatives in  Congress  spout  their  heretical 
theories  till  doomsday,  and  his  Excellency 
appoint  abolitionist  after  free-soiler  as  our" 
Governor,  yet  we  will  continue  to  lynch  and 
hang,  tar  and  feather  and  drown,  every 
white-livered  abolitionist  who  dares  to  pol- 
lute our  soil." 

Gov.  Reeder,  in  the  early  months 
of  1855,  had  a  census  of  the  Territo- 
ry taken,  which  showed  a  total  pop- 
ulation of  8,501,  whereof  2,905  were 
voters  and  242  slaves.  He  thereupon 
ordered  an  election  for  a  first  Terri- 
torial Legislature  and  for  certain 
county  officers,  to  be  held  on  the 
30th  of  March,  which  took  place  ac- 
cordingly. All  of  border  Missouri 
was  on  hand ;  and  the  invaders  had 

26  On  the  Kansas  bank  of  the  Missouri ;  some 
thirty  miles  above  Leavenworth. 


238 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


been  so  nicely  apportioned  and  di- 
rected to  the  several  districts  and 
polls  that  they  elected  all  the  mem- 
bers, with  a  single  exception,  in  either 
House — the  two  Free-Soilers  being 
chosen  from  a  remote  inland  district 
which  the  Missonrians  had  overlook- 
ed or  did  not  care  to  reach.  Al- 
though bnt  831  legal  electors  voted, 
there  were  no  less  than  6,320  votes 
polled.  Even  at  Lawrence,  where 
there  were  but  369  voters  in  all,  and 
not  half  a  dozen  of  them  pro-Slavery, 
the  vote  returned  was — pro-Slavery, 
781 ;  Free  State,  253.  At  Marysville, 
where  there  were  24  legal  voters,  328 
votes  were  returned,  all  pro-Slavery. 
There  was  no  disguise,  no  pretense 
of  legality,  no  regard  for  decency. 
On  the  evening  before  and  the  morn- 
ing of  the  day  of  election,  nearly  a 
thousand  Missonrians  arrived  at  Law- 
rence, in  wagons  and  on  horseback, 
well  armed  with  rifles,  pistols,  and 
bowie-knives,  and  two  pieces  of  can- 
non loaded  with  musket  balls.  They 
had  tents,  music,  and  flags,  and  en- 
camped in  a  ravine  near  the  town. 
They  held  a  meeting  the  night  before 
the  election  at  the  tent  of  Claiborne 
F.  Jackson.27  Finding  that  they  had 
more  men  than  were  needed  to  carry 
the  Lawrence  district,  they  dispatch- 
ed companies  of  one  to  two  hundred 
each  to  two  other  districts.  Meeting 
one  of  the  judges  of  election  before 
the  poll  opened,  they  questioned  him 
as  to  his  intended  course,  and,  learn- 
ing that  he  should  insist  on  the  oath 
of  residence,  they  first  attempted  to 
bribe  and  then  threatened  to  hang 
him.  In  consequence  of  this  threat, 
he  failed  to  appear  at  the  poll,  and 
a  Missourian  was  appointed  in  his 
stead.    One  of  the  remaining  judges, 


refusing  to  receive  Missouri  votes, 
resigned  under  duress,  and  was  re- 
placed by  another  who  made  no  ob- 
jection. One  Missourian  voted  for 
himself  and  then  for  his  son,  ten  or 
eleven  years  old.  Three  of  those 
they  thus  elected  to  the  Legislature 
were  residents  of  Missouri  at  the 
time.  These  details  might  be  con- 
tinued indefinitely,  but  it  is  needless. 
The  Missourians  voted  at  other  polls 
with  less  circumspection,  easily  driv- 
ing off  all  who  objected  to  their  pro- 
ceedings, and  then  doing  as  they 
chose.  The  Weston  Reporter  (Mis- 
souri), of  the  day  before,  had  said  : 

"  Our  minds  are  already  made  up  as  to 
the  result  of  the  election  in  Kansas  to-mor- 
row. The  pro-Slavery  party  will  be  trium- 
phant, we  presume,  in  nearly  every  precinct. 
Should  the  pro- Slavery  party  fail  in  this 
contest,  it  will  not  be  because  Missouri 
has  failed  to  do  her  duty  to  assist  her 
friends.  It  is  a  safe  calculation  that  two 
thousand  squatters  have  passed  over  into 
^the  promised  land  from  this  part  of  the 
State  within  four  days." 

The  Platte  Argus  (Missouri),  in  its 

next  issue,  said : 

"  It  is  to  be  admitted  that  they — the  Mis- 
sourians—  have  conquered  Kansas.  Our 
advice  is,  let  them  hold  it,  or  die  in  the 
attempt." 

A  week  or  two  thereafter,  rumors 
were  in  circulation  that  the  Gover- 
nor did  not  indorse,  in  all  respects, 
the  legality  of  this  election ;  where- 
upon The  Brunswicker  (Missouri) 
said : 

"  We  learn,  just  as  we  go  to  press,  that 
Reeder  has  refused  to  give  certificates  to 
four  of  the  Councilmen  and  thirteen  mem- 
bers of  the  House !  He  has  ordered  an  elec- 
tion to  fill  their  places  on  the  22d  of  May. 

"  This  infernal  scoundrel  will  have  to  be 
hemped  yet." 

The  Parkville  Luminary  y  issued 

in  Platte  County,  Missouri,  was  the 

only  journal  on  that  side  of  the  bor_ 


27  Democratic  Governor  of  Missouri,  elected  in  1860 ;  died  a  Rebel  refugee  in  Arkansas,  1862. 


BORDER  RUFFIAN 


LAW  IN  KANSAS. 


239 


der  that  dared  and  chose  to  speak  a 
word  for  the  Free-State  settlers  of 
Kansas,  maintaining  their  rights  un- 
der the  organic  law.  Though  guard- 
ed and  careful  in  its  language,  it  could 
not  escape  the  discipline  meted  out  in 
that  region  to  all  who  favored  "  Abo- 
lition." On  the  14th  of  April,  1855, 
its  office  and  materials  were  destroy- 
ed by  a  mob,  and  its  editor  constrain- 
ed to  flee  for  his  life. 

William  Phillips,  a  Free-State  law- 
yer of  Leavenworth,  saw  fit  to  sign 
the  protest  against  the  wholesale 
frauds  whereby  the  election  at  that 
place  was  carried.  A  few  days  there- 
after, he  was  seized  by  a  crowd  of 
Missouri  ruffians,  taken  by  force  to 
"Weston,  Mo.,  eight  miles  distant, 
and  there  tarred  and  feathered,  rid- 
den on  a  rail,  and  finally  sold  at  auc- 
tion to  a  negro,  who  was  compelled 
to  purchase  him. 

Gov.  Reeder  did  set  aside  the  elec- 
tion in  the  only  six  districts  from 
which  protests  were  seasonably  for- 
warded to  him,  with  distinct  proof  of 
frauds;  whereupon,  new  elections 
were  held  in  those  districts,  and  all 
of  them  but  Leavenworth  were  car- 
ried Free-Soil.  Leavenworth,  being 
directly  on  the  Missouri  border,  was 
carried  pro-Slavery  by  fraud  and  vio- 
lence, as  usual.  The  Free-State  men 
elected  at  this  second  election  were 
refused  seats  by  the  pro -Slavery 
majority,  and  the  pro -Slavery  men 
chosen  on  the  regular  day  of  election 
duly  installed  in  their  places. 

The  Legislature  was  called  to  meet 
at  Pawnee  City  on  the  Kansas  river, 
nearly  a  hundred  miles  west  from 
the  border.  It  was  immediately  ad- 
journed, over  the  Governor's  veto,  to 
Shawnee  Mission,  directly  on  the  line 
of  Missouri.    It  proceeded  to  pass 


one  act  whereby  the  laws  of  Missou*- 
ri  generally  were  adopted  and  de- 
clared laws  of  Kansas,  and  other 
acts  specially  upholding  and  fortify- 
ing Slavery,  whereof  the  following 
are  but  specimens : 

"Sec.  1.  Be  it  enacted  by  the  Governor 
and  Legislative  Assembly  of  Kansas,  That 
every  person,  bond  or  free,  who  shall  be 
convicted  of  raising  a  rebellion  or  insurrec- 
tion of  slaves,  free  negroes,  or  mulattoes,  in 
this  Territory,  shall  suffer  death. 

"Sec.  2.  Every  free  persoD,  who  shall  aid 
or  assist  in-  any  rebellion  or  insurrection  of 
slaves,  free  negroes,  or  mulattoes,  or  shall  fur- 
nish arras,  or  do  any  other  act  in  further- 
ance of  such  rebellion  or  insurrection,  shall 
suffer  death. 

"Sec  3.  If  any  free  person  shall,  by 
speaking,  writing,  or  printing,  advise,  per- 
suade, or  induce,  any  slaves  to  rebel,  conspire 
against,  or  murder,  any  citizen  of  the  Terri- 
tory, or  shall  bring  into,  print,  write,  pub- 
lish, or  circulate,  or  cause  to  be  brought  into, 
written,  printed,  published,  or  circulated,  or 
shall,  knowingly,  aid  or  assist  in  the  bring- 
ing into,  printing,  writing,  publishing,  or 
circulating,  in  the  Territory,  any  book,  paper, 
magazine,  pamphlet,  or  circular,  for  the 
purpose  of  inciting  insurrection,  rebellion, 
revolt,  or  conspiracy,  on  the  part  of  the 
slaves,  free  negroes,  or  mulattoes,  against 
the  citizens  of  the  Territory,  or  any  part 
of  them,  such  person  shall  suffer  death. 

"  Sec.  4.  If  any  person  shall  entice,  decoy, 
or  carry  away,  out  of  this  Territory,  any 
slave  belonging  to  another,  with  the  in- 
tent to  deprive  the  owner  thereof  of  the 
services  of  such  slave,  he  shall  be  adjudged 
guilty  of  grand  larceny,  and,  on  conviction 
thereof,  shall  suffer  death,  or  be  imprisoned 
at  hard  labor  for  not  less  than  ten  years. 

"  Sec.  5.  If  any  person  shall  aid  or  assist 
in  enticing,  decoying,  or  persuading,  or  car- 
rying away,  or  sending  out  of  this  Territory, 
any  slave  belonging  to  another,  with  the  in- 
tent to  procure  or  effect  the  freedom  of  such 
slave,  or  deprive  the  owners  thereof  of  the 
services  of  such  slave,  he  shall  be  adjudged 
guilty  of  grand  larceny,  and,  on  conviction 
thereof,  shall  suffer  death,  or  be  imprisoned 
at  hard  labor  for  not  less  than  ten  years. 

uSec.  12.  If  any  free  person,  by  speaking 
or  writing,  shall  assert  or  maintain  that  per- 
sons have  not  the  right  to  hold  slaves  in 
this  Territory,  or  shall  introduce  into  this 
Territory,  print,  publish,  write,  circulate, 
or  cause  to  be  introduced  into  the  Ter- 
ritory, or  written,  printed,  published,  and 
circulated  in  this  Territory,  any  book,  pa- 
per, magazine,  pamphlet,  or  circular,  con- 


240  THE  AMERICA 

taining  any  denial  of  the  right  of  persons 
to  hold  slaves  in  this  Territory,  such  person 
shall  be  deemed  guilty  of  felony,  and  pun- 
ished by  imprisonment  at  hard  labor  for  a 
term  of  not  less  than  two  years. 

uSec.  13.  No  person  who  is  conscienti- 
ously opposed  to  holding  slaves,  or  who  does 
not  admit  the  right  to  hold  slaves  in  this 
Territory,  shall  sit  as  a  juror  on  the  trial  of 
any  prosecution  for  any  violation  of  any  of 
the  sections  of  this  act." 

Another  act  of  this  remarkable 
Legislature,  entitled  "  An  act  to 
punish  persons  decoying  slaves  from 
their  masters,"  has  this  unique  pro- 
vision : 

"  Sec.  3.  If  any  person  shall  entice,  decoy, 
or  carry  away,  out  of  any  State  or  other 
Territory  of  the  United  States,  any  slave 
belonging  to  another,  with  intent  to  pro- 
cure or  effect  the  freedom  of  such  slave,  or 
to  deprive  the  owner  thereof  of  the  services  j 
of  such  slave,  and  shall  bring  such  slave 
into  this  Territory,  lie  shall  be  adjudged 
guilty  of  grand  larceny,  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  if  such  slave  had  been  enticed,  de- 
coyed, or  carried  away,  out  of  this  Terri- 
tory ;  and  in  such  case  the  larceny  may  be 
charged  to  have  been  committed  in  any 
county  of  this  Territory,  into  or  through 
which  such  slave  shall  have  been  brought 
by  such  person,  and,  on  conviction  thereof, 
the  person  offending  shall  suffer  death." 

This  Legislature,  whose  acts  were 
systematically  vetoed  ty  Gov.  Reed- 
er,  but  passed  over  his  head,  memori- 
alized the  President  for  his  removal, 
which  was,  in  due  time,  effected. 
Wilson  Shannon, 28  of  Ohio,  was  ap- 
pointed in  his  stead.  On  his  way  to 
Kansas,  he  stopped  at  "Westport,  Mo., 
the  headquarters  of  border  ruffian- 
ism, and  made  a  speech  to  those 
who  crowded  about  him.  In  that 
speech,  he  declared  that  he  consid- 
ered the  Legislature  which  had  re- 
cently adjourned  to  Shawnee  Mis- 
sion a  legal  assembly,  and  regarded 
its  laws  as  binding  on  the  authorities 
and  on  every  citizen  of  the  Terri- 
tory.   He  added : 


.N"  CONFLICT. 

"To  one  subject,  however,  he  would  al- 
lude— Slavery.  His  official  life  and  charac- 
ter were  not  unknown  to  a  portion,  at  least, 
of  the  citizens  of  Kansas.  He  had  no  in- 
tention of  changing  his  political  faith.  He 
thought,  with  reference  to  Slavery,  that,  as 
Missouri  and  Kansas  were  adjoining  States, 
— as  much  of  that  immense  trade  up  the 
Missouri,  which  was  already  rivaling  the 
commerce  between  the  United  States  and 
some  foreign  countries,  must  necessarily  lead 
to  a  great  trade  and  perpetual  intercourse 
between  them, — it  would  be  well  if  their 
institutions  should  harmonize ;  otherwise, 
there  would  be  continual  quarrels  and  bor- 
der feuds.  He  was  for  Slavery  in  Kansas 
(loud  cheers)." 

The  actual  settlers  of  Kansas  were 
little  disposed  to  submit  to  the  impu- 
dent and  hostile  usurpation  which 
had  seized  their  ballot-boxes  and  im- 
posed on  them  a  fraudulent  Legisla- 
j  ture.  They  held  a  mass  convention 
at  Big  Springs  on  the  5th  of  Septem- 
ber, wherein  they  repudiated  the  laws 
I  and  officers  imposed  on  Kansas  by  the 
Border-Ruffian  election  and  Legisla- 
ture, and  refused  to  submit  to  them 
They  further  resolved  not  to  vote  at 
the  election  for  a  Delegate  to  Con- 
gress, which  the  bogus  Legislature 
had  appointed  to  be  held  on  the  1st 
of  October.  They  called  a  Delegate 
Convention  to  be  held  at  Topeka  on 
the  19th  of  that  month,  whereat  an 
Executive  Committee  for  Kansas  Ter- 
ritory was  appointed,  and  an  election 
for  Delegate  to  Congress  appointed  for 
the  second  Tuesday  in  October.  Gov. 
Reeder  was  nominated  for  Delegate. 
So,  two  rival  elections  for  Delegate 
were  held  on  different  days,  at  one  of 
which  Whitfield  (pro-Slavery),  and 
at  the  other  Reeder  (Free-Soil),  was 
chosen  Delegate  to  Congress.  And, 
on  the  23d  of  October,  a  Constitu- 
tional Convention,  chosen  by  the  set- 
tlers under  the  Free- State  organiza- 
tion aforesaid,  assembled  at  Topeka, 


28  Elected  Democratic  Governor  of  Ohio  over  Thomas  Corwin,  in  1842, 


KANSAS  INVESTIGATION  BY  CONGRESS. 


241 


and  formed  a  Free-State  Constitu- 
tion, under  which  they  asked  admis- 
sion into  the  Union  as  a  State. 

The  XXXIYth  Congress  assem- 
bled at  Washington,  December  3d, 
1855,  no  party  having  a  majority  in 
the  House.  Several  weeks  were 
consumed  in  fruitless  ballotings  for 
Speaker,  until,  finally,  a  majority 
voted — Yeas  113,  Kays  104 — that  a 
plurality  should  suffice  to  elect  after 
three  more  ballots.  Under  this  rule, 
Nathaniel  P.  Banks,  Jr.,  of  Massa- 
chusetts, received  103  votes  to  100 
for  "William  Aiken,  of  South  Caroli- 
na, and  11  scattering.  It  was  there- 
upon resolved — Yeas  155,  Nays  40 — 
that  Mr.  Banks  had  been  duly  elected 
Speaker.  The  House,  on  the  19th 
of  March,  resolved — Yeas  101,  Nays 
93 — to  send  a  Special  Committee  to 
Kansas,  to  inquire  into  the  anarchy 
by  this  time  prevailing  there.  That 
Committee  was  composed  of  Messrs. 
William  A.  Howard,  of  Michigan, 
John  Sherman,  of  Ohio,  and  Morde- 
cai  Oliver,  of  Missouri,  who  immedi- 
ately proceeded  to  Kansas,  and  there 
spent  several  weeks  in  taking  testi- 
mony ;  which  the  majority,  on  their 
return  to  Washington,  summed  up  in 
an  able  and  searching  Report.  Their 
conclusions  were  as  follows : 

"  First :  That  each  election  in  the  Terri- 
tory, held  under  the  organic  or  alleged  Ter- 
ritorial law,  has  been  carried  by  organized 
invasions  from  the  State  of  Missouri,  by 
which  the  people  of  the  Territory  have  been 
prevented  from  exercising  the  rights  secured 
to  them  by  the  organic  law. 

"  Second :  That  the  alleged  Territorial 
Legislature  was  an  illegally  constituted  body, 
and  had  no  power  to  pass  valid  laws ;  and 
their  enactments  are,  therefore,  null  and  void. 

"Third:  That  these  alleged  laws  have 
not,  as  a  general  thing,  been  used  to  pro- 
tect persons  and  property  and  to  punish 
wrong,  but  for  unlawful  purposes. 

"  Fourth :  That  the  election  under  which 
16 


the  sitting  delegate,  John  W.  Whitfield, 
holds  his  seat,  was  not  held  in  pursuance  of 
any  valid  law,  and  that  it  should  be  regarded 
only  as  the  expression  of  the  choice  of  those 
resident  citizens  who  voted  for  him. 

"Fifth:  That  the  election  under  which 
the  contesting  delegate,  Andrew  H.  Eeeder, 
claims  his  seat,  was  not  held  in  pursuance  of 
law,  and  that  it  should  be  regarded  only  as 
the  expression  of  the  choice  of  the  resident 
citizens  who  voted  for  him. 

"  Sixth :  That  Andrew  H.  Reeder  received 
a  greater  number  of  votes  of  resident  citizens 
than  John  W.  Whitfield,  for  Delegate. 

"  Seventh :  That,  in  the  present  condition 
of  the  Territory,  a  fair  election  cannot  be 
held  without  a  new  census,  a  stringent  and 
well-guarded  election  law,  the  selection  of 
impartial  judges,  and  the  presence  of  United 
States  troops  at  every  place  of  election. 

"Eighth  :  That  the  various  elections  held 
by  the  people  of  the  Territory  preliminary  to 
the  formation  of  the  State  Government,  have 
been  as  regular  as  the  disturbed  condition  of 
the  Territory  would  allow ;  and  that  the  Con- 
stitution framed  by  the  Convention,  held  in 
pursuance  of  said  elections,  embodies  the 
will  of  a  majority  of  the  people." 

Whitfield  held  his  seat,  notwith- 
standing, to  the  end  of  the  Congress, 
despite  strenuous  efforts  by  the 
Republican  members  to  oust  him ; 
and  a  bill  admitting  Kansas  as  a 
State  under  her  Free  Constitution 
was  first  defeated  in  the  House  by 
106  Yeas  to  107  Nays,  but  afterward 
reconsidered  and  passed  by  99  Yeas 
to  97  Nays.  In  the  Senate,  which 
was  strongly  pro-Slavery,  it  was 
promptly  defeated. 

Meantime,  the  settled  antagonism 
in  Kansas  between  the  Federal  au- 
thorities and  the  Territorial  function- 
aries and  enactments  recognized  and 
upheld  by  them  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  great  mass  of  her  people  on  the 
other,  had  resulted  in  great  practical 
disorders.  On  the  21st  of  Novem- 
ber, 1855,  William  Dow,  a  Free- 
State  settler  on  the  Santa  Fe  road, 
near  Hickory  Point,  was  shot  dead 
in  open  day  by  one  Coleman,  a  pro- 
Slavery  neighbor,  in  plain  sight  of 


242 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


several  persons.  Dow  was  unarmed, 
and  was  set  upon  by  three  armed 
pro-Slavery  men,  who  had  no  cause 
of  quarrel  with  him  but  their  differ- 
ence in  politics,  although  they  made 
a  pretense  of  claiming  the  land  on 
which  he  had  settled.  The  murderer 
fled  to  Missouri,  but  immediately  re- 
turned to  Shawnee  Mission,  and  sur- 
rendered himself  to  G-ov.  Shannon, 
but  was  allowed  to  go  at  large.  The 
body  of  the  murdered  man  lay  in 
the  road  from  noon  till  evening, 
when  Jacob  Branson,  the  Free-State 
settler  with  whom  he  boarded,  hear- 
ing of  his  death,  went  after  and  re- 
covered it.  Five  days  thereafter,  a 
meeting  of  Free-State  men  was  held 
at  Hickory  Point,  at  which  the  mur- 
der and  its  authors  were  forcibly 
denounced,  and  a  Committee  ap- 
pointed to  bring  the  murderers  to 
justice.  This  meeting  was  made  the 
pretext  for  bringing  on  a  collision 
between  the  people  and  the  authori- 
ties. Branson  was  soon  after  arrest- 
ed on  an  affidavit  of  one  of  the  three 
armed  men  who  had  compassed  the 
death  of  Dow,  who  swore  that  he  was 
in  fear  of  his  life.  The  arrest  was 
made  by  a  party  headed  by  Samuel 
J.  Jones,  postmaster  at  Westport, 
Mo.,  and  one  of  the  foremost  in 
the  conspiracy  by  which  Kansas  had 
been  so  far  subjugated  to  "  Border- 
Ruffian"  rule  through  the  wholesale 
corruption  of  her  ballot-boxes.  For 
his  zeal  and  efficiency  in  this  work, 
the  fraudulent  Legislature  at  Shaw- 
nee Mission  had  made  him  sheriff  of 
Douglas  County,  wherein  are  Law- 
rence and  Hickory  Point.  Of  course, 
the  "Free-State"  settlers,  constitut- 
ing a  large  majority  of  the  people  of 
that  important  county,  scouted  his 
assumption  of  official  authority,  re- 


garding him  as  a  deadly  and  danger- 
ous foe.  His  posse  was  made  up  of 
pro- Slavery  men,  including  two  of 
those  who  had  witnessed  and  abetted 
the  murder  of  Dow,  though  Coleman 
— however  active  in  raising,  fitting 
out,  and  arming  the  party — had  been 
persuaded  not  to  accompany  it. 
Branson  was  found  by  them  asleep 
in  his  bed,  and  taken  out  by  Jones, 
who  professed  his  intent  to  take  him 
to  Lawrence  for  examination.  Whe- 
ther he  did  or  did  not  entertain  that 
purpose,  he  lingered  and  drank  by 
the  way,  so  that  a  party  of  the  neigh- 
boring Free-State  settlers,  fifteen  in 
number,  was  hastily  collected,  by 
which  Jones  and  his  party  were  in- 
tercepted near  Blanton's  Bridge  over 
the  Wakarusa,  and  Branson  rescued 
from  Jones's  custody.  There  was  no 
actual  collision — not  even  a  gun 
snapped — but  the  Free-State  men 
formed  across  the  road  in  a  bright 
moonlight  evening,  and  called  Bran- 
son to  come  over  to  them,  which  he 
did,  notwithstanding  free  threats  of 
shooting  on  the  part  of  Jones  and 
his  followers,  answered  by  a  cocking 
of  Sharpe's  rifles  and  revolvers  on 
the  other  side.  Jones,  who  had  been 
speaking  daggers  up  to  this  time, 
wisely  concluded  to  use  none,  though 
his  party  was  well  armed,  and  decid- 
edly the  more  numerous.  Branson 
and  his  rescuers  moved  off  toward 
Lawrence,  the  citadel  of  Free- State 
principles,  which  the  discomfited  sher- 
iff protested  he  would  soon  visit  at 
the  head  of  five  thousand  men,  and 
"  wipe  out."  He  accordingly  called 
on  Gov.  Shannon  to  order  out  three 
thousand  militia,  to  enable  him  to 
"execute  the  laws,"  and  sent  to 
President  Pierce  an  affidavit  that  he 
had  been  resisted  by  "  forty  abolition- 


THE  CAPTURE  AND  S 


ACK  OF  LAWRENCE. 


243 


ists."  The  call  was  promptly  made 
by  proclamation  from  the  governor, 
and  the  whole  Missouri  border  came 
over  to  execute  vengeance  on  Law- 
rence and  the  Free-State  men.  This 
army  encamped  at  Franklin,  a  pro- 
Slavery  settlement,  a  few  miles  from 
Lawrence,  and  there  remained  seve- 
ral days,  during  which  Thomas  "W. 
Barber,  a  Free-State  man,  returning 
from  Lawrence  to  his  home,  seven 
miles  off,  was  shot  dead  by  some  of 
them,  but  no  other  serious  damage 
done.  Finally,  articles  of  negotiation 
and  adjustment  were  agreed  up- 
on between  Gov.  Shannon  and  the 
Free-State  leaders,  in  Lawrence, 
which  suspended  the  feud  for  the 
present.  The  Missourians  dispersed, 
and  the  troubled  land  once  more  had 
peace. 

In  the  Spring  of  1856,  the  pro- 
Slavery  party  on  the  Kansas  border 
were  reenforced  by  Col.  Buford,  from 
Alabama,  at  the  head  of  a  regiment 
of  wild  young  men,  mainly  recruited 
in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 
They  came  in  military  array,  armed, 
and  with  the  avowed  purpose  of 
making  Kansas  a  Slave  State  at  all 
hazards.  On  one  of  their  raids  into 
Kansas,  a  party  of  Buford's  men, 
who  were  South  Carolinians,  took  a 
Mr.  Miller  prisoner,  and,  finding 
that  he  was  a  Free- State  man,  and  a 
native  of  South  Carolina,  they  grave- 
ly tried  him  for  treason  to  his  native 
State !  He  was  found  guilty,  and 
escaped  with  his  life  only,  losing  his 
horse  and  money. 

Kansas  now  swarmed  with  the 
minions  of  the  Slave  Power,  intent 
on  her  subjugation ;  their  pretext 
being  the  enforcement  of  the  laws 
passed  by  the  fraudulent  Legislature. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  of 


May,  1856,  Lawrence  was  surrounded 
and  surprised  by  various  parties  of 
enemies,  part  of  them  under  Gen. 
Atchison,  who,  with  the  "  Platte 
County  Pities,"  and  two  pieces  of 
artillery,  approached  from  Lecomp- 
ton  on  the  west,  while  another  force, 
composed  in  good  part  of  the  volun- 
teers from  the  Atlantic  Southern 
States,  under  Col.  Buford,  beleaguer- 
ed it  on  the  east.  They  bristled  with 
weapons  from  the  United  States  Ar- 
mory, then  in  charge  of  the  Federal 
officers  in  Kansas.  Nearly  all  the 
pro-Slavery  leaders  then  in  Kansas, 
or  hovering  along  the  Missouri  bor- 
der, were  on  hand ;  among  them, 
Col.  Titus,  from  Florida,  Col.  "Wilkes, 
from  South  Carolina,  Gen.  String- 
fellow,  a  Virginian,  Col.  Boone, 
hailing  from  Westport,  and  many 
others  of  local  and  temporary  fame. 
The  entire  force  was  about  800 
strong,  having  possession  of  Mount 
Oread,  a  hill  which  commanded  the 
town.  The  pretext  for  this  raid  was 
a  desire  to  serve  legal  processes  in 
Kansas,  although  deputy  marshal 
Fain,  who  held  a  part  of  those  pro- 
cesses, had  been  in  Lawrence  the 
evening  before,  and  served  two  writs 
without  a  sign  of  resistance,  as  on 
several  previous  occasions.  He  now 
rode  into  the  town  with  ten  men, 
and  arrested  two  leading  Free-State 
citizens,  no  one  making  objection. 
Meantime,  the  posse,  so  called,  were 
busy  in  the  suburbs,  breaking  open 
houses  and  robbing  their  inmates. 
Fain  remained  in  town  until  after- 
noon, eating  dinner  with  his  party  at 
the  principal  hotel,  but  neglecting  to 
pay  for  it ;  then  returned  to  the 
camp  on  the  hill,  and  was  succeeded 
by  "  Sheriff  Jones"  of  that  county, 
whose  authority,  being  derived  from 


244 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  sham  Legislature,  the  people  did 
not  recognize.  Jones  rode  into 
town  at  the  head  of  twenty  men,  at 
three  P.  M.,  and  demanded  that  all 
the  arms  should  be  given  up  to  him, 
on  pain  of  a  bombardment.  The 
people,  unprepared  to  resist,  consent- 
ed to  surrender  their  artillery,  con- 
sisting of  a  twelve-pound  howitzer, 
and  four  smooth-bore  pieces,  carrying 
each  a  pound  ball.  All  these  had 
been  buried  some  days  before,  but 
were  now  dug  up  and  made  over  to 
Jones.  A  few  muskets  were  like- 
wise surrendered  by  their  owners. 
The  pro-Slavery  army  now  marched 
down  the  hill,  and  entered  the  south 
end  of  the  town,  where  Atchison 
made  a  speech  to  them,  declaring 
that  the  Free-State  Hotel  and  the 
two  Free-State  printing-offices  must 
be  destroyed.  "Sheriff  Jones"  de- 
clared that  he  had  an  order  to  that 
effect  from  Judge  Lecompte,  of  the 
Federal  Court.  The  whole  force  ac- 
cordingly marched  into  the  heart  of 
the  town,  destroyed  the  printing-offi- 
ces, and  fired  some  fifty  rounds  from 
their  cannon  at  the  Free-State  Hotel, 
which,  being  solidly  built  of  stone, 
was  not  much  damaged  thereby. 
Four  kegs  of  gun-powder  were  then 
placed  in  it  and  fired,  but  only  two 
of  them  exploded,  making  little  im- 
pression. Fire  was  now  applied  to 
the  building,  and  it  was  burnt  to  the 
bare  and  blackened  walls.  The 
dwelling  of  Gov.  Robinson29  was 
next  set  on  fire,  and,  though  the 
flames  were  twice  extinguished,  it 
was  finally  consumed.  The  total  loss 
to  the  citizens  of  Lawrence  by  that 
day's  robbery  and  arson  was  estimat- 

29  Elected  Governor  under  the  embryo  organi- 
zation, by  the  great  body  of  her  settlers,  of 
Kansas  as  a  Free  State. 


ed  at  $150,000.  None  of  them  were 
killed  or  wounded ;  but  one  of  the 
ruffians  shot  himself  badly,  and 
another  was  killed  by  a  brick  or 
stone,  knocked  by  one  of  their  can- 
non from  the  upper  story  of  the 
Free-State  Hotel. 

Such  were  the  beginnings  of  the 
so-called  "  Kansas  War,"  a  desultory, 
wasteful,  but  not  very  bloody  con- 
flict, which  continued,  with  alterna- 
tions of  activity  and  quiet,  through- 
out the  next  year.  One  of  its  most 
noted  incidents  is  known  as  the 
"  battle  of  Black  Jack,"  wherein  28 
Free-State  men,  led  by  old  John 
Brown,  of  Osawatomie,  fought  and 
defeated,  on  the  open  prairie,  56 
"  border  ruffians,"  headed  by  Capt. 
H.  Clay  Pate,  from  Yirginia,  who 
professed  to  be  an  officer  under  Mar- 
shal Donaldson.  It  terminated  in 
the  surrender  of  Pate  and  all  that 
remained  of  his  band,  twenty-one 
men,  beside  the  wounded,  with 
twenty-three  horses  and  mules,  wag- 
ons, provisions,  camp-equipage,  and 
a  considerable  quantity  of  plunder, 
obtained  just  before  by  sacking  a 
little  Free- State  settlement,  known  as 
Palmyra. 

The  Legislature  chosen  under  the 
Free-State  Constitution  was  sum- 
moned to  meet  at  Topeka  on  the  4th 
of  July,  1856,  and  its  members  as- 
sembled accordingly,  but  were  not 
allowed  to  organize,  Col.  Sumner,30 
with  a  force  of  regulars,  dispersing 
them  by  order  of  President  Pierce. 

The  village  of  Osawatomie,  in  the 
southern  part  of  the  Territory,  was 
sacked  and  burned  on  the  5th  of 
June  by  a  pro-Slavery  force,  headed 

30  Since  known  as  Maj.-Gen.  Edwin  V.  Sum- 
ner: fought  bravely  in  several  battles  of  the 
War:  died  at  Syracuse,  N.  T.,  early  in  1863. 


THE  SACK  OF  LEATENWO  RTH. 


245 


by  Gen.  Whitfield.  But  few  of  the 
male  citizens  were  at  home,  and 
there  was  no  resistance. 

Leavenworth,  being  directly  on 
the  border,  and  easily  accessible  from 
a  populous  portion  of  Missouri,  was 
especially  exposed  to  outrages.  It 
was  long  under  the  control  of  the 
pro-Slavery  party,  being  a  military 
post,  and  a  point  whence  overland 
trains  and  mails  were  dispatched, 
and  at  which  a  vast  Federal  patron- 
age was  concentrated.  The  office  of 
The  Territorial  Register  (Free-State) 
was  destroyed  by  a  Missouri  band, 
December  20,  1855.  Many  collisions 
and  murders  occurred  here,  and  in 
the  vicinity ;  and  at  length,  on  the 
recurrence  of  the  municipal  election 
(September  1,  1856),  a  large  force, 
mainly  of  Missourians,  took  posses- 
sion of  the  town  ;  and,  under  the 
pretense  of  searching  for  arms,  plun- 
dered and  ravaged  as  they  chose. 
William  Phillips,  a  lawyer,  refused 
to  submit  to  their  search,  and  stood 
on  his  defense.  He  killed  two  of 
his  assailants,  but  was  finally  killed 
himself ;  while  his  brother,  who  aid- 
ed him  in  his  defense,  had  his  arm 
shattered  by  a  bullet.  Phillips's 
house  was  burned,  with  several 
others,  and  every  known  Free-State 
man  put  on  board  a  steamboat  and 
sent  down  the  river.  It  was  boasted 
by  the  Missouri  journals  that  not  a 
single  "abolition  vote"  was  cast  at 
that  election ! 

Meantime,  the  emigrants  flocking 
to  Kansas  from  the  Free  States  were 
arrested  on  their  passage  through 
Missouri  and  turned  back :  cannon  be- 
ing planted  along  the  Missouri  river 
to  stop  the  ascending  steamboats 
for  this  purpose.  Not  many  of  these 
emigrants  were  actually  plundered, 


save  of  their  passage-money,  which 
was  in  no  case  returned.  A  large 
party  was  finally  made  up  of  those 
whose  progress  to  their  intended 
homes  had  been  thus  obstructed,  who 
proceeded  thither  slowly  and  toil- 
somely, by  a  circuitous  route  through 
Iowa  and  Nebraska ;  but  who,  on  en- 
tering Kansas,  were  met  by  a  Fede- 
ral military  force,  and  all  their  arms 
taken  from  them. 

Yet  the  immigration  continued ;  so 
that,  while  the  office-holders,  the 
military,  and  all  the  recognized 
power  and  authority,  were  on  the 
side  of  Slavery,  the  Free-State  pre- 
ponderance among  the  settlers  con- 
stantly increased.  The  pro-Slavery 
forces  made  strong  incursions  or  raids 
into  the  Territory  from  time  to  time, 
but  subsided  into  Missouri  after  a 
few  days ;  and,  while  a  good  share 
of  the  fighting,  with  most  of  the 
burning  and  plundering,  was  done 
by  them,  nearly  all  the  building,  the 
clearing,  the  plowing,  and  the  plant- 
ing, were  the  work  of  Free-State  men. 
Meantime,  dissipation,  exposure,  and 
all  manner  of  irregularities,  were 
constantly  thinning  the  ranks  of  the 
pro-Slavery  volunteers  from  the 
South,  while  many  of  the  better  class 
among  them,  disgusted  and  remorse- 
ful, abandoned  their  evil  work,  and 
shrank  away  to  some  region  wherein 
they  were  less  generally  detested. 
Under  all  its  persecutions  and  deso- 
lations, Kansas  was  steadily  maturing 
and  hardening  into  the  bone  and 
sinew  of  a  Free  State  not  only,  but 
of  one  fitted  by  education  and  expe- 
rience to  be  an  apostle  of  the  gospel 
of  Universal  Freedom. 


The  Democratic  National  Conven- 
tion for  1856  met  at  Cincinnati  on 


246 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  2d  of  June.  John  E.  Ward,  of 
Georgia,  presided  over  its  delibera- 
tions. On  the  first  ballot,  its  votes 
for  Presidential  candidate  were- cast, 
for  James  Buchanan,  135  ;  Pierce, 
122;  Douglas,  33;  Cass,  5.  Bu- 
chanan gained  pretty  steadily,  and 
Pierce  lost ;  so  that,  on  the  ninth 
ballot,  the  vote  stood :  Buchanan, 
147  ;  Pierce,  87 ;  Douglas,  56  ;  Cass, 
7.  On  the  sixteenth,  Mr.  Buchanan 
had  168 ;  Mr.  Douglas,  121.  And, 
on  the  seventeenth,  Mr.  Buchanan 
received  the  whole  number,  296 
votes,  and  was  nominated.  On  the 
first  ballot  for  Yice-President,  John 
A.  Quitman,  of  Mississippi,  received 
the  highest  vote — 59  ;  but,  on  the 
second,  his  name  was  withdrawn, 
and  John  C.  Breckinridge,  of  Ken- 
tucky, was  unanimously  nominated. 

The  Convention,  in  its  platform, 
after  adopting  nearly  all  the  material 
resolves  of  its  two  immediate  prede- 
cessors, unanimously 

"  1.  Resolved,  That,  claiming  fellowship 
with  and  desiring  the  cooperation  of  all 
who  regard  the  preservation  of  the  Union 
Tinder  the  Constitution  as  the  paramount 
issue,  and  repudiating  all  sectional  parties 
and  platforms  concerning  domestic  Slavery, 
which  seek  to  embroil  the  States  and  incite 
to  treason  and  armed  resistance  to  law  in 
the  Territories,  and  whose  avowed  purpose, 
if  consummated,  must  end  in  civil  war  and 
disunion,  the  American  Democracy  recog- 
nize and  adopt  the  principles  contained  in 
the  organic  laws  establishing  the  Territories 
of  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  as  embodying  the 
only  soimd  and  safe  solution  of  the  Slavery 
question,  upon  which  the  great  National 
idea  of  the  people  of  this  whole  country 
can  repose  in  its  determined  conservation 
of  the  Union,  and  non-interference  of  Con- 
gress with  Slavery  in  the  Territories  or  in 
the  District  of  Columbia. 

"  2.  That  this  was  the  basis  of  the  Compro- 
mises of  1850,  confirmed  by  both  the  Demo- 
cratic and  "Whig  parties  in  National  Conven- 
tions ;  ratified  by  the  people  in  the  election 
of  1 852,  and  rightly  applied  to  the  organi- 
zation of  the  Territories  in  1854. 

"  3.  That,  by  the  uniform  application  of  the 


Democratic  principle  to  the  organization  of 
Territories,  and  the  admission  of  new  States 
with  or  without  domestic  Slavery,  as  they 
may  elect,  the  equal  rights  of  all  the  States 
will  be  preserved  intact,  the  original  com- 
pacts of  the  Constitution  maintained  invio- 
late, and  the  perpetuity  and  expansion  of 
the  Union  insured  to  its  utmost  capacity  of 
embracing,  in  peace  and  harmony,  every 
future  American  State  that  may  be  consti- 
tuted or  annexed  with  a  republican  form  of 
government." 

The  dissolution  of  the  "WTiig  party, 
commenced  by  the  imposition  of  the 
Southern  platform  on  its  National 
Convention  of  1852,was  consummated 
by  the  eager  participation  of  most  of 
its  Southern  members  of  Congress  in 
the  repudiation  of  the  Missouri  Com- 
promise by  the  passage  of  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  bill.  Those,  of  whatever 
party  in  the  past,  who  emphatically 
condemned  that  repudiation,  and  who 
united  on  that  basis  to  ignore  past 
political  denominations,  with  a  view 
to  united  action  in  the  future,  were 
first  known  simply  as  "  anti-Nebras- 
ka," but  gradually,  and  almost  spon- 
taneously, assumed  the  designation 
of  "  Republicans."  As  such,  they 
carried  most  of  the  Free  State  elec- 
tions of  1854,  but  were  less  decidedly 
successful  in  those  of  1855.  Their 
first  National  Convention  was  held 
at  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  on  the  22d  of 
February,  1856  ;  but  no  nominations 
were  there  made.  Their  nominating 
Convention  met  at  Philadelphia  on 
the  17th  of  June,  Col.  Henry  S. 
Lane,  of  Indiana,  presiding.  John 
C.  Fremont,  of  California,  was  nom- 
inated for  President  on  the  first  bal- 
lot, receiving  359  votes  to  196  for 
John  McLean,  of  Ohio.  William 
L.  Dayton,  of  New  Jersey,  received 
259  votes  on  the  informal  ballot,  to 
110  for  Abraham  Lincoln  and  180 
scattering,  for  Yice-President.  Mr. 
Dayton  was  thereupon  unanimously 


NOMINATION   OF   FILLMORE   AND  DONELSON. 


247 


nominated.  The  more  material  re- 
solves of  this  Convention  are  as  fol- 
lows : 

"Resolved^  That,  with  our  republican 
fathers,  we  hold  it  to  be  a  self-evident 
truth,  that  all  men  are  endowed  with  the 
inalienable  rights  to  life,  liberty,  and  the 
pursuit  of  happiness  ;  and  that  the  primary 
object  and  ulterior  design  of  our  Federal 
Government  were,  to  secure  these  rights  to 
all  persons  within  its  exclusive  jurisdiction; 
that,  as  our  republican  fathers,  when  they 
had  abolished  Slavery  in  all  our  National 
territory,  ordained  that  no  person  should 
be  deprived  of  life,  liberty,  or  property, 
without  due  process  of  law,  it  becomes  our 
duty  to  maintain  this  provision  of  the  Con- 
stitution against  all  attempts  to  violate  it, 
for  the  purpose  of  establishing  Slavery  in 
any  territory  of  the  United  States,  by  posi- 
tive legislation,  prohibiting  its  existence 
and  extension  therein.  That  we  deny  the 
authority  of  Congress,  of  a  Territorial  Legis- 
lature, of  any  individual  or  association  of 
individuals,  to  give  legal  existence  to  Sla- 
very in  any  Territory  of  the  United  States, 
while  the  present  Constitution  shall  be 
maintained. 

"Resolved,  That  the  Constitution  confers 
upon  Congress  sovereign  power  over  the 
Territories  of  the  United  States  for  their 
government;  and  that,  in  the  exercise  of 
this  power,  it  is  both  the  right  and  the  duty 
of  Congress  to  prohibit  in  the  Territories 
those  twin  relics  of  barbarism — Polygamy 
and  Slavery." 

An  "American"  National  Con- 
vention was  held  at  Philadelphia  on 
the  22d  of  February ;  all  the  States 
represented  but  Maine,  Vermont, 
Georgia,  and  South  Carolina.  An 
"American"  National  Council  (secret) 
had  met  three  days  before  in  the 
same  place,  and  adopted  a  platform. 
The  following  plank  is  the  most 
essential : 

"  The  recognition  of  the  right  of  native- 
born  and  naturalized  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  permanently  residing  in  any  Terri- 
tory thereof,  to  frame  their  Constitution 
and  laws,  and  to  regulate  their  domestic  and 
social  affairs  in  their  own  mode,  subject 
only  to  the  provisions  of  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution, with  the  privilege  of  admission 
into  the  Union  whenever  they  have  the 
requisite  population  for  one  Representative 
in  Congress :  Provided,  always,  that  none 


but  those  who  are  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  under  the  Constitution  and  laws 
thereof,  and  who  have  a  fixed  residence  in 
any  such  Territory,  ought  to  participate  in 
the  formation  of  the  Constitution,  or  in  the 
enactment  of  laws,  for  said  Territory  or 
State." 

This  Council  proceeded  to  con- 
demn the  National  Administration, 
among  other  things,  for  "  reopening 
sectional  agitation  by  the  repeal  of 
the  Missouri  compromise."  This  was 
not  satisfactory  to  the  "  anti-Nebras- 
ka" members  of  the  nominating  Con- 
vention ;  on  whose  behalf,  Mr.  Kil- 
linger,  of  Pennsylvania,  proposed  the 
following : 

"Resolved,  That  the  National  Council  has 
no  authority  to  prescribe  a  Platform  of  prin- 
ciples for  this  Nominating  Convention  ;  and 
that  we  will  nominate  for  President  and 
Vice-President  no  men  who  are  not  in  favor 
of  interdicting  the  introduction  of  Slavery 
into  territory  north  of  36°  30'  by  Congres- 
sional action." 

This  resolve  was  laid  on  the  table, 
by  141  votes  to  59.  The  "  anti-Ne- 
braska" delegates,  to  the  number  of 
about  fifty,  thereupon  withdrew  from 
the  Convention.  On  the  first  ballot 
for  President,  Millard  Fillmore,  of 
New  York,  received  71  votes ;  George 
Law,  of  N.  Y.,  27 ;  and  there  were  45 
scattering.  On  the  next  ballot,  Mr. 
Fillmore  received  179  to  64  for  all 
others,  and  was  nominated.  On  the 
first  ballot  for  Yice-President,  An- 
drew Jackson  Donelson,  of  Tennes- 
see, received  181  votes  to  24  scatter- 
ing, and  was  unanimously  nomina- 
ted. 

The  nomination  of  Mr.  ¥ illmore 
was  ratified  by  a  Whig  Convention, 
which  met  at  Baltimore  on  the  17th 
of  September — Edward  Bates,  of  Mis- 
souri, presiding. 

Mr.  Fillmore  was  absent  in  Europe 
when  the  American  nomination  was 
made ;  but,  returning  early  in  July, 


248  THE  AMERICA 

took  ground  emphatically  against  the 
Republican  organization  and  effort. 
In  his  speech  at  Albany,  he  said : 

u  We  see  a  political  party  presenting  can- 
didates for  the  Presidency  and  Vice-Presi- 
dency, selected,  for  the  first  time,  from  the 
Free  States  alone,  with  the  avowed  purpose 
of  electing  these  candidates  by  the  suffrages 
of  one  part  of  the  Union  only,  to  rule  over 
the  whole  United  States.  Can  it  be  possible 
that  those  who  are  engaged  in  such  a  meas- 
ure can  have  seriously  reflected  upon  the 
consequences  which  must  inevitably  follow, 
in  case  of  success?  Can  they  have  the  mad- 
ness or  the  folly  to  believe  that  our  South- 
ern brethren  would  submit  to  be  governed 
by  such  a  Chief  Magistrate  ?  "Would  he  be 
required  to  follow  the  same  rule  prescribed 
by  those  who  elected  him  in  making  his  ap- 
pointments? If  a  man  living  south  of  Ma- 
son and  Dixon's  line  be  not  worthy  to  be 
President  or  Vice-President,  would  it  be 
proper  to  select  one  from  the  same  quarter 
as  one  of  his  Cabinet  Council,  or  to  repre- 
sent the  nation  in  a  foreign  country  ?  Or, 
indeed,  to  collect  the  revenue,  or  administer 
the  laws  of  the  United  States?  If  not,  what 
new  rule  is  the  President  to  adopt  in  select- 
ing men  for  office  that  the  people  them- 
selves discard  in  selecting  h  im  ?  These  are 
serious  but  practical  questions ;  and,  in  or- 
der to  appreciate  them  fully,  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  turn  the  tables  upon  ourselves.  Sup- 
pose that  the  South,  having  the  majority  of 
the  electoral  votes,  should  declare  that  they 
would  only  have  slaveholders  for  President 
and  Vice-President,  and  should  elect  such  by 
their  exclusive  suffrages  to  rule  over  us  at 
the  North.  Do  you  think  we  would  sub- 
mit to  it  ?  No,  not  for  a  moment.  And  do 
you  believe  that  your  Southern  brethren  are 
less  sensitive  on  this  subject  than  you  are, 
or  less  jealous  of  their  rights  ?  If  you  do, 
let  me  tell  you  that  you  are  mistaken.  And, 
therefore,  you  must  see  that,  if  this  sectional 
party  succeeds,  it  leads  inevitably  to  the  de- 
struction of  this  beautiful  fabric,  reared  by 
our  forefathers,  cemented  by  their  blood,  and 
bequeathed  to  us  as  a  priceless  inheritance." 

This  speech  is  memorable  not 
merely  for  its  gross  misapprehen- 
sion of  £he  grounds  and  motives  of 
the  Republican  movement — repre- 
senting its  purposes  as  violent,  ag- 
gressive, and  sectional,  when  they 
date  back  to  1784,  and  trace  their 
paternity  to  Jefferson,  a  Southron 
and  a  slaveholder — but  because  this 
was  the  first  declaration  by  a  North - 


N  CONFLICT. 

ern  statesman  of  mark  that  the  suc- 
cess of  the  Republicans  would  not 
only  incite,  but  justify,  a  Southern  re- 
bellion. The  facts  that  the  "Na- 
tional Republicans,"  in  1828,  sup- 
ported John  Q.  Adams  and  Richard 
Rush — both  from  Free  States — while 
their  antagonists  supported  Andrew 
Jackson  and  John  C.  Calhoun,  both 
slaveholders,  and  thus  secured  nearly 
every  elector  from  the  Slave  States,  are 
conveniently  ignored  by  Mr.  Fillmore. 

The  Presidential  contest  of  1856 
was  ardent  and  animated  up  to  the 
October  elections,  wherein  the  States 
of  Pennsylvania  and  Indiana  were 
carried  by  the  Democrats,  rendering 
the  election  of  Buchanan  and  Breck- 
inridge a  moral  certainty.  In  de- 
spite>  however,  of  that  certainty,  the 
Republicans  carried  New  York  by  a 
plurality  of  80,000,  with  the  six  New 
England  States,  and  Ohio,  Michigan, 
Wisconsin,  and  Iowa — giving  Gen. 
Fremont  114  electoral  votes.  Mr. 
Buchanan  carried  Pennsylvania,  New 
Jersey,  Indiana,  Illinois,  California, 
with  all  the  Slave  States  but  Mary- 
land, which  voted  alone  for  Mr.  Fill- 
more. New  Jersey,  Illinois,  and  Cal- 
ifornia, gave  each  a  plurality  only, 
not  a  majority,  of  her  popular  vote 
for  the  successful  candidate.  In  the 
aggregate,  Mr.  Buchanan  received 
1,838,169  votes;  Col.  Fremont 
1,341,264 ;  and  Mr.  Fillmore  874,534 : 
so  that  Mr.  Buchanan,  though  he 
had  a  very  decided  plurality,  lacked 
377,629  votes  of  a  majority  over  both 
his  competitors.  Of  the  electors, 
however,  he  had  174 — a  clear  ma- 
jority of  60.  Major  Breckinridge 
was,  of  course,  chosen  Yice-President 
by  the  same  vote. 


The  disturbed  and  distracted  con- 


VOTING   ON   THE  LECO 


MPTON  CONSTITUTION. 


249 


dition  of  Kansas,  resulting  from  the 
efforts  of  her  Missouri  neighbors  to 
force  Slavery  upon  her  against  her 
will,  necessarily  attracted  the  early 
attention  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  Admin- 
istration. John  W.  Geary — the  third 
or  fourth  of  her  Territorial  Govern- 
ors— had  recently  resigned  and  left 
in  disgust,  and  the  selection  of  a  suc- 
cessor was  an  obvious  and  urgent  duty. 
The  President's  choice  fell  on  Hon. 
Robert  J.  Walker,  formerly  Senator 
from  Mississippi,  and  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury  under  President  Polk, 
who  accepted  the  post  with  consider- 
able reluctance.  Frederick  P.  Stan- 
ton, for  ten  years  a  representative  in 
Congress  from  Tennessee,  was  associ- 
ated with  him  as  Secretary. 

Meantime,  the  double-headed  ac- 
tion in  Kansas  proceeding,  an  im- 
mense majority  of  the  settlers, 
though  prevented  by  Federal  force 
from  effecting  such  an  organization 
as  they  desired,  utterly  refused  to 
recognize  the  Legislature  chosen  by 
the  Missouri  invaders,  or  the  officers 
thereby  appointed  :  consequently, 
each  party  held  its  own  conven- 
tions and  elections  independent  of 
the  other.  The  pro-Slavery  Legisla- 
ture called  a  Constitutional  Conven- 
tion in  1857,  which  met  at  Lecomp- 
ton  on  the  first  Monday  of  Septem- 
ber. That  Convention  proceeded,  of 
course,  to  form  a  pro-Slavery  Consti- 
tution, which  they  pretended  to  sub- 
mit to  the  people  at  an  election  held 
on  the  21st  of  December  following. 
But  at  this  remarkable  election,  held 
expressly  to  ratify  or  reject  a  State 
Constitutiou,  no  one  was  allowed  to 
vote  against  that  Constitution.  The 
vote  was  to  be  taken  "  For  the  Con- 
stitution with  Slavery"  or  "  For  the 
Constitution  without  Slavery"  —  no 


others  to  be  allowed  or  counted.  It 
was  accordingly  so  taken,  and  the  fol- 
lowing was  the  return : 

For  the  Constitution  with  Slavery  6,266. 

For  the  Constitution  without  Slavery   567. 

So  the  Constitution  with  Slavery 
was  adopted.  But,  meantime,  an 
election  had  been  held,  on  the  first 
Monday  in  October,  for  a  Territorial 
Legislature  under  the  bogus  laws  ; 
and  at  this  election  most  of  the  Free- 
State  men,  trusting  to  the  assurances 
of  Gov.  Walker,  had  voted.  Over 
11,000  votes  were  polled,  of  which 
1,600  were  taken  at  a  little  precinct 
known  as  Oxford,  on  the  Missouri 
border,  where  there  were  but  43  vot- 
ers; and  1,200  were  returned  from 
McGee  County,  where  no  poll  was 
opened.  But,  notwithstanding  these 
enormous  frauds,  the  Free-State  pre- 
ponderance was  so  decided  that  it 
carried  the  Legislature  and  elected  a 
delegate  to  Congress.  This  Legisla- 
ture, whose  legality  was  now  unques- 
tioned, passed  an  act  submitting  the 
Lecompton  Constitution  to  a  vote  of 
the  people  for  or  against  it,  on  the 
4th  of  January,  1858.  This  Consti- 
tution provided  that  "  the  rights  of 
property  in  slaves  now  in  the  Terri- 
tory shall  in  no  manner  be  interfered 
with,"  and  precluded  any  amendment 
prior  to  the  year  1864 ;  after  which, 
amendments  could  be  made  with  the 
concurrence  of  both  houses  of  the  legis- 
lature, and  a  majority  of  all  the  citizens 
of  the  State.  Thus,  while  the  people 
had  not  been  allowed  to  vote  against 
the  Constitution,  their  seeming  privi- 
lege of  voting  for  it  without  Slavery 
was  a  delusion.  In  any  case,  Slavery 
was  to  have  been  protected  and 
perpetuated.  But,  at  the  election 
authorized  by  the  new  Legislature, 
which  the  Missourians  did  not  choose 


250 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


to  recognize  as  valid,  and  therefore  did 
not  come  over  to  vote  at,  the  full  poll 
was  returned  as  follows : 

For  the  Lecompton  Constitution  with  Slavery,     138  5 
44  "         "         "       without     *  24; 

Against  the  Lecompton  Constitution,  10,226 ; 

giving  a  majority  of  over  10,000 
against  the  said  Constitution  in  any 
shape. 

The  XXXYth  Congress  organized 
at  Washington,  December  7,  1857. 
There  being  a  large  Democratic  ma- 
jority, Linn  Boyd,  of  Kentucky,  was 
elected  Speaker.  Mr.  Buchanan,  in 
his  Annual,  as  also  in  a  Special  Mes- 
sage,31 urged  Congress  to  accept  and 
ratify  the  Lecompton  Constitution. 
Senator  Douglas  took  strong  ground 
against  it.  The  Senate32  passed — 
Yeas  32,  Nays  25 — a  bill  accepting 
this  Constitution.  But  the  House 33 
adopted  a  substitute,  prepared  by 
Senator  Crittenden,  of  Kentucky,  and 
proposed  in  the  House  by  Mr.  Mont- 
gomery, a  Douglas  Democrat  from 
Pennsylvania.  This  substitute  re- 
quired a  re-submission  of  that  Con- 
stitution to  the  people  of  Kansas, 
under  such  provisions  and  precau- 
tions as  should  insure  a  fair  vote 
thereon.  It  was  adopted  by  the 
House  as  a  substitute  for  the  Sen- 
ate bill  —  Yeas,  92  Eepublicans,  22 
Douglas  Democrats,  6  Americans — 
total  120;  Nays,  104  Democrats,  8 
Americans — total  112.  This  amend- 
ment was  rejected  by  the  Senate,  who 
asked  a  Committee  of  Conference ; 
which,  on  motion  of  Mr.  English,  of 
Indiana,  who  had  thus  far  acted  with 
the  Douglas  men,  was  granted  by  109 
Yeas  to  108  Nays.  The  bill  reported 
from  the  Conference  Committee  pro- 
posed a  submission  to  the  people  of 


Kansas  of  a  proposition  on  the  part 
of  Congress  to  limit  and  curtail 
the  grants  of  public  lands  and  oth- 
er advantages  stipulated  in  behalf 
of  said  State  in  the  Lecompton  Con- 
stitution ;  and,  in  case  of  their  vot- 
ing to  reject  said  proposition,  then 
a  new  Convention  was  to  be  held 
and  a  new  Constitution  framed. 
This  bill  passed  both  Houses ; 34  and 
under  it  the  people  of  Kansas,  on  the 
3d  of  August,  voted,  by  an  over- 
whelming majority,  to  reject  the  pro- 
position :  which  was,  in  effect,  to  reject 
the  Lecompton  Constitution. 

The  Territorial  Legislature  had 
now  passed  completely  into  the 
hands  of  the  Free-State  party,  and, 
under  its  guidance,  a  new  Constitution-^ 
al  Convention  assembled  at  Wyandot 
on  the  first  Tuesday  in  March,  1859  ; 
the  people  having  voted,  by  a  major- 
ity of  3,881,  to  hold  such  Convention. 
The  attempt  to  make  Kansas  a  Slave 
State  was  now  formally  abandoned 
in  favor  of  an  effort  to  organize  it  as 
a  Democratic  Free  State.  This,  how- 
ever, failed — the  Convention  con- 
sisting of  thirty-five  Republicans  to 
seventeen  Democrats.  A  Free- State 
Constitution  was  duly  framed,  where- 
by the  western  boundary  of  the  State 
was  fixed  at  the  twenty-third  paral- 
lel of  longitude  west  from  Washing- 
ton. This  Constitution  was  adopted 
at  an  election  held  on  the  first  Tues- 
day in  October,  whereat  the  majority 
for  ratification  was  about  4,000.  The 
first  undisputed  State  election  was 
held  under  it  on  the  6th  of  December 
following,  when  Republican  officers 
and  member  of  Congress  were  elect- 
ed on  a  light  vote,  by  majorities  rang- 
ing from  2,000  to  2,500. 

The  Constitution  framed  by  the 


31  February  2,  1858.       32  March  23,  1858. 


33  April  1,  1858. 


84  April  30,  1858. 


KANSAS   ADMITTED  — DEED  SCOTT. 


251 


Convention  at  "Wyandot  was  laid  be- 
fore the  House,  February  10th,  1860. 
On  the  15th,  Mr.  Grow,  of  Pennsyl- 
vania, introduced  a  bill  for  the  admis- 
sion of  Kansas  into  the  Union ; 
which  was  read  a  first  and  a  second 
time,  and  referred  to  the  Committee 
on  Territories.  This  bill  was  report- 
ed to  the  House  from  that  Commit- 
tee, and,  on  the  11th  of  April,  it 
passed,  under  the  Previous  Question : 
Yeas  134 ;  Nays  73.  But  the  Senate, 
which  was  very  strongly  Democratic, 
stubbornly  refused  (32  to  27)  to  take 
it  up,  and  adjourned,  leaving  Kansas 
still  a  Territory:  so  that,  though 
every  way  qualified  for  and  entitled 
to  admission,  she  was  remanded  into 
territorial  vassalage  by  the  very  men 
who  had  been  so  eager  to  admit  her, 
two  years  before,  when  her  popula- 
tion and  every  other  element  of 
strength  and  stability  were  consider- 
ably less.  She  was  thus  denied  a 
voice  in  the  election  for  President  in 


1860.  At  the  next  session  of  Con- 
gress, however,  her  application  was 
renewed ;  and  on  the  same  day 35  that 
Messrs.  Jefferson  Davis,  Clement  C. 
Clay,  Fitzpatrick,  Mallory,  and  others, 
abandoned  their  seats  and  the  Capitol 
to  take  part  in  the  Southern  Eebel- 
lion,  a  bill  admitting  her  as  a  Free 
State  under  the  Wyandot  Constitu- 
tion was  called  up  by  Gov.  Seward, 
and  passed  the  Senate :  Yeas  36 ; 
Kays  16.  One  week  later,  on  mo- 
tion of  Mr.  Grow,  of  Pennsylvania, 
it  was  taken  up  in  the  House,  out  of 
regular  order,  by  119  to  42,  and 
passed. 

And  thus,  on  the  very  threshold  of 
our  great  struggle — no  serious  effort 
having  been  made  by  the  slaveholders 
to  colonize  or  conquer  Nebraska — the 
arduous  contest  opened  by  Mr.  Dixon's 
proposition  to  repeal  the  Missouri 
Kestriction,  was  closed  by  the  admis- 
sion of  Free  Kansas  as  the  thirty- 
fourth  State  of  our  Federal  Union. 


XVIII. 

THE  DEED  SCOTT  CASE. 


Deed  Scott,  a  negro,  was,  previ- 
ously to  1834,  held  as  a  slave  in  Mis- 
souri by  Dr.  Emerson,  a  surgeon  in 
the  U.  S.  Army.  In  that  year,  the 
doctor  was  transferred  to  the  military 
post  at  Eock  Island,  in  the  State  of 
Illinois,  and  took  his  slave  with  him. 
Here,  Major  Taliaferro  (also  of  the 
army)  had,  in  1835,  in  his  service  a 
black  known  as  Harriet,  whom  he 
likewise  held  as  his  slave.  The  ma- 
jor was  transferred  that  year  to  Fort 


Snelling,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mis- 
sippi,  in  what  is  now  known  as  Min- 
nesota, but  was  then  an  unorganized 
territory  of  the  United  States,  ex- 
pressly covered  by  the  Slavery  Pro- 
hibition included  in  the  Missouri 
Compromise  of  1820.  Dr.  Emerson 
was  likewise  transferred  to  Fort  Snel- 
ling in  1836,  and  here  bought  Har- 
riet of  Major  Taliaferro,  and  held  her 
and  Dred  as  his  slaves ;  they  being 
married  to  each  other  with  his  con- 


35  January  21,  1861. 


252  THE  AMERICA 

sent  soon  after  his  arrival  at  the 
Fort.  Two  children  were  born  to 
them;  Eliza,  in  1838,  on  board  the 
steamboat  Gipsy,  on  their  way  down 
the  Mississippi,  but  still  north  of  the 
Missouri  line;  Lizzie,  seven  years 
later,  at  Jefferson  Barracks,  in  the 
State  of  Missouri.  The  doctor,  with 
Dred,  Harriet,  and  Eliza,  returned 
thence  to  St.  Louis,  and  he  there  con- 
tinued to  hold  them  as  his  slaves, 
until  he  sold  them,  several  years 
later,  to  John  F.  A.  Sanford,  of 
the  State  and  City  of  New  York. 
Finally,  Dred  brought  suit  for  his 
freedom,  on  the  above  state  of  facts, 
in  the  State  Circuit  Court  of  St. 
Louis  County,  Missouri,  and  obtained 
a  verdict  and  judgment  in  his  favor. 
But  this  was  reversed  by  a  judgment 
on  a  writ  of  error  to  the  Supreme 
Court  of  that  State,  from  which  an 
appeal  was  taken  to  the  courts  of  the 
United  States,  and  the  case  came  to 
trial  in  May,  1854.  Having  been 
fully  heard  by  the  Supreme  Court  at 
Washington,  that  court  was  about  to 
decide  it  at  its  term  of  1855-6 ;  but 
the  controlling  majority  of  its  Judges 
concluded,  in  view  of  the  pending 
Presidential  election,  and  the  strong 
excitement  which  the  Nebraska  bill 
and  the  Kansas  outrages  had  aroused 
throughout  the  Free  States,  to  defer 
rendering  judgment  until  its  next 
session.  It  is  quite  probable  that 
its  action  in  the  premises,  if  made 
public  at  the  time  originally  intend- 
ed, would  have  reversed  the  issue  of 
that  Presidential  election.  The  em- 
inent Chief  Justice  John  Marshall, 
who  had  so  long  presided  over  that 
tribunal,  and  whose  opinions  had  won 
for  it  a  weight  and  influence  rarely 
accorded  to  any  court,  died  in  1835 


2T  CONFLICT. 

at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty.  None  of 
the  Judges  appointed  by  any  prede- 
cessor of  Gen.  Jackson  survived.  Of 
the  nine  who  now  composed  that  au- 
gust tribunal,  eight  had  been  selected 
from  the  ranks  of  the  Democratic 
party,  and  most  of  them  for  other 
considerations  than  those  of  eminent 
legal  ability  or  acquirements.  John 
McLean,  of  Ohio,  was  placed  on  the 
bench,  in  1829,  by  Gen.  Jackson,  in 
order  to  make  room  for  a  Postmaster- 
General  who  would  remove  from  office 
the  postmasters  who  had  supported 
Mr.  Adams  and  appoint  Jacksonians 
to  their  places ;  which  McLean — hav- 
ing been  continued  in  office  by  Mr. 
Adams,  though  himself  for  Jackson 
— could  not  decently  do.  Eoger  B. 
Taney,  of  Maryland,  was  likewise 
appointed  by  Jackson  in  1836,  as  a 
reward  for  his  services  in  accepting 
the  post  of  Secretary  of  the  Treasury 
and  removing  the  Federal  deposits 
from  the  United  States  Bank,  upon 
the  dismissal  of  William  J.  Duane, 
of  Pennsylvania,  for  refusing  to  make 
such  removal.  Mr.  Taney,  born  in 
1777,  was  an  ultra  Federalist  pre- 
viously to  his  becoming  a  Jackso- 
nian,  but  always  a  devotee  of  prerog- 
ative and  power.  Of  his  associates, 
beside  Judge  McLean,  only  Samuel 
Nelson,  of  New  York,  and  Benjamin 
R.  Curtis,  of  Massachusetts,  were  ever 
presumed  qualified,  either  by  nature 
or  attainments,  for  judicial  emi- 
nence. 

The  decision  and  opinions  of  this 
Court,  in  the  case  of  Dred  Scott,  had 
not  been  made  public  when  Mr. 
Buchanan  was  inaugurated ; 1  but 
that  gentleman  had  undoubtedly 
been  favored  with  a  private  intima- 
tion of  their  scope  and  bearing: 


1  March  4th,  1857. 


BUCHANAN  AND  TANEY  ON  DRED  SCOTT.  '253 


hence  the  following  prelusive  sugges- 
tions of  his  Inaugural  Address : 

"We  have  recently  passed  through  a 
Presidential  contest,  in  which  the  passions 
of  our  fellow-citizens  were  excited  to  the 
highest  degree  by  questions  of  deep  and 
vital  importance ;  but,  when  the  people  pro- 
claimed their  will,  the  tempest  at  once 
subsided,  and  all  was  calm. 

"The  voice  of  the  majority,  speaking  in 
the  manner  prescribed  by  the  Constitution, 
was  heard ;  and  instant  submission  follow- 
ed. Our  own  country  could  alone  have 
exhibited  so  grand  and  striking  a  spectacle 
of  the  capacity  of  man  for  self-government. 

"  What  a  happy  conception,  then,  was  it 
for  Congress  to  apply  this  simple  rule — that 
the  will  of  the  majority  shall  govern — to 
the  settlement  of  the  question  of  domestic 
Slavery  in  the  territories!  Congress  is 
neither  '  to  legislate  Slavery  into  any  terri- 
tory or  State,  nor  to  exclude  it  therefrom, 
but  to  leave  the  people  thereof  perfectly 
free  to  form  and  regulate  their  domestic  in- 
stitutions in  their  own  way,  subject  only  to 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States.'  As 
a  natural  consequence,  Congress  has  already 
prescribed  that,  when  the  Territory  of  Kan- 
sas shall  be  admitted  as  a  State,  it  '  shall  be 
received  into  the  Union  with  or  without 
Slavery,  as  their  Constitution  may  prescribe 
at  the  time  of  their  admission.' 

"A  difference  of  opinion  has  arisen  in 
regard  to  the  point  of  time  when  the  people 
of  a  territory  shall  decide  this  question  for 
themselves. 

"  This  is,  happily,  a  matter  of  but  little 
practical  importance.  Besides,  it  is  a  judi- 
cial question,  which  legitimately  belongs  to 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States, 
before  whom  it  is  now  pending,  and  will,  it 
is  understood,  be  speedily  and  finally  settled. 
To  their  decision,  in  common  with  all  good 
citizens,  I  shall  cheerfully  submit." 

Not  many  days  thereafter,  the  de- 
cision and  opinions  thus  heralded, 
and  commended  as  a  new  and  admi- 
rable exemplification  of  "Popular 
Sovereignty,"  and  the  "  happy  con- 
ception" embodied  in  the  Kansas- 
Nebraska  bill,  were  revealed,  with 
due  trumpeting  and  laudation,  to  an 
expectant  world.  Chief  Justice 
Taney,  in  pronouncing  the  decision 
of  the  Court,  which  nullified  the 
Missouri  Restriction,  or  any  restric- 


tion by  Congress  on  the  boundless 
diffusion  of  Slavery  throughout  the 
territories  of  the  Union,  commenced 
by  denying  to  Dred  Scott,  or  to  any 
person  "whose  ancestors  were  im- 
ported to  this  country  and  sold  as 
slaves,"  any  right  to  sue  in  a  court 
of  the  United  States.    He  said : 

"  The  question  before  us  is,  whether  the 
class  of  persons  described  in  the  plea  in 
abatement  compose  a  portion  of  this  peo- 
ple, and  are  constituent  members  of  this 
sovereignty?  We  think  they  are  not,  and 
that  they  are  not  included,  and  were  not 
intended  to  be  included,  under  the  word 
'  citizens'  in  the  Constitution,  and  can 
therefore  claim  none  of  the  rights  and 
privileges  which  that  instrument  provides 
for  and  secures  to  citizens  of  the  United 
States.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  at  that 
time  considered  as  a  subordinate  and  infe- 
rior class  of  beings,  who  had  been  subjugated 
by  the  dominant  race,  and,  whether  eman- 
cipated or  not,  yet  remained  subject  to  their 
authority,  and  had  no  rights  or  privileges 
but  such  as  those  who  held  the  power  and 
the  Government  might  choose  to  grant 
them." 

The  Chief  Justice  proceeds  to 
affirm,  not  only  that  no  persons  who 
had  been,  or  whose  ancestors  had 
been,  slaves,  wera  regarded  as  citi- 
zens previously  to,  or  at  the  time  of, 
adopting  the  Federal  Constitution, 
but  that  no  State  has,  or  can  have, 
any  right  to  confer  citizenship  on 
such  persons.  Bearing  in  mind  the 
citations  from  our  revolutionary  and 
^^-revolutionary  history,  embodied 
in  the  earlier  chapters  of  this  work,2 
the  reader  will  be  puzzled  to  decide 
whether  Law,  Humanity,  or  History, 
is  most  flagrantly  defied  in  that  por- 
tion of  Chief  Justice  Taney's  opin- 
ion which  follows : 

"In  the  opinion  of  the  Court,  the  legisla- 
tion and  history  of  the  times,  and  the  lan- 
guage used  in  the  Declaration  of  Independ- 
ence, show,  that  neither  the  class  of  per- 
sons who  had  been  imported  as  slaves,  nor 
their  descendants,  whether  they  had  become 


2  See  pages  51-2,  107-8,  etc.,  etc. 


254 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


free  or  not,  were  then  acknowledged  as  a 
part  of  the  people,  nor  intended  to  be  in- 
cluded in  the  general  words  used  in  that 
memorable  instrument. 

"It  is  difficult  at  this  day  to  realize  the 
state  of  public  opinion  in  relation  to  that 
unfortunate  race,  which  prevailed  in  the 
civilized  and  enlightened  portions  of  the 
world  at  the  time  of  the  Declaration  of  In- 
dependence, and  when  the  Constitution  of 
the  United  States  was  framed  and  adopted. 
But  the  public  history  of  every  European 
nation  displays  it,  in  a  manner  too  plain  to 
be  mistaken. 

"  They  had,  for  more  than  a  century  be- 
fore, been  regarded  as  beings  of  an  inferior 
order,  and  altogether  unfit  to  associate  with 
the  white  race,  either  in  social  or  political 
relations ;  and  so  far  inferior  that  they  had 
no  rights  which  the  white  man  was  bound  to 
respect;  and  that  the  negro  might  justly 
and  lawfully  be  reduced  to  Slavery  for  his 
benefit.  He  was  bought  and  sold,  and 
treated  as  an  ordinary  article  of  merchan- 
dise and  traffic,  whenever  a  profit  could  be 
made  by  it.  This  opinion  was  at  that  time 
fixed  and  universal  in  the  civilized  portion 
of  the  white  race.  It  was  regarded  as  an 
axiom  in  morals,  as  well  as  in  politics, 
which  no  one  thought  of  disputing,  or  sup- 
posed to  be  open  to  dispute ;  and  men  of 
every  grade  and  position  in  society  daily 
and  habitually  acted  upon  it  in  their  private 
pursuits,  as  well  as  in  matters  of  public  con- 
cern, without  doubting  for  a  moment  the 
correctness  of  this  opinion. 

"  And  in  no  nation  was  this  opinion  more 
firmly  fixed  or  more  uniformly  acted  upon 
than  by  the  English  Government  and  Eng- 
lish people.  They  not  only  seized  them  on 
the  coast  of  Africa,  and  sold  them  or  held  them 
in  Slavery  for  their  own  use,  but  they  took 
them  as  ordinary  articles  of  merchandise  to 
every  country  where  they  could  make  a  profit 
on  them,  and  were  far  more  engaged  in  this 
commerce  than  any  other  nation  in  the  world. 

"  The  opinion  thus  entertained  and  acted 
upon  in  England  was  naturally  impressed 
upon  the  colonies  they  founded  on  this  side 
of  the  Atlantic.  And,  accordingly,  a  negro 
of  the  African  race  was  regarded  by  them 
as  an  article  of  property,  and  held,  and 
bought  and  sold  as  such,  in  every  one  of 
the  thirteen  colonies  which  united  in  the 
Declaration  of  Independence,  and  afterward 
formed  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States. 
The  slaves  were  more  or  less  numerous  in 
the  different  colonies,  as  slave  labor  was 
found  more  or  less  profitable.  But  no  one 
seems  to  have  doubted  the  correctness  of  the 
prevailing  opinion  of  the  time.11 

3  See,  in  refutation  of  this,  the  views  of  Henry 
Laurens,  Dr.  Hopkins,  La  Fayette,  Washington, 


The  immortal  language  of  the  pre- 
amble to  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence, wherein  "  life,  liberty,  and 
the  pursuit  of  happiness,"  are  pro- 
claimed the  self-evident,  inalienable 
rights  of  all  men,  might  well  stagger 
the  most  brazen  and  subtle  attorney, 
but  not  a  case-hardened  Chief  Jus- 
tice. He  tosses  them  aside  in  this 
fashion : 

"  The  general  words  above  quoted  would 
seem  to  embrace  the  whole  human  family  ; 
and,  if  they  were  used  in  a  similar  instru- 
ment at  this  day,  would  be  so  understood. 
But  it  is  too  clear  to  dispute,  that  the  en- 
slaved African  race  were  not  intended  to  be 
included,  and  formed  no  part  of  the  people 
who  framed  and  adopted  this  Declaration; 
for,  if  the  language,  as  understood  in  that 
day,  would  embrace  them,  the  conduct  of 
the  distinguished  men  who  framed  the  Dec- 
laration of  Independence  would  have  been 
utterly  and  flagrantly  inconsistent  with  the 
principles  they  asserted  ;  and,  instead  of  the 
sympathy  of  mankind,  to  which  they  so  confi- 
dently appealed,  they  would  have  deserved  and 
received  universal  rebuke  and  reprobation. 

"  Yet  the  men  who  framed  this  declara- 
tion were  great  men — high  in  literary  ac- 
quirements— high  in  their  sense  of  honor — 
and  incapable  of  asserting  principles  incon- 
sistent with  those  on  which  they  were  acting. 
They  perfectly  understood  the  meaning  of 
the  language  they  used,  and  how  it  would 
be  understood  by  others;  and  they  knew 
that  it  would  not,  in  any  part  of  the  civilized 
world,  be  supposed  to  embrace  the  negro 
race ;  which,  by  common  consent,  had  been 
excluded  from  civilized  Governments  and 
the  family  of  nations,  and  doomed  to  Sla- 
very. They  spoke  and  acted  according  to 
the  then  established  doctrines  and  principles, 
and  in  the  ordinary  language  of  the  day,  and 
no  one  misunderstood  them.  The  unhappy 
black  race  were  separated  from  the  white  by 
indelible  marks,  and  laws  long  before  estab- 
lished, and  were  never  thought  of  or  spoken  3 
of  except  as  property,  and  when  the  claims 
of  the  owner  or  the  profit  of  the  trader  were 
supposed  to  need  protection. 

u  This  state  of  public  opinion  had  under- 
gone no  change  when  the  Constitution  was 
adopted,  as  is  equally  evident  from  its  pro- 
visions and  language.11 

Mr.  Taney  here  deliberately  as- 
serts that  "  the  unhappy  black  race" 

Jefferson,  etc.,  as  quoted  in  the  earlier  chapters 
of  this  work. 


TANEY   ON   THE  SLAVE-TRADE. 


255 


were  "never  thought  of  or  spoken 
of  except  as  property,"  before  and 
when  the  Constitution  was  adopted, 
"  as  is  equally  evident  from  its  pro- 
visions and  language."  Had  he  been 
asked  to  say,  then,  what  the  Consti- 
tution can  mean  by  declaring  (Art.  I. 
§  2)  that  "  representatives  and  direct 
taxes  shall  be  apportioned  among  the 
several  States  which  may  be  included 
in  this  Union,  according  to  their  re- 
spective numbers;  which  shall  be 
determined  by  adding  to  the  whole 
number  of  free  persons,  including 
those  bound  to  service  for  a  term  of 
years,  and  excluding  Indians  not  tax- 
ed, three-fifths  of  all  other  persons" 
he  might  have  hesitated  for  an  an- 
swer, but  never  blushed ;  since,  very 
soon  after  this,  he  proceeds  to  argue 
that,  when  this  same  article  of  the 
Constitution  (§  9)  declares  that  Con- 
gress shall  not,  prior  to  the  year  1808, 
prohibit  "the  migration  or  importa- 
tion of  such  persons  as  any  of  the 
States  now  existing  shall  think  proper 
to  admit,"  but  a  tax  or  duty  may 
be  imposed  "  on  such  importation,  not 
exceeding  ten  dollars  for  each  per- 
son" he  coolly  says,  the  importation 
which  it  thus  sanctions,  "  was  unques- 
tionably of  all  persons  of  the  race  of 
which  we  are  now  speaking." 

The  Chief  Justice  proceeds  to  defy 
history  and  common  sense  by  assert- 
ing that,  in  the  days  of  the  fathers, 
even  emancipated  blacks  "  were  iden- 
tified in  the  public  mind  with  the  race 
to  which  they  belonged,  and  regard- 
ed as  a  part  of  the  slave  population 
rather  than  the  free"  He  is  so  kind 
as  to  tell  the  people  of  the  Free  States 
that  the  efforts  of  W esley,  and  Ed- 
wards, and  Hopkins,  and  Franklin, 
and  Jay,  and  all  the  other  eminent 
divines,  patriots,  and  statesmen,  who 


appealed  to  their  consciences  and 
their  hearts  against  Slavery  as  un- 
just and  cruel,  had  no  existence,  or, 
at  least,  no  effect — that  Slavery  was 
abolished  by  our  fathers,  not  at  all 
because  it  was  felt  to  be  wrong,  but 
because  it  was  found  to  be  unprofit- 
able in  this  particular  locality.  On 
this  point,  he  says : 

"  It  is  very  true  that,  in  that  portion  of  the 
Union  where  the  labor  of  the  negro  race  was 
found  to  be  unsuited  to  the  climate  and  un- 
profitable to  the  master,  but  few  slaves  were 
held  at  the  time  of  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence ;  and,  when  the  Constitution  was 
adopted,  it  had  entirely  worn  out  in  one  of 
them,  and  measures  had  been  taken  for  its 
gradual  abolition  in  several  others.  But 
this  change  had  not  been  produced  by  any 
change  of  opinion  in  relation  to  this  race; 
but  because  it  was  discovered,  from  experi- 
ence, that  slave  labor  was  unsuited  to  the 
climate  and  productions  of  these  States: 
for  some  of  these  States  where  it  had 
ceased,  or  nearly  ceased,  to  exist,  were  ac- 
tively engaged  in  the  Slave-Trade ;  procur- 
ing cargoes  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  trans- 
porting them  for  sale  to  those  parts  of  the 
Union  where  their  labor  was  found  to  be 
profitable,  and  suited  to  the  climate  and  pro- 
ductions. And  this  traffic  was  openly  car- 
ried on,  and  fortunes  accumulated  by  it, 
without  reproach  from  the  people  of  the 
States  where  they  resided.  And  it  can 
hardly  be  supposed  that,  in  the  States 
where  it  was  then  countenanced  in  its 
worst  form  —  that  is,  in  the  seizure  and 
transportation  —  the  people  could  have  re- 
garded those  who  were  emancipated  as  en- 
titled to  equal  rights  with  themselves." 

How  utterly  mistaken  this  is,  the 
recollection  of  thousands  will  estab- 
lish. The  very  few  persons  at  the 
North  who  were  openly  engaged 
in  this  slave-trading,  fifty  or  eighty 
years  ago,  though  shrewd,  wealthy, 
and  powerful,  were  never  held  in 
good  repute ;  and  the  stain  of  their 
nefarious  traffic  still  sullies  their  in- 
nocent descendants.  Bad  as  our  great 
marts  may  be,  and  blinded  by  the 
lust  of  gain  as  our  trading  classes 
may  seem,  there  never  was  an  hour 
when  it  was  desirable  to  be  known 


256 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


on  the  exchange  of  New  York  or  Bos- 
ton as  a  slave-trader ;  and  no  man  to- 
day blazons  the  fact  that  the  wealth 
he  inherits  was  obtained  by  success- 
ful ventures  on  the  Slave-Coast. 

Mr.  Taney  proceeds  to  show,  after 
his  fashion,  that  no  State  can  make 
its  black  people  citizens,  because  that 
would  be  very  inconvenient  and  un- 
safe for  the  slaveholders  of  other 
States.    "  For,"  he  says : 

"  If  they  were  so  received,  and  entitled 
to  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  citizens, 
it  would  exempt  them  from  the  operation 
of  the  special  laws  and  from  the  police 
regulations  which  they  considered  to  be 
necessary  for  their  own  safety.  It  would 
give  to  persons  of  the  negro  race,  who  were 
recognized  as  citizens  in  any  one  State  of 
the  Union,  the  right  to  enter  every  other 
State  whenever  they  pleased,  singly  or  in 
companies,  without  pass  or  passport ;  and, 
without  obstruction,  to  sojourn  there  as 
long  as  they  pleased ;  to  go  where  they 
pleased  at  every  hour  of  the  day  or  night 
without  molestation,  unless  they  committed 
some  violation  of  law  for  which  a  white 
man  would  be  punished  ;  and  it  would  give 
them  the  full  liberty  of  speech  in  public 
and  private  upon  all  subjects  upon  which 
its  own  citizens  might  speak ;  to  hold  pub- 
lic meetings  upon  political  affairs,  and  to 
keep  and  carry  arms  wherever  they  went. 
And  all  of  this  would  be  done  in  the  face 
of  the  subject  race  of  the  same  color,  both 
free  and  slaves,  and  inevitably  producing 
discontent  and  insubordination  among  them, 
and  endangering  the  peace  and  safety  of 
the  State." 

Having  thus  determined,  to  his 
own  satisfaction,  that  Dred  Scott, 
being  a  negro  and  descended  from 
slaves,  had  no  right  to  bring  this 
suit,  and  no  standing  in  the  Federal 
Courts,  and  that  the  Court  has  no 
authority  in  the  premises,  the  Chief 
Justice  proceeds  to  take  jurisdiction, 
in  order  to  obtain  a  footing  from 
which  to  nullify  the  Missouri  Restric- 
tion and  deny  the  right  of  Congress  to 
exclude  Slavery  from  any  territory. 
To  this  end,  he  affirms  that  that 
clause  of  the  Constitution  (Art.  IY. 


§  3)  which  says  "  Congress  shall  have 
power  to  dispose  of  and  make  all 
needful  rules  and  regulations  respect- 
ing the  territory  or  other  property 
belonging  to  the  United  States,"  ap- 
plies only  to  such  territory  as  be- 
longed to  the  United  States  at  the 
time  the  Constitution  was  framed! 
The  territory  covered  by  the  Mis- 
souri Restriction,  having  all  been 
acquired  since  that  time,  is  not,  in 
his  view,  subject  to  this  provision. 

He  proceeds  to  affirm  that,  by  the 
mere  fact  of  our  acquiring  territory, 
"  the  Government  and  the  citizen 
both  enter  it  under  the  authority  of 
the  Constitution;"  in  other  words, 
that  the  Constitution  takes  effect 
upon  any  territory  that  our  Govern- 
ment may  acquire,  at  the  instant  of 
such  acquisition,  in  such  manner  as 
to  create  and  uphold  the  right  of 
every  slaveholder  to  take  his  slaves 
thither  and  hold  them  there  as  prop- 
erty. But  this  particular  and  only 
clause  of  the  Constitution  relating 
to  territory  has  no  application  or 
subsisting  validity;  because,  if  it 
had,  it  might  enable  Congress  to 
prohibit  Slavery  therein.  The  Chief 
Justice,  therefore,  nullifies  the  Mis- 
souri Restriction,  and  all  kindred 
restrictions,  in  the  following  terms : 

"  Upon  these  considerations,  it  is  the 
opinion  of  the  Court  that  the  act  of  Con- 
gress which  prohibited  a  citizen  from  hold- 
ing property  of  this  kind  in  the  territory  of 
the  United  States  north  of  the  line  therein 
mentioned,  is  not  warranted  by  the  Consti- 
tution, and  it  is  therefore  void ;  and  that 
neither  Dred  Scott  himself,  nor  any  of  his 
family,  were  made  free  by  being  carried 
into  this  territory,  even  if  they  had  been 
carried  there  by  the  owner,  with  the  inten- 
tion of  becoming  a  permanent  resident." 

But  Dred's  freedom  was  claimed 
on  still  another  ground ;  viz.  :  that 
he  had  been  taken  by  his  master  to 


"WAYNE,  NELSON,  GEIEE,  ETC.,  ON  DRED  SCOTT. 


257 


the  Free  State  of  Illinois,  and  there 
retained  some  two  or  three  years. 
But  this  the  Chief  Justice  disposes 
of  by  declaring  that  his  claim  was 
not  properly  before  the  court ;  that 
the  question  raised  by  it  was  to  be 
adjudged  by  the  tribunals  of  Mis- 
souri alone ;  and  he  concludes  as 
follows : 

"  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  the 
judgment  of  this  Court,  that  it  appears  by 
the  record  before  us  that  the  plaintiff  in 
error  is  not  a  citizen  of  Missouri,  in  the 
sense  in  which  that  word  is  used  in  the 
Constitution  ;  and  that  the  Circuit  Court 
of  the  United  States,  for  that  reason,  had 
no  jurisdiction  in  the  case,  and  could  give 
no  judgment  in  it.  Its  judgment  for  the 
defendant  must,  consequently,  be  reversed, 
and  a  mandate  issued,  directing  the  suit  to 
be  dismissed  for  want  of  jurisdiction." 

Justice  Wayne,  of  Georgia,  con- 
curred "  entirely  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Court,  as  written  and  read  by 
the  Chief  Justice,  without  any  quali- 
fication of  its  reasoning  or  its  con- 
clusions." 

Justice  Nelson,  of  E"ew  York,  con- 
curred also  in  the  conclusion  of  the 
Court,  and  favored  an  astonished 
world  with  the  following  sample  of 
judicial  logic : 

"  If  Congress  possesses  power,  under  the 
Constitution,  to  abolish  Slavery  in  a  terri- 
tory, it  must  necessarily  possess  the  like 
power  to  establish  it.  It  cannot  be  a  one- 
sided power,  as  may  suit  the  convenience 
or  particular  views  of  the  advocates.  It  is 
a  power,  if  it  exist  at  all,  over  the  whole 
subject." 

But  the  power  against  which  Mr. 
Nelson  is  contending  is  a  power  to 
prohibit  by  legislation  certain  forms 
of  injustice  and  immorality.  If, 
then,  according  to  his  reasoning, 
Congress  should,  by  law,  prohibit 
adultery,  theft,  burglary,  and  murder, 
in  the  territories  of  the  Union,  it 
would  thereby  affirm  and  establish 
its  right  to  reward  and  encourage 
those  crimes. 

17 


Mr.  Justice  Grier,  of  Pennsylvania, 
emitted  all  the  additional  light  he 
had  power  to  shed  on  the  subject  in 
the  following  commendably  brief,  but 
not  otherwise  commendable,  opinion : 

"I  concur  in  the  opinion  delivered  by 
Mr.  Justice  Nelson  on  the  question  dis- 
cussed by  him. 

"  I  also  concur  with  the  opinion  of  the 
Court,  as  delivered  by  the  Chief  Justice, 
that  the  act  of  Congress  of  6th  of  March, 
1820,  is  unconstitutional  and  void;  and 
that,  assuming  the  facts  as  stated  in  the 
opinion,  the  plaintiff  cannot  sue  as  a  citizen 
of  Missouri  in  the  courts  of  the  United 
States.  But,  that  the  record  shows  a  prima 
facie  case  of  jurisdiction,  requiring  the  Court 
to  decide  all  the  questions  properly  arising 
in  it ;  and  as  the  decision  of  the  pleas  in  bar 
shows  that  the  plaintiff  is  a  slave,  and 
therefore  not  entitled  to  sue  in  a  court  of 
the  United  States,  the  form  of  the  judgment 
is  of  little  importance ;  for,  whether  the 
judgment  be  affirmed  or  dismissed  for  want 
of  jurisdiction,  it  is  justified  by  the  decision 
of  the  Court,  and  is  the  same  in  effect 
between  the  parties  to  the  suit." 

Mr.  Justice  Daniel,  of  Virginia, 
in  announcing  his  opinion,  seemed 
appalled  by  the  magnitude  of  the 
issues  involved  in  the  question  be- 
fore the  Court.  The  tremor  and  awe 
with  which  he  had  approached  the 
subject  may  have  blunted  his  judicial 
acumen,  since  his  exhibitions  of  it 
were  mainly  confined  to  such  asser- 
tions as  these : 

"  Now,  the  following  are  truths  which  a 
knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  world,  and 
particularly  of  that  of  our  own  country, 
compels  us  to  know — that  the  African  negro 
race  have  never  been  acknowledged  as  be- 
longing to  the  family  of  nations ;  that  as 
amongst  them  there  never  has  been  known 
or  recognized  by  the  inhabitants  of  other 
countries  anything  partaking  of  the  charac- 
ter of  nationality,  or  civil  or  political  polity  ; 
that  this  race  has  been,  by  all  the  nations 
of  Europe,  regarded  as  subjects  of  capture 
or  purchase,  as  subjects  of  commerce  or 
traffic;  and  that  the  introduction  of  that 
race  into  every  section  of  this  country  was 
not  as  members  of  civil  or  political  society, 
but  as  slaves — as  property,  in  the  strictest 
sense  of  the  term." 

He  proceeded  in  this  vein  to  deny 


258 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  right  or  power  of  any  State  to 
elevate  persons  (or,  as  he  would  say, 
property)  of  African  descent  to  citi- 
zenship of  the  United  States,  "-by 
any  direct  or  indirect  proceeding," 
so  as  to  entitle  them  to  sue,  or  be 
sued,  in  the  Federal  tribunals.  And, 
having  thus  put  Dred  Scott  out  of 
court,  and  finished  the  case,  he  pro- 
ceeds to  deal  with  the  political  ques- 
tions introduced  and  discussed  by 
Chief  Justice  Taney,  in  order  "to 
put  them  finally  to  rest."  He  is 
horror-struck  at  the  "inequalities," 
the  disfranchisement,  and  the  degra- 
dation, involved  in  the  prohibition 
of  Slavery  in  the  Federal  territories, 
which  he  reprehends  and  stigmatizes 
as  follows : 

"  Nothing  can  be  more  conclusive  to  sho  w 
the  equality  of  this  with  every  other  right 
in  all  the  citizens  of  the  United  States,  and 
the  iniquity  and  absurdity  of  the  pretension 
to  exclude  or  to  disfranchise  a  portion  of 
them,  because  they  are  the  owners  of  slaves, 
than  the  fact  that  the  same  instrument, 
which  imparts  to  Congress  its  very  exist- 
ence, and  its  every  function,  guarantees  to 
the  slaveholder  the  title  to  his  property, 
and  gives  him  the  right  to  its  reclamation 
throughout  the  entire  extent  of  the  nation ; 
and,  further,  that  the  only  private  property 
which  the  Constitution  has  specifically  re- 
cognized, and  has  imposed  it  as  a  direct  ob- 
ligation, both  on  the  States  and  the  Federal 
Government,  to  protect  and  enforce,  is  the 
property  of  the  master  in  his  slave ;  no  other 
right  of  property  is  placed  by  the  Constitu- 
tion upon  the  same  high  ground,  nor  shield- 
ed by  a  similar  guarantee." 

There  is  much  more  of  this,  but 
the  above  must  suffice.  Mr.  Daniel, 
pushing  his  doctrines  to  their  legiti- 
mate result,  pronounces  the  Ordi- 
nance of  '87  only  equal  in  constitu- 
tionality and  validity  with  the  Mis- 
souri Restriction — that  is  to  say,  es- 
sentially null  and  void. 

Mr.  Justice  Campbell,  of  Alabama, 

4  In  his  "  Historical  and  Legal  Examination  of 
that  part  of  the  Decision  of  the  Supreme  Court, 


followed  with  a  general  assent  to  the 
views  of  Chief  Justice  Taney. 

Mr.  Justice  Catron,  of  Tennessee, 
concurs  with  Justice  Nelson,  that 
Dred  Scott  has  no  right  to  freedom, 
at  the  hands  of  this  court,  on  the 
ground  of  his  two  years'  residence  in 
Illinois ;  but  he  dissents  from  the 
Chief  Justice's  notion  that  the  power 
over  the  territories,  expressly  given 
to  Congress  by  the  Constitution,  has 
no  force  or  application  beyond  the 
territory  possessed  by  us  when  that 
Constitution  was  framed.  In  fact, 
as  he  had  been  hanging  men  for  the 
last  twenty  years  under  this  very 
power,  he  could  not  well  do  other- 
wise.   He  says : 

"  It  is  due  to  myself  to  say,  that  it  is  ask- 
ing much  of  a  judge,  who  has  for  nearly 
twenty  years  been  exercising  jurisdiction 
from  the  Western  Missouri  line  to  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  and,  on  this  understanding  of 
the  Constitution,  inflicting  the  extreme 
penalty  of  death  for  crimes  committed 
where  the  direct  legislation  of  Congress  was 
the  only  rule,  to  agree  that  he  had  all  the 
while  been  acting  in  mistake,  and  as  an 
usurper. 

''More  than  sixty  years  have  passed  away 
since  Congress  has  exercised  power  to  gov- 
ern the  territories,  by  its  legislation  directly, 
or  by  territorial  charters,  subject  to  repeal 
at  all  times ;  and  it  is  now  too  late  to  call 
that  power  in  question,  if  this  Court  could 
disregard  its  own  decisions,  which  it  cannot 
do,  as  I  think." 

Several  points  in  his  opinion  evince 
a  sturdy  independence ;  yet  he  con- 
cludes that  that  clause  of  the  Consti- 
tution which  provides  that  u  the  citi- 
zens of  each  State  shall  be  entitled  to 
all  privileges  and  immunities  of  citi- 
zens in  the  several  States,"  gives 
slaveholders  an  indefeasible  right  to 
carry  their  slaves  into,  and  hold  them 
in,  the  territories. 

Col.  Benton4  observes  that  the 

in  the  Dred  Scott  case,  which  declares  the  un- 
constitutionality of  the  Missouri  Compromise." 


CALHOUN   AND  BENT 


ON   ON   TANEY'S  LAW. 


259 


opinion  of  the  Court,  as  pronounced 
by  Chief  Justice  Taney  in  this  cele- 
brated case,  is,  in  essence,  but  an 
amplification  of  certain  resolves  sub- 
mitted by  Mr.  Calhoun  to  the  United 
States  Senate,  in  February,  1847,  in 
the  following  language : 

"Resolved,  That  the  Territories  of  the 
United  States  belong  to  the  several  States 
composing  this  Union,  and  are  held  by  them 
as  their  joint  and  common  property. 

"Resolved,  That  Congress,  as  the  joint 
agent  and  representative  of  the  States  of 
the  Union,  has  no  right  to  make  any  law,  or 
do  any  act  whatever,  that  shall  directly,  or 
by  its  effects,  make  any  discrimination  be- 
tween the  States  of  this  Union,  by  which 
any  one  of  them  shall  be  deprived  of  its  full 
and  equal  rights  in  the  territory  of  the 
United  States,  acquired  or  to  be  acquired. 

"Resolved,  That  the  enactment  of  any 
law  which  would  directly,  or  by  its  effects, 
deprive  the  citizens  of  any  of  the  States  of 
this  Union  from  emigrating,  with  their  prop- 
erty, into  any  of  the  Territories  of  the 
United  States,  would  make  such  a  discrimin- 
ation ;  and  would,  therefore,  be  a  violation 
of  the  Constitution,  and  the  rights  of  the 
States  from  which  such  citizens  emigrated, 
and  in  derogation  of  that  perfect  equality 
which  belongs  to  them  as  members  of  this 
Union,  and  would  tend  directly  to  subvert 
the  Union  itself." 

The  resolve  submitted  to  the  Dem- 
ocratic National  Convention  of  1848, 
by  Mr.  William  L.  Yancey,  and  un- 
ceremoniously rejected  by  it,  216  to 
36,  as  will  have  been  seen 5 — sets  forth 
the  same  doctrine  more  concisely  and 
abruptly. 

Col.  Benton,  himself  a  life-long 
slaveholder  and  upholder  of  Slavery, 
thus  forcibly  refutes,6  from  a  conser- 
vative and  legal  standpoint,  the  Cal- 
houn-Yancey dogma : 

"  The  prohibition  of  Slavery  in  a  territory 
is  assumed  to  work  an  inequality  in  the 
States,  allowing  one  part  to  carry  its  property 
with  it — the  other,  not.  This  is  a  mistake 
— a  great  error  of  fact— the  source  of  great 
errors  of  deduction.  The  citizens  of  all  the 
States,  free  and  slave,  are  precisely  equal  in 
their  capacity  to  carry  their  property  with 


them  into  territories.  Each  may  carry  what- 
ever is  property  by  the  laws  of  nature :  nei- 
ther can  carry  that  which  is  only  property 
by  statute  law ;  and  the  reason  is,  because  he 
cannot  carry  with  him  the  law  which  makes 
it  property.  Either  may  carry  the  thing 
which  is  the  subject  of  this  local  property; 
but  neither  can  carry  the  law  which  makes 
it  so.  The  Virginian  may  carry  his  man- 
slave;  but  he  cannot  carry  the  Virginian 
law  which  makes  him  a  slave.  The  citi- 
zen of  Massachusetts  may  carry  the  pile  of 
money  which,  under  a  State  law,  constitutes  a 
bank ;  but  he  cannot  carry  the  law  or  char- 
ter which  makes  it  a  bank :  and  his  treasure 
is  only  a  pile  of  money;  and,  besides  being 
impossible,  it  would  be  absurd,  and  confu- 
sion confounded,  to  be  otherwise.  For,  if 
the  citizen  of  one  State  may  carry  his  Slave 
State  law  with  him  into  a  territory,  the  citi- 
zens of  every  other  Slave  State  might  do  the 
same ;  and  then  what  Babylonish  confusion, 
not  merely  of  tongues,  but  of  laws,  would  be 
found  there  !  Fifteen  different  codes,  as  the 
Slave  States  now  number,  and  more  to  come. 
For  every  Slave  State  has  a  servile  code  of 
its  own,  differing  from  others  in  some  re- 
spects— and  in  some,  radically:  as  much  so 
as  land,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  differs  from 
cattle.  Thus,  in  some  States,  as  in  Virginia 
and  others,  slaves  are  only  chattels :  in  oth- 
ers, as  in  Kentucky  and  Louisiana,  they  are 
real  estate.  How  wTould  all  these  codes  work 
together  in  a  territory  under  the  wing  of  the 
Constitution,  protecting  all  equally ;  no  law  of 
Congress  there,  or  of  the  territory,  to  recon- 
cile and  harmonize  them  by  forming  them  into 
one ;  no  law  to  put  the  protecting  po w  er  of  the 
Constitution  into  action ;  but  of  itself,  by  its 
own  proper  vigor,  it  is  to  give  general  and 
equal  protection  to  all  slaveholders  in  the  en- 
joyment of  their  property — each,  according 
to  the  laAV  of  the  State  from  which  he  came ! 
For,  there  being  no  power  in  Congress,  or 
the  Territorial  Legislature,  to  legislate  upon 
Slavery,  the  w- hole  subject  is  left  to  the  Con- 
stitution and  the  State  law !  that  law  which 
cannot  cross  the  State  line !  and  that  Con- 
stitution which  gives  protection  to  slave 
property  but  in  one  instance,  and  that  only 
in  States,  not  in  Territories — the  single  in- 
stance of  recovering  runaways.  The  Con- 
stitution protect  slave  property  in  a  terri- 
tory !  when,  by  that  instrument,  a  runaway 
from  the  territory  or  into  the  territory  can- 
not be  reclaimed !  Beautiful  constitutional 
protection  that !  only  one  clause  under  it  to 
protect  slave  property ;  and  that  limited,  in 
express  words,  to  fugitives  between  State 
and  State !  and  but  one  clause  in  it  to  pro- 
tect the  master  against  his  slaves,  and  that 
limited  to  States !  and  but  one  clause  in  it 


6  See  page  192. 


his  "Examination,"  aforesaid. 


260 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


to  tax  slaves  as  property,  and  that  limited 
to  States!  and  but  one  clause  in  it  to 
give  a  qualified  representation  to  Con- 
gress, and  that  limited  to  States.  No ;  the 
thing  is  impossible.  The  owner  cannot 
carry  his  Slave  State  law  with  him  into  the 
Territory ;  nor  can  he  carry  it  into  another 
Slave  State,  but  must  take  the  law  which  he 
finds  there,  and  have  his  property  governed 
by  it ;  and,  in  some  instances,  wholly  changed 
by  it,  and  rights  lost,  or  acquired,  by  the 
change." 

To  the  same  effect,  Mr.  Webster, 
when  resisting,  in  1848,  the  attempt, 
on  a  bill  organizing  the  Territory  of 
Oregon,  to  fasten  a  "  rider"  extend- 
ing the  Slave  line  of  36°  30'  to  the 
Pacific,  refuted  this  doctrine  as  fol- 
lows : 

"The  Southern  Senators  say  we  deprive 
them  of  the  right  to  go  into  these  newly  ac- 
quired territories  with  their  property.  We 
certainly  do  not  prevent  them  from  going 
into  those  territories  with  what  is,  in  gen- 
eral law,  called  property.  But  these  States 
have,  by  their  local  laws,  created  a  property 
in  persons;  and  they  cannot  carry  these  lo- 
cal laws  with  them.  Slavery  is  created  and 
exists  by  a  local  law,  which  is  limited  to  a 
certain  section;  and  it  is  asked  that  Con- 
gress shall  establish  a  local  law  in  other  ter- 
ritories to  enable  Southern  Senators  to  carry 
their  particular  law  with  them.  No  man 
can  be  held  as  a  slave  unless  the  local  law 
accompany  him." 

Justice  McLean,  of  Ohio,  in  his 
opinion  dissenting  from  that  of  the 
Court  in  this  case  of  Dred  Scott, 
says : 

"  Will  it  be  said  that  the  slave  is  taken  as 
property,  the  same  as  other  property  which 
the  master  may  own?  To  this  I  answer, 
that  colored  persons  'are  made  property  by 
the  law  of  the  State,  and  no  such  power  has 
been  given  to  Congress.  Does  the  master 
carry  with  him  the  law  of  the  State  from 
which  he  removes  into  the  territory?  and 
does  that  enable  him  to  coerce  his  slave  in 
the  territory  ?  Let  us  test  this  theory :  If 
this  may  be  done  by  a  master  from  one  Slave 
State,  it  may  be  done  by  a  master  from  every 
other  Slave  State.  This  right  is  supposed 
to  be  connected  with  the  person  of  the  mas- 
ter, by  virtue  of  the  local  law.  Is  it  trans- 
ferable ?  May  it  be  negotiated  as  a  promis- 
sory note  or  bill  of  exchange  ?  If  it  be  assign- 
ed to  a  man  from  a  Free  State,  may  he  coerce 


the  slave  by  virtue  of  it?  What  shall  this  thing 
be  denominated  ?  Is  it  personal  or  real  prop- 
erty ?  Or  is  it  an  indefinable  fragment  of  sove- 
reignty, which  every  person  carries  with  him 
from  his  late  domicile  ?  One  thing  is  certain, 
that  its  origin  has  been  very  recent,  and  it  is 
unknown  to  the  laws  of  any  civilized  country. 
It  is  said  that  the  territories  are  the  common 
property  of  the  States,  and  that  every  man 
has  a  right  to  go  there  with  his  property. 
This  is  not  controverted.  But  the  Court 
say,  a  slave  is  not  property  beyond  the 
operation  of  the  local  law  which  makes 
him  such.  Never  was  a  truth  more  author- 
itatively and  justly  uttered  by  man.  Sup- 
pose a  master  of  a  slave  in  a  British  island 
owned  a  million  of  property  in  England; 
would  that  authorize  him  to  take  his  slaves 
with  him  to  England?  The  Constitution, 
in  express  terms,  recognizes  the  status  of 
Slavery  as  founded  on  the  municipal  law : 
1  No  person  held  to  service  or  labor  in  one 
State,  under  the  laws  thereof,  escaping  to 
another,  shall,'  etc.  Now,  unless  the  fugi- 
tive escape  from  a  place  where,  by  the 
municipal  law,  he  is  held  to  labor,  this 
provision  affords  no  remedy  to  the  master. 
What  can  be  more  conclusive  than  this  ? 
Suppose  a  slave  escape  from  a  territory 
where  Slavery  is  not  authorized  by  law,  can 
he  be  reclaimed  ?  In  this  case,  a  majority 
of  the  Court  have  said  that  a  slave  may  be 
taken  by  his  master  into  a  territory  of  the 
United  States,  the  same  as  a  horse,  or  any 
other  kind  of  property.  It  is  true,  this  was 
said  by  the  Court,  as  also  many  other  things, 
which  are  of  no  authority.  Nothing  that 
has  been  said  by  them,  which  has  not  a  di- 
rect bearing  on  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Court, 
against  which  they  decided,  can  be  consid- 
ered as  authority.  I  shall  certainly  not  re- 
gard it  as  such.  The  question  of  jurisdiction, 
being  before  the  Court,  was  decided  by  them 
authoritatively,  but  nothing  beyond  that 
question.  A  slave  is  not  a  mere  chattel. 
He  bears  the  impress  of  his  Maker,  and  is 
amenable  to  the  laws  of  God  and  man ;  and 
he  is  destined  to  an  endless  existence." 

To  the  same  effect,  Justice  Curtis, 

of  Massachusetts,  in  his  dissenting 

opinion,  thus  traverses  the  judgment 

of  the  Court : 

"Is  it  conceivable  that  the  Constitution 
has  conferred  the  right  on  every  citizen  to 
become  a  resident  on  the  territory  of  the 
United  States  with  his  slaves,  and  there  to 
hold  them  as  such,  but  has  neither  made 
nor  provided  for  any  municipal  regulations 
which  were  essential  to  the  existence  of  Sla- 
very ?  Is  it  not  more  rational  to  conclude 
that  they  who  framed  and  adopted  the  Con- 


JUDGES   CURTIS  AND 


GASTON    ON  TANEY. 


261 


stitution  were  aware  that  persons  held  to 
service  under  the  laws  of  a  State  are  prop- 
erty only  to  the  extent  and  under  the  condi- 
tions fixed  by  those  laws;  and  that  they 
must  cease  to  be  available  as  property  when 
their  owners  voluntarily  place  them  perma- 
nently within  another  jurisdiction,  where 
no  municipal  laws  on  the  subject  of  Slavery 
exist  ? 

"Moreover,  if  the  right  exists,  what  are 
its  limits,  and  what  are  its  conditions  ?  If 
citizens  of  the  United  States  have  a  right  to 
take  their  slaves  to  a  Territory,  and  hold 
them  there  as  slaves,  without  regard  to  the 
laws  of  the  Territory,  I  suppose  this  right  is 
not  to  be  restricted  to  the  citizens  of  slave- 
holding  States.  A  citizen  of  a  State  which 
does  not  tolerate  Slavery  can  hardly  be  deni- 
ed the  power  of  doing  the  same  thing.  And 
what  law  of  Slavery  does  either  take  with 
him  to  the  Territory  ?  If  it  be  said  to  be 
those  laws  respecting  Slavery  which  existed 
in  the  particular  State  from  which  each  slave 
last  came,  what  an  anomaly  is  this !  Where 
else  can  we  find,  under  the  laws  of  any  civil- 
ized country,  the  power  to  introduce  and 
permanently  continue  diverse  systems  of 
foreign  municipal  law,  for  holding  persons 
in  Slavery?" 

Justice  Curtis  is  an  ultra  conserva- 
tive of  the  State-street  (Boston)  school 
— a  life-long  follower  of  Mr.  Webster, 
especially  in  his  later  and  more  lament- 
able days — and  yet  his  opinion  deliv- 
ered in  this  case  evinces  considerably 
more  freedom  and  boldness  than  that 
of  Judge  McLean.  Though  couched 
in  judicial  and  respectful  language, 
it  constantly,  and  pretty  clearly,  inti- 
mates not  merely  that  the  judgment 
of  the  Court  is  contrary  both  to  law 
and  to  fact,  but  that  its  authors  well 
know  such  to  be  the  case.  In  reply 
to  Chief  Justice  Taney's  disquisition 
as  to  the  opinions  and  views  of  our 
Revolutionary  statesmen,  Mr.  Curtis 
bluntly  says : 

"  To  determine  whether  any  free  persons, 
descended  from  Africans  held  in  Slavery, 
were  citizens  of  the  United  States  under  the 
Confederation,  and  consequently  at  the  time 
of  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  it  is  only  necessary  to  know 
whether  such  persons  were  citizens  of  either 
of  the  States  under  the  Confederation,  at 
the  time  of  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution. 


"  Of  this,  there  can  be  no  doubt.  At  the 
time  of  the  ratification  of  the  Articles  of 
Confederation,  all  free,  native-born  inhab- 
itants of  the  States  of  New  Hampshire, 
Massachusetts,  New  York,  New  Jersey,  and 
North  Carolina,  though  descended  from 
African  slaves,  were  not  only  citizens  of 
those  States,  but  such  of  them  as  had  the 
other  necessary  qualifications  possessed  the 
franchise  of  electors,  on  equal  terms  with 
other  citizens." 

He  proceeds  to  cite,  in  support  of 
this  averment,  the  judgment  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  North  Carolina  in 
the  case  of  the  State  against  Manuel, 
wherein  William  Gaston — by  far  the 
most  eminent  jurist  of  whom  that 
State  could  ever  boast — pronounced 
the  opinion  of  the  Court  in  the  fol- 
lowing terms . 

"  According  to  the  laws  of  this  State,  all 
human  beings  within  it,  who  are  not  slaves, 
fall  within  one  of  two  classes.  "Whatever 
distinctions  may  have  existed  in  the  Roman 
laws  between  citizens  and  free  inhabitants, 
they  are  unknown  to  our  institutions.  Be- 
fore our  Revolution,  all  free  persons  born 
within  the  dominions  of  the  King  of  Great 
Britain,  whatever  their  color  or  complexion, 
were  native-born  British  subjects  —  those 
born  out  of  his  allegiance  were  aliens.  Sla- 
very did  not  exist  in  England,  but  it  did  in 
the  British  Colonies.  Slaves  were  not,  in 
legal  parlance,  persons,  but  property.  The 
moment  the  incapacity,  the  disqualification 
of  Slavery  was  removed,  they  became  per- 
sons, and  were  then  either  British  subjects, 
or  not  British  subjects,  according  as  they 
were  or  were  not  born  within  the  allegiance 
of  the  British  king.  Upon  the  Revolution, 
no  other  change  took  place  in  the  laws  of 
North  Carolina  than  was  consequent  on  the 
transition  from  a  colony  dependent  on  a  Eu- 
ropean king  to  a  free  and  sovereign  State. 
Slaves  remained  slaves.  British  subjects  in 
North  Carolina  became  North  Carolina  free- 
men. Foreigners,  until  made  members  of 
the  State,  remained  aliens.  Slaves,  manu- 
mitted here,  became  freemen  ;  and  therefore, 
if  born  within  North  Carolina,  are  citizens 
of  North  Carolina ;  and  all  free  persons  born 
within  the  State  are  born  citizens  of  the 
State.  The  Constitution  extended  the  elec- 
tive franchise  to  every  freeman  who  had 
arrived  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  paid  a 
public  tax ;  and  it  is  a  matter  of  universal 
notoriety,  that,  under  it,  free  persons,  with- 
out regard  to  color,  claimed  and  exercised 


262 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  franchise,  until  it  was  taken  from  free  men 
of  color  a  few  years  since,  by  our  amended 
Constitution." 

Continuing  his  review  of  the  Chief 

Justice's  assumptions,  Judge  Curtis 

says : 

"  It  has  been  often  asserted  that  the  Con- 
stitution was  made  exclusively  by  and  for 
the  white  race.  It  has  already  been  shown 
that,  in  five  of  the  thirteen  original  States, 
colored  persons  then  possessed  the  elective 
franchise,  and  were  among  those  by  whom 
the  Constitution  was  ordained  and  estab- 
lished. If  so,  it  is  not  true,  in  point  of 
fact,  that  the  Constitution  was  made  ex- 
clusively by  the  white  race.  And  that  it 
was  made  exclusively  for  the  white  race  is, 
in  my  opinion,  not  only  an  assumption  not 
warranted  by  anything  in  the  Constitution, 
but  contradicted  by  its  open  declaration, 
that  it  was  ordained  and  established  by  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  for  themselves 
and  their  posterity.  And,  as  free  colored 
persons  were .  then  citizens  of  at  least  five 
States,  and  so,  in  every  sense,  part  of  the 
people  of  the  United  States,  they  were 
among  those  for  whom  and  whose  posterity 
the  Constitution  was  ordained  and  es- 
tablished." 

Judge  Curtis  is  not  content  with 
refuting  the  logic  of  the  Chief  Jus- 
tice. He  seizes  the  weapons  of  his 
antagonist  and  turns  them  against 
him  with  decided  effect.  Witness 
the  following : 

"I  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  review  at 
length  the  legislation  of  Congress  having 
more  or  less  bearing  upon  the  citizenship 
of  colored  persons.  It  does  not  seem  to  me 
to  have  any  considerable  tendency  to  prove 
that  it  has  been  considered  by  the  legisla- 
tive department  of  the  Government  that  no 
such  persons  are  citizens  of  the  United 
States.  Undoubtedly,  they  have  been  de- 
barred from  the  exercise  of  particular  rights 
or  privileges  extended  to  white  persons, 
but,  I  believe,  always  in  terms  which,  by 
implication,  admit  that  they  may  be  citi- 
zens. Thus,  the  act  of  May  17,  1792,  for 
the  organization  of  the  militia,  directs  the 
enrollment  of  every  '  free,  able-bodied,  white 
male  citizen.'  An  assumption  that  none 
but  white  persons  are  citizens,  would  be  as 
inconsistent  with  the  just  import  of  this 
language,  as  that  all  citizens  are  able-bodied, 
or  males. 

"  So  the  act  of  February  28,  1803  (2  Slat. 


at  Large,  205),  to  prevent  the  importation 
of  certain  persons  into  States,  when,  by  the 
laws  thereof,  their  admission  is  prohibited, 
in  its  first  section  forbids  all  masters  of  ves- 
sels to  import  or  bring  '  any  negro,  mulatto, 
or  other  person  of  color,  not  being  a  native, 
a  citizen,  or  registered  seaman  of  the  United 
States,'  etc.,  etc. 

"The  acts  of  March  3,  1813,  §  1  (2  Stat, 
at  Large,  809),  and  March  1,  1817,  §  3  (3 
Stat,  at  Large,  351),  concerning  seamen, 
certainly  imply  that  there  may  be  persons  of 
color,  natives  of  the  United  States,  who  are 
not  citizens  of  the  United  States.  This 
implication  is  undoubtedly  in  accordance 
with  the  fact.  For  not  only  slaves,  but 
free  persons  of  color,  born  in  some  of  the 
States,  are  not  citizens.  But  there  is  nothing 
in  these  laws  inconsistent  with  the  citizen- 
ship of  persons  of  color  in  others  of  the 
States,  nor  with  their  being  citizens  of  the 
United  States. 

"  Whether  much  or  little  weight  should 
be  attached  to  the  particular  phraseology  of 
these  and  other  laws,  which  were  not 
passed  with  any  direct  reference  to  the 
subject,  I  consider  their  tendency  to  be, 
as  already  indicated,  to  show  that,  in  the 
apprehension  of  their  framers,  color  was 
not  a  necessary  qualification  for  citizenship. 
It  would  be  strange,  if  laws  were  found  on 
our  statute-book  to  that  effect,  when,  by 
solemn  treaties,  large  bodies  of  Mexican 
and  North  American  Indians,  as  well  as 
free  colored  persons  of  Louisiana,  have 
been  admitted  to  citizenship  of  the  United 
States." 

Mr.  Curtis  cites  with  effect  the 
action  of  Congress  in  1821  on  the 
admission  of  Missouri,  whereby  that 
State  was  constrained  to  abandon 
and  repudiate  her  attempt  to  pro- 
hibit the  settlement  of  free  negroes 
and  mulattoes  within  her  borders ; T 
whereof  he  says : 

"  It  is  true,  that  neither  this  legislative 
declaration,  nor  anything  in  the  Constitu- 
tion or  laws  of  Missouri,  could  confer  or 
take  away  any  privilege  or  immunity 
granted  by  the  Constitution.  But  it  is  also 
true  that  it  expresses  the  then  conviction 
of  the  legislative  power  of  the  United  States, 
that  free  negroes,  as  citizens  of  some  of  the 
States,  might  be  entitled  to  the  privileges 
and  immunities  of  citizens  in  all  the  States." 

He  sums  up  his  conclusions  as  to 


T  See  page  80  of  this  work. 


JUDGE  CURTIS  ON   NEGRO  CITIZENSHIP. 


263 


the  right  of  Dred  Scott  to  bring  this 
action,  as  follows : 

"  First.  That  the  free,  native-born  citizens 
of  each  State  are  citizens  of  the  United 
States. 

"Second.  That,  as  free  colored  persons, 
born  within  some  of  the  States,  are  citizens 
of  those  States,  such  persons  are  also  citi- 
zens of  the  United  States. 

"  Third.  That  every  such  citizen,  re- 
siding in  any  State,  has  a  right  to  sue,  and 
is  liable  to  be  sued,  in  the  Federal  Courts, 
as  a  citizen  of  that  State  in  which  he  re- 
sides. 

"  Fourth.  That,  as  the  plea  to  the  juris- 
diction in  this  case  shows  no  facts  except 
that  the  plaintiff  was  of  African  descent,  and 
that  his  ancestors  were  sold  as  slaves,  and 
as  these  facts  are  not  inconsistent  with  his 
citizenship  of  the  United  States  and  his 
residence  in  the  State  of  Missouri,  the  plea 
to  the  jurisdiction  was  bad,  and  the  judg- 
ment of  the  Circuit  Court  overruling  it  was 
correct. 

"  I  dissent,  therefore,  from  that  part  of 
the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  court  in 
which  it  is  held  that  a  person  of  African 
descent  cannot  be  a  citizen  of  the  United 
States ;  and  I  regret  I  must  go  further,  and 
dissent  both  from  what  I  deem  their  assump- 
tion of  authority  to  examine  the  constitu- 
tionality of  the  act  of  Congress  commonly 
called  the  Missouri  Compromise  act,  and  the 
grounds  and  conclusions  announced  in  their 
opinion. 

"Having  first  decided  that  they  were 
bound  to  consider  the  sufficiency  of  the  plea 
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Circuit  Court,  and 
having  decided  that  this  plea  showed  that 
the  Circuit  Court  had  not  jurisdiction,  and 
consequently  that  this  is  a  case  to  which 
the  judicial  power  of  the  United  States  does 
not  extend,  they  have  gone  on  to  examine 
the  merits  of  the  case  as  they  appeared  on 
the  trial  before  the  court  and  jury,  on  the 
issues  joined  on  the  pleas  in  bar,  and  so 
have  reached  the  question  of  the  power  of 
Congress  to  pass  the  act  of  1820.  On  so 
grave  a  subject  as  this,  I  feel  obliged  to  say 
that,  in  my  opinion,  such  an  exertion  of 
judicial  power  transcends  the  limits  of  the 
authority  of  the  Court,  as  described  by  its 
repeated  decisions,  and,  as  I  understand, 
acknowledged  in  this  opinion  of  the  majori- 
ty of  the  Court." 

Mr.  Curtis  proceeds  to  confute  at 
length,  and  with  decided  ability,  the 
doctrines  of  the  majority,  affirming 
the  invalidity  of  the  Missouri  Ee- 
striction,  and  asserting  the  paramount 


right  of  each  slaveholder  to  remove 
with  his  slaves  into  any  territory  of 
the  United  States,  and  there  retain 
and  control  them  under  the  segis  of 
the  Federal  Constitution.  He  shows, 
further,  that  the  majority  erred  in 
upholding  a  majority  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Missouri  in  overruling  their 
own  Chief  Justice  and  their  own 
former  decisions,  whereby  it  had  been 
established,  in  accordance  with  kin- 
dred decisions  in  Louisiana,  as  in 
other  Slave  States,  that  a  slave  taken 
by  his  master,  or  removed  with  his 
assent,  to  a  Free  State,  or  to  any 
country  wherein  Slavery  is  prohibit- 
ed, becomes  thereby  a  freeman,  and 
cannot  be  returned  or  reduced  again 
to  Slavery.  It  cannot,  however,  be 
necessary  to  quote  further  on  this 
head.    He  concludes: 

"  For  these  reasons,  I  am  of  the  opinion 
that  so  much  of  the  several  acts  of  Congress 
as  prohibited  Slavery  and  involuntary  servi- 
tude within  that  part  of  the  Territory  of 
Missouri  lying  north  of  thirty-six  degrees 
thirty  minutes  north  latitude,  and  west  of 
the  river  Mississippi,  were  constitutional 
and  valid  laws. 

"In  my  opinion,  the  judgment  of  the 
Circuit  Court  should  be  reversed,  and  the 
cause  remanded  for  a  new  trial." 

The  majority  of  the  Justices  com- 
posing the  Supreme  Court,  after  de- 
ciding that  Dred  Scott  had  no  stand- 
ing in  that  Court,  and  that  the  case 
was,  therefore,  entirely  beyond,  or 
outside  of,  its  jurisdiction,  had  pro- 
ceeded to  take  and  make  jurisdiction, 
for  the  purpose  of  ousting  Congress 
and  the  people  from  all  right  or 
power  to  exclude  Slavery  from  the 
Federal  Territories,  organized  or  un- 
organized. Congress  had  repeatedly, 
and  from  the  very  origin  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, legislated  on  this  subject, 
and  to  this  end.  The  Supreme 
Court  now  interposes,  in  a  case 


264 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


wherein  it  proclaims  itself  devoid  of 
jurisdiction,  and  denies  the  validity 
of  such  legislation.  The  people  are 
treated  as  inclining  to  usurp  the 
power  of  excluding  human  bondage 
from  their  territorial  possessions  ;  so 
the  Court  decides  that  they  have  no 
rights  in  the  premises,  no  power  to 
act  on  the  question.  If  twenty  mil- 
lions of  freemen  were  unanimously 
and  earnestly  to  insist  that  Freedom 
should  be  the  law  of  their  common 
territories,  while  but  one  slaveholder 
should  claim  the  privilege  of  taking 
his  slaves  to  and  holding  them  in 
said  territories,  the  claim  of  this  one 
slaveholder,  according  to  the  Court, 
would  override  and  defeat,  conclu- 
sively, the  earnest  demands  of  those 
twenty  millions  of  freemen.  The 
war  upon  the  Missouri  Restriction, 
and  against  Slavery  Inhibition  in 


the  Territories  generally,  had  been 
commenced  and  prosecuted  under 
the  banner  of  "Popular  Sovereign- 
ty ;"  and  it  was  to  this  complexion 
it  had  come  at  last ;  and  it  was  of 
this  judgment,  just  about  to  be  pro- 
claimed to  an  astounded  people,  that 
Mr.  Buchanan,  in  his  Inaugural 
aforesaid,  says : 

"  The  whole  territorial  question  being 
thus  settled  upon  the  principle  of  Popular 
Sovereignty — a  principle  as  ancient  as  free 
government  itself — everything  of  a  practical 
nature  has  been  decided.  No  other  ques- 
tion remains  for  adjustment;  because  all 
agree  that,  under  the  Constitution,  Slavery 
in  the  States  is  beyond  the  reach  of  any 
human  power,  except  that  of  the  respective 
States  themselves  wherein  it  exists.  May 
we  not,  then,  hope  that  the  long  agitation 
on  this  subject  is  approaching  its  end,  and 
that  the  geographical  parties  to  which  it 
has  given  birth,  so  much  dreaded  by  the 
father  of  his  country,  will  speedily  become 
extinct?" 


XIX. 

OUR  FOREIGN   POLICY— CUBA. 


The  foundations  of  our  foreign 
policy  were  firmly  and  strongly  laid 
during  the  Presidency,  and  under 
the  councils,  of  Washington.  To 
mind  our  own  business,  and  leave 
other  nations  to  manage  their  affairs, 
and  to  preserve,  recast,  or  modify 
their  respective  governments,  as  to 
them  shall  seem  tit  and  advantageous 
— to  regard  the  rule  actually  estab- 
lished and  operative,  in  any  nation 
as  the  rightful  government  of  that 
nation,  however  widely  divergent 
it  may  be  from  our  own  notions 
of  what  is  wisest  and  most  beneficent : 
such  are  its  great  cardinal  principles. 


To  Washington  and  his  eminent 
compatriots  in  our  Revolutionary 
struggle,  and  in  the  framing  of  our 
Federal  Union,  is  the  credit  justly 
due  of  having  originated  and  firmly 
upheld  this  policy,  in  defiance  of 
popular  passion,  and  under  circum- 
stances of  great  difficulty  and  em- 
barrassment. But  Jefferson,  Madi- 
son, George  Clinton,  Gerry,  and 
their  associate  founders  of  the  Repub- 
lican party,  very  generally  yielded  to 
this  policy  a  tacit,  if  not  positive  and 
emphatic,  approval.  The  mob  of  the 
seaboard  cities,  who  shouted  beneath 
the  windows    of    Citizen  Genet, 


OUR    EARLY   FOREIGN  POLICY 


—  FRANCE. 


265 


burned  Jay's  treaty  in  the  streets, 
and  clamored  violently  for  alliance 
with  revolutionary  France  and  war 
upon  Tory  England,  were,  of  course, 
anti-Federal ;  and  their  voices  and 
votes  helped  to  strengthen  the  Re- 
publican opposition  in  Congress,  and 
to  swell  the  steadily-growing  host 
that,  in  due  time,  ousted  the  Federal- 
ists from  power,  by  electing  Mr.  Jef- 
ferson to  the  Presidency. 

But  Mr.  Jefferson  himself  never 
shared  in  the  blind  passions  by  which 
he  so  largely  profited.  An  earnest 
and  unchanging  devotee  of  cheap, 
simple,  and  frugal  government,  he 
profoundly  realized  that  wars  were 
costly,  and  alliances  perilous;  and, 
while  he  hated  the  British  Govern- 
ment as  embodying  whatever  was,  at 
the  same  time,  most  pernicious  to 
our  country,  and  most  seductive  to 
her  wealthy  and  commercial  classes, 
he  never,  after  our  independence 
was  achieved,  was  eager  to  tempt 
again  the  desperate  chances,  the  cer- 
tain devastations  and  enduring  bur- 
dens, of  war  with  Great  Britain. 
Before  the  close  of  his  Presidency,1 
the  popular  feeling  would  have  fully 
justified  and  sustained  him  in  declar- 
ing war,  but  he  wisely  forbore ;  and 
it  was  only  after  the  strong  infusion 
of  young  blood  into  the  councils  of 
the  Republican  party,  through  the 
election  of  Messrs.  Clay,  Grundy, 
Calhoun,  John  Holmes,  etc.,  to  Con- 
gress, that  the  hesitation  of  the  cau- 
tious and  philosophic  Madison  was 
overborne  by  their  impetuosity,  and 
j  war  actually  proclaimed. 

When  Washington  and  his  advi- 
sers definitively  resolved  on  preserv- 

1  On  the  occasion  of  the  outrageous  attack  on 
the  frigate  Chesapeake  by  the  Leopard. 


ing  a  strict  neutrality  between  revo- 
lutionary France  and  the  banded 
despots  who  assailed  her,  they  did 
not  entirely  escape  the  imputation  of 
ingratitude,  if  not  positive  bad  faith. 
Our  country  was  deeply  indebted  to 
France  for  the  generous  and  vitally 
important  assistance  received  from 
her  in  our  Revolutionary  struggle; 
and,  although  France  was  not — as 
nations,  like  individuals,  seldom  are 
— entirely  disinterested  in  rendering 
that  assistance,  the  advantage  accru- 
ing to  and  the  obligation  incurred  by 
us  wrere  scarcely  lessened  by  that  con- 
sideration. When  barely  two  of  our 
seven  years'  arduous  struggle  had 
passed,  Louis  XYI.  decided  to  ac- 
knowledge our  independence;  and 
his  minister  soon  after2  united  with 
our  envoys  in  a  treaty  of  alliance, 
whereof  the  preponderance  of  bene- 
fits was  very  greatly  on  our  side. 
And  among  the  stipulations  of  that 
treaty — a  treaty  whereby  we  profited 
too  much  in  the  general  to  be  fastidi- 
ous as  to  the  particulars — was  the 
following : 

"  Aet.  XL  The  two  parties  guarantee 
mutually,  from  the  present  time  and  for- 
ever, against  all  other  powers,  to  wit: 
The  United  States,  to  his  Most  Christian 
Majesty,  the  present  possessions  of  the  crown 
of  France  in  America,  as  well  as  those  which 
it  may  acquire  by  the  future  treaty  of  peace : 
And  his  Most  Christian  Majesty  guarantees 
on  his  part  to  the  United  States  their  liber- 
ty, sovereignty,  and  independence,  absolute 
and  unlimited,  as  well  in  matters  of  govern- 
ment as  commerce,  and  also  their  posses- 
sions, and  the  additions  or  conquests  that 
their  confederation  may  obtain  during  the 
war,  from  any  of  the  dominions  now  or 
heretofore  possessed  by  Great  Britain  in 
North  America,  conformably  to  the  5th  and 
6th  articles  above  written,  the  whole  as 
their  possessions  shall  be  fixed  and  assured 
to  the  said  States,  at  the  moment  of  the 

2  February  6,  1*778.  This  treaty  was  kept 
secret  for  several  months. 


266  THE  AMERICA 

cessation  of  their  present  war  with  Eng- 
land." 

Such  a  guarantee  could  not,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  endure  and  be-  ful- 
filled, unless  the  contracting  parties 
were  to  become,  in  effect,  one  na- 
tion ;  or,  at  least,  to  be  partners  or 
confederates  in  all  their  future  wars. 
In  the  case  actually  presented,  the 
monarch  with  whom  we  made  this 
treaty  had  been  the  enemy  and  the 
victim  of  the  Jacobins,  who  claimed 
of  us  the  fulfillment  of  this  grave 
compact. 

President  Washington,  in  his  Fare- 
well Address 3  to  his  countrymen  on 
taking  leave  of  public  life,  thus 
summed  up  his  convictions  on  the 
subject  under  contemplation : 

"  The  great  rule  of  conduct  for  us  in  re- 
gard to  foreign  nations  is,  in  extending  our 
commercial  relations,  to  have  with  them  as 
little  political  connection  as  possible.  So 
far  as  we  have  already  formed  engagements, 
let  them  be  fulfilled  with  perfect  good  faith. 
Here  let  us  stop. 

"Europe  has  a  set  of  primary  interests, 
which  to  us  have  none,  or  a  very  remote,  re- 
lation. Hence,  she  must  be  engaged  in  fre- 
quent controversies,  the  causes  of  which  are 
essentially  foreign  to  our  concerns.  Hence, 
therefore,  it  must  be  unwise  in  us  to  impli- 
cate ourselves  by  artificial  ties  in  the  ordi- 
nary vicissitudes  of  her  politics,  or  the  or- 
dinary combinations  and  collisions  of  her 
friendships  or  enmities. 

"  Our  detached  and  distant  situation  in- 
vites and  enables  us  to  pursue  a  different 
course.  If  we  remain  one  people,  under  an 
efficient  government,  the  period  is  not  far 
off  when  we  may  defy  material  injury  from 
external  annoyance ;  when  we  may  take  such 
an  attitude  as  will  cause  the  neutrality  we 
may  at  any  time  resolve  upon  to  be  scrupu- 
lously respected ;  when  belligerent  nations, 
under  the  impossibility  of  making  acquisi- 
tions from  us,  will  not  lightly  hazard  the 
giving  us  provocation  ;  when  we  may  choose 
peace  or  war,  as  our  interests,  guided  by  jus- 
tice, shall  counsel. 

"  Why  forego  the  advantages  of  so  pecu- 
liar a  situation  ?  "Why  quit  our  own  to  stand 
on  foreign  ground?  Why,  by  interweaving 
Our  destiny  with  that  of  any  part  of  Europe, 


N  CONFLICT. 

entangle  our  peace  and  prosperity  in  the 
toils  of  European  ambition,  rivalships,  inter- 
ests, humor,  or  caprice  ? 

"  It  is  our  true  policy  to  steer  clear  of  per- 
manent alliances  with  any  portion  of  the 
foreign  world,  so  far,  I  mean,  as  we  are  now 
at  liberty  to  do  it;  for  let  me  not  be  under- 
stood as  capable  of  patronizing  infidelity  to 
existing  engagements.  I  hold  the  maxim  no 
less  applicable  to  public  than  to  private 
affairs,  that  honesty  is  the  best  policy.  I 
repeat,  therefore,  let  those  engagements  be 
observed  in  their  genuine  sense.  But,  in 
my  opinion,  it  is  unnecessary  and  would  be 
unwise  to  extend  them." 

No  decided — at  least  no  avowed — 
departure  from  this  policy  had  oc- 
curred down  to  1823,  when  President 
Monroe  was  required  to  address  a 
new  Congress  under  peculiar  circum- 
stances. The  Spanish  people  had 
revolted  against  the  despotism  of 
their  imbecile,  treacherous  monarch, 
Ferdinand  VII.,  and  had  established 
a  Constitution  which  left  him  still  in 
possession  of  the  trappings,  but  with 
little  of  the  substance,  of  royalty. 
He  was,  of  course,  profoundly  hostile 
to  this  change,  though  affecting  to 
acquiesce  in  it.  A  congress4  of  the 
great  powers  of  continental  Europe, 
then  united  in  a  league,  known  as 
the  "Holy  Alliance,"  for  the  main- 
tenance of  their  despotic  authority 
and  the  repression  of  popular  aspira- 
tions, had  decreed  the  overthrow  of 
this  dangerous  example ;  and,  under 
its  auspices,  a  French  army  of 
100,000  men,  led  by  the  Duke  d'An- 
gouleme,  a  prince  of  the  blood  royal, 
had  invaded  Spain,  and,  meeting 
with  little  serious  resistance,  over- 
thrown the  Constitution  and  the 
Cortes,  and  restored  to  Ferdinand 
his  beloved  and  grossly  abused  au- 
tocracy. Apprehensions  were  en- 
tertained that  the  discipline  thus 
bestowed  on  Spain  was  about  to 


3  September  17,  1796. 


4  Held  at  Verona,  Italy,  in  1822. 


THE    "MONROE  DOCTRINE." 


267 


be  extended  to  her  revolted  and 
nearly  independent  American  colo- 
nies, whereby  they  should  be  reduced 
to  abject  servitude  to  their  mother 
country,  and  to  the  despotism  that 
now  enthralled  her.  To  such  a  con- 
summation, Great  Britain,  as  well  as 
this  country,  was  intensely  opposed 
— quite  as  much,  probably,  for  com- 
mercial as  for  political  reasons.  Mr. 
Canning,  then  the  master-spirit  of 
the  British  Cabinet,  at  least  with  re- 
spect to  foreign  affairs,  hinted  to  our 
Government  the  expediency  of  a 
moral  demonstration  against  the  ap- 
prehended design  of  the  Holy  Alli- 
ance with  regard  to  this  Continent — 
a  demonstration  which  could  be  made 
with  less  offense,  yet  with  no  less  effi- 
ciency, from  this  side  of  the  Atlantic 
than  from  the  other.  Thus  prompted, 
Mr.  Monroe  spoke  as  follows : 5 

"  Of  events  in  that  quarter  of  the  globe 
with  which  we  have  so  much  intercourse, 
and  from  which  we  derive  our  origin,  we 
have  always  been  anxious  and  interested 
spectators.  The  citizens  of  the  United 
States  cherish  sentiments  the  most  friendly 
in  favor  of  the  liberty  and  happiness  of  their 
fellow-men  on  that  side  of  the  Atlantic.  In 
the  wars  of  the  European  powers,  in  matters 
relating  to  themselves,  we  have  never  taken 
any  part,  nor  does  it  comport  with  our  poli- 
cy so  to  do.  It  is  only  when  our  rights  are 
invaded  or  seriously  menaced,  that  we  resent 
injuries,  or  make  preparation  for  our  defense. 
"With  the  movements  in  this  hemisphere,  we 
are  of  necessity  more  immediately  connect- 
ed, and  by  causes  which  must  be  obvious  to 
all  enlightened  and  impartial  observers.  The 
political  system  of  the  Allied  Powers  is  es- 
sentially different  in  this  respect  from  that 
of  America.  This  difference  proceeds  from 
that  which  exists  in  their  respective  govern- 
ments. And  to  the  defense  of  our  own, 
which  has  been  achieved  by  the  loss  of  so 
much  blood  and  treasure,  and  matured  by 
the  wisdom  of  their  most  enlightened  citi- 
zens, and  under  which  we  have  enjoyed  un- 
exampled felicity,  this  whole  nation  is  de- 
voted. We  owe  it,  therefore,  to  candor,  and 
to  the  amicable  relations  existing  between 


the  United  States  and  those  powers,  to  de- 
clare, that  we  should  consider  any  attempt- 
on  their  part  to  extend  their  system  to  any 
portion  of  this  hemisphere  as  dangerous  to 
our  peace  and  safety. 

"  With  the  existing  colonies  or  dependen- 
cies of  any  European  power,  we  have  not 
interfered,  and  shall  not  interfere.  But  with 
the  governments  which  have  declared  their 
independence  and  maintained  it,  and  whose 
independence  we  have,  on  great  considera- 
tion and  on  just  principles,  acknowledged, 
we  could  not  view  any  interposition  for  the 
purpose  of  oppressing  them,  or  controlling 
in  any  other  manner  their  destiny,  by  any 
European  power,  in  any  other  light  than  as 
the  manifestation  of  an  unfriendly  disposi- 
tion toward  the  United  States.  *  *  *  * 
Our  policy  in  regard  to  Europe,  which  was 
adopted  at  an  early  stage  of  the  wars  which 
have  so  long  agitated  that  quarter  of  the 
globe,  nevertheless,  remains  the  same :  which 
is,  not  to  interfere  in  the  internal  concerns  of 
any  of  its  powers ;  to  consider  the  government 
de  facto  as  the  legitimate  government  for 
us;  to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  it; 
and  to  preserve  those  relations  by  a  frank, 
firm,  and  manly  policy ;  meeting,  in  all  in- 
stances, the  just  claims  of  every  power,  sub- 
mitting to  injuries  from  none. 

"  But,  in  regard  to  these  continents,  cir- 
cumstances are  eminently  and  conspicuously 
different.  It  is  impossible  that  the  Allied 
Powers  should  extend  their  political  system 
to  any  portion  of  either  continent  without 
endangering  our  peace  and  happiness;  nor 
can  any  one  believe  that  our  southern  breth- 
ren, if  left  to  themselves,  would  adopt  it 
of  their  own  accord.  It  is  equally  impossi- 
ble, therefore,  that  Ave  should  behold  such 
interposition,  in  any  form,  with  indifference. 
If  we  look  to  the  comparative  strength  and 
resources  of  Spain  and  those  new  govern- 
ments, and  their  distance  from  each  other, 
it  must  be  obvious  that  she  can  never  sub- 
due them.  It  is  still  the  true  policy  of  the 
United  States  to  leave  the  parties  to  them- 
selves, in  the  hope  that  other  powers  will 
pursue  the  same  course." 

In  this  remarkable  passage,  may 
probably  be  found  the  impulse  to  the 
invitation  from  several  of  the  South 
American  Kepublics  to  that  Congress 
at  Panama  of  representatives  of 
American  Eepublics,  which  Messrs. 
Adams  and  Clay  so  promptly  and 
heartily  accepted,  and  which  the  Op- 
position or  Jackson  party  of  1825-6 


6  Seventh  Annual  Message,  December  2, 1823. 


26S 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


so  generally  and  resolutely  opposed. 
That  Congress  proved,  practically,  a 
failure,  whether  through  European 
intrigue,  or  Spanish- American  jeal- 
ousy and  indolence,  is  not  apparent. 
Our  envoys 6  were  duly  appointed ; 
but  the  strenuous  opposition  in  our 
Senate7  had  so  protracted  the  discus- 
sion that  it  was  found  too  late  for  Mr. 
Sergeant  to  reach  Panama  at  the 
time  appointed  for  the  meeting  of 
the  Congress;8  and  Mr.  Anderson, 
then  Minister  to  Colombia,  when  at 
Carthagena  on  his  way  to  Panama, 
was  attacked  by  a  malignant  fever, 
whereof  he  died. 

But,  long  ere  this,  the  jealousy  of 
the  slaveholders  had  been  aroused, 
and  their  malign  influence  upon  the 
course  of  our  Government  made 
manifest.  Among  the  means  em- 
ployed to  render  the  Panama  Con- 
gress odious  at  the  South,  was  the 
fact  that  John  Sergeant,  the  more 


conspicuous  of  our  envoys,  had  stern- 
ly opposed  the  admission  of  Missouri 
as  a  Slave  State.9 

The  Spanish- American  Republics 
had  already  decreed  general  emanci- 
pation ;  and  fears  were  naturally  ex- 
pressed that  they  would  extend  tliis 
policy  to  Cuba,  should  they,  as  was 
then  contemplated,  combine  to  invade 
and  conquer  that  island.  Mr.  Clay 
!  had  already 10  written  as  Secretary  of 
I  State  to  Mr.  Alexander  H.  Everett, 
our  Minister  at  Madrid,  instructing 
him  to  urge  upon  Spain  the  expedi- 
ency of  acknowledging  the  independ- 
ence of  her  lost  colonies.    He  said : 

u  It  is  not  for  the  new  Republics  that  the 
President  wishes  to  nrge  upon  Spain  the  ex- 
pediency of  concluding  the  war.  If  the  war 
should  continue  between  Spain  and  the  new 
Republics,  and  those  islands  [Cuba  and  Por- 
to Rico]  should  become  the  object  and  thea- 
ter of  it,  their  fortunes  have  such  a  connec- 
tion with  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
that  they  could  not  be  indifferent  spectators; 
and  the  possible  contingencies  of  a  protract- 
ed war  might  bring  upon  the  Government 


6  John  Sergeant,  of  Pennsylvania,  and  Richard 
C.  Anderson,  of  Kentucky. 

7  In  the  course  of  the  debate,  Mr.  John  Ran- 
dolph, of  Virginia,  said: 

"Cuba  possesses  an  immense  negro  popula- 
tion. In  case  those  States  [Mexico  and  Colom- 
bia] should  invade  Cuba  at  all,  it  is  unquestion- 
able that  this  invasion  will  be  made  with  this 
principle. — the  genius  of  universal  emancipation, 
— this  sweeping  anathema  against  the  white 
population  in  front, — and  then,  Sir,  what  is  the 
situation  of  the  Southern  States  V 

Mr.  John  M.  Berrien,  of  Georgia,  said: 
"  The  question  to  be  determined  is  this:  with 
a  due  regard  to  the  safety  of  the  Southern 
States,  can  you  suffer  these  islands  (Cuba  and 
Porto  Rico)  to  pass  into  the  hand3  of  buccaneers 
drunk  with  their  new-born  liberty  t  If  our  inter- 
est and  our  safety  shall  require  us  to  say  to  these 
new  republics,  1  Cuba  and  Porto  Rico  must  re-  I 
main  as  they  are,'  we  are  free  to  say  it,  and,  by 
the  blessing  of  God.  and  the  strength  of  our  arms, 
to  enforce  the  declaration ;  and  let  me  say  to 
gentlemen,  these  high  considerations  do  require 
it.    The  vital  interests  of  the  South  demand  it." 

Mr.  John  Floyd,  of  Virginia,  said  [in  the  House] 
"  So  far  as  I  can  see,  in  all  its  bearings,  it  [the 
Panama  Congress]  looks  to  the  conquest  of  Cuba 


and  Porto  Rico;  or,  at  all  events,  of  tearing 
them  from  the  crown  of  Spain.  The  interests, 
if  not  safety,  of  our  own  country,  would  rather 
require  us  to  interpose  to  prevent  such  an  event ; 
and  I  would  rather  take  up  arms  to  prevent  than 
to  accelerate  such  an  occurrence." 

Mr.  Josiah  S.  Johnston,  of  Louisiana,  a  friend 
of  the  Administration,  parried  these  attacks  as 
follows : 

"We  know  that  Colombia  and  Mexico  have 
long  contemplated  the  independence  of  the 
island  [Cuba].  The  final  decision  is  now  to  be 
made,  and  the  combination  of  forces  and  the 
plan  of  attack  to  be  formed.  What,  then,  at 
such  a  crisis,  becomes  the  duty  of  the  Govern- 
ment ?  Send  your  ministers  instantly  to  the  dip- 
lomatic assembly,  where  the  measure  is  matur- 
ing. Advise  with  them — remonstrate — menace, 
if  necessary — against  a  step  so  dangerous  to  us, 
and  perhaps  fatal  to  them." 

s  June  22,  1826. 

*   "And  then,  to  cap  the  climax, 

John  Sergeant,  too,  must  go— 
A  chief  who  wants  the  darkies  free — 
John  Adams'  son,  my  Jo!" 
— '  Federal  Song'  in  The  Richmond  Enquirer. 

10  April  27,  1825. 


TAX    BUREN    AND    TAYLOR   ON  CUBA. 


269 


of  the  United  States  duties  and  obligations, 
the  performance  of  which,  however  painful 
it  should  be,  they  might  not  be  at  liberty  to 
decline.'''' 

In  the  same  spirit,  his  instructions 

to  Messrs.  Anderson  and  Sergeant11 

contained  the  following  passage : 

u  It  is  required  by  the  frank  and  friendly 
relations  which  we  most  earnestly  desire  ever 
to  cherish  with  the  new  Republics,  that  you 
should,  without  reserve,  explicitly  state  that 
the  United  States  have  too  much  at  stake  in 
the  fortunes  of  Cuba,  to  allow  them  to  see 
with  indifference  a  war  of  invasion  prose- 
cuted in  a  desolating  manner,  or  to  see  em- 
ployed, in  the  purposes  of  such  a  war,  one 
race  of  the  inhabitants  combating  against 
another,  upon  principles  and  with  motives 
that  must  inevitably  lead,  if  not  to  the  ex- 
termination of  one  party  or  the  other,  to  the 
most  shocking  excesses.  The  humanity  of 
the  United  States  in  respect  to  the  weaker, 
and  which,  in  such  a  terrible  struggle,  would 
probably  be  the  suffering,  portion,  and  the 
duty  to  defend  themselves  against  the  con- 
tagion of  such  near  and  dangerous  examples, 
would  constrain  them,  even  at  the  hazard 
of  losing  the  friendship  of  Mexico  and  Co- 
lombia, to  employ  all  the  means  necessary 
to  their  security." 

Several  years  later,  Mr.  Van  Bu- 
ren,  writing  as  Gen.  Jackson's  pre- 
mier to  Mr.  C.  P.  Yan  Xess,  our 
then  Minister  at  Madrid,  urges  upon 
Spain,  through  him,  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  South  American  independ- 
ence, on  this  among  other  grounds : 

"  Considerations  connected  with  a  certain 
class  of  our  population  make  it  the  interest 
of  the  Southern  section  of  the  Union  that 
no  attempt  should  be  made  in  that  island 
[Cuba]  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  Spanish  de- 
pendence ;  the  first  effect  of  which  would  be 
the  sudden  emancipation  of  a  numerous 
slave  population,  whose  result  could  not  but 
be  very  sensibly  felt  upon  the  adjacent 
shores  of  the  United  States." 

Thus,  so  long  as  any  revolution  in 
Cuba,  or  displacement  of  the  Spanish 
authority  there,  seemed  likely  to  af- 
fect the  stability  or  perpetuity  of 
Slavery,  our  Government  steadily, 
officiously  opposed  such  revolution; 


I  and,  while  refusing,  so  early  as  1S25, 
j  to  guarantee  the  possession  of  that 
island  to  Spain,  and  informally  giv- 
ing notice  that  we  would  never  con- 
sent to  its  transfer  to  any  more  for- 
midable power,  seemed  entirely  sat- 
isfied with,  and  anxious  for,  its  re- 
tention by  Spain  as  her  most  precious 
and  valued  dependency — '  The  Queen 
of  the  Antilles.' 

But,  at  length,  having  ^annexed 
Texas,  the  Slave  Power  fixed  covet- 
ous eyes  on  this  fertile,  prolific  island. 
\  In  184S,  our  Minister,  under  instruc- 
i  tions  from  President  Polk,  made  an 
j  offer  of  $100,000,000  for  it,  which 
j  was  peremptorily,  conclusively  re- 
|  jected.      Directly    thereafter,  the 
|  South  became  agitated  by  'fillibus- 
tering '  plots  for  the  invasion  and 
conquest  of  that  island,  wherein  real 
I  or  pretended   Cubans  by  nativity 
were  prominent  as  leaders.  Presi- 
dent Taylor  was  hardly  warm  in  the 
j  ^Thite  House  before  he  was  made 
I  aware  that  these  schemes  were  on 
\  the  point  of  realization,  and  compel- 
led to  issue  his  proclamation 12  against 
them  in  these  words : 

"  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  an  armed 

j  expedition  is  about  to  be  fitted  out  in  the 
United  States  with  an  intention  to  invade 

'  the  island  of  Cuba,  or  some  of  the  provinces 
off  Mexico.  The  best  information  which  the 
Executive  has  been  able  to  obtain  points  to 
the  island  of  Cuba  as  the  object  of  this  ex- 
pedition.   It  is  the  duty  of  this  Government 

i  to  observe  the  faith  of  treaties,  and  to  pre- 
vent any  aggression  by  our  citizens  upon  the 
territories  of  friendly  nations.    I  have,  there- 

|  fore,  thought  it  necessary  and  proper  to  is- 
sue this  Proclamation,  to  warn  all  citizens 
of  the  United  States,  who  shall  connect 

i  themselves  with  any  enterprise  so  grossly  in 
violation  of  our  laws  and  our  treaty  obliga- 
tions, that  they  will  thereby  subject  them- 
selves to  the  heavy  penalties  denounced 
against  them  by  our  acts  of  Congress,  and 
will  forfeit  their  claim  to  the  protection  of 
their  country.    No  such  persons  must  ex- 


11  May  S,  1826. 


15August  11,  1849. 


270 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


peot  the  interference  of  this  Government,  in 
any  form,  on  their  behalf,  no  matter  to  what 
extremities  they  may  be  reduced  in  conse- 
quence of  their  conduct.  An  enterprise  to 
invade  the  territories  of  a  friendly  nation, 
set  on  foot  and  prosecuted  within  the  limits 
of  the  United  States,  is,  in  the  highest  de- 
gree, criminal,  as  tending  to  endanger  the 
peace,  and  compromit  the  honor,  of  this  na- 
tion ;  and,  therefore,  I  exhort  all  good  citi- 
zens, as  they  regard  our  national  reputation, 
as  they  respect  their  own  laws  and  the  Law 
of  Nations,  as  they  value  the  blessings  of 
peace  and  the  welfare  of  their  country,  to 
discountenance  and  prevent,  by  all  lawful 
means,  any  such  enterprise ;  and  I  call  upon 
every  officer  of  this  Government,  civil  or 
military,  to  use  all  efforts  in  his  power  to 
arrest,  for  trial  and  punishment,  every  such 
offender  against  the  laws  providing  for  the 
performance  of  our.  sacred  obligations  to 
foreign  powers." 

This  emphatic  warning  probably 
embarrassed  and  delayed  the  execu- 
tion of  the  plot,  but  did  not  defeat  it. 
Early  in  August,  1851 — or  soon  after 
Gen.  Taylor's  death — an  expedition 
under  Lopez,  a  Cuban  adventurer, 
sailed  in  a  steamer  from  JSTew  Or- 
leans— always  the  hotbed  of  the  pro- 
jects of  the  Slavery  propagandists 
About  five  hundred  men  embarked 
in  this  desperate  enterprise,  by  which 
a  landing  was  effected  on  the  island 
of  Cuba.  All  its  expectations,  how- 
ever, of  a  rising  in  its  behalf,  or  of 
any  manifestation  of  sympathy  on 
the  part  of  the  Cubans,  were  utterly 
disappointed.  The  invaders  were 
easily  defeated  and  made  prisoners, 
when  their  leader  was  promptly  gar- 
roted  at  Havana,13  and  a  few  of  his 
comrades  shot ;  but  the  greater  num- 
ber were  sentenced  to  penal  servi- 
tude in  a  distant  Spanish  possession, 

13  August  16th. 

14  The  body  of  the  Convention  proposed  to  us, 
on  the  part  of  Great  Britain  and  France,  was  in 
the  following  words: 

"  The  high  contracting  parties  hereby  seve- 
rally and  collectively  disclaim,  both  now  and 
for  hereafter,  all  intention  to  obtain  possession 
of  the  island  of  Cuba;  and  they  respectively 


whence  they  were  ultimately  liber 
ated  by  pardon. 

The  discipline  proved  effective. 
There  was  much  talk  of  further  ex- 
peditions against  Cuba  from  one  or 
another  Southern  city.  A  secret  ca- 
bal, known  as  the  "  Order  of  the  Lone 
Star,"  recruited  adventurers  and  tried 
to  raise  funds  through  all  the  sea- 
board cities  of  the  Union,  and  it  was 
understood  that  Gen.  John  A.  Quit- 
man, of  Mississippi,  one  of  the  ablest 
and  strongest  of  Mr.  Calhoun's  disci- 
ples, had  consented  to  lead  the  next 
expedition  against  Cuba;  but  none 
ever  sailed.  The  "  Order  of  the  Lone 
Star"  proved  useful  to  Gen.  Pierce  in 
swelling  his  vote  for  President  in 
1852,  and  soon  after  subsided  into 
nothingness. 

As  our  Government  had  long  ex- 
pressed satisfaction  with  the  posses- 
sion of  Cuba  by  Spain,  while  pro- 
claiming hostility  to  its  transfer  to 
any  other  power,  Great  Britain  and 
France  determined  to  put  our  sin- 
cerity to  the  test ;  and,  accordingly, 
in  1852,  proposed  to  unite  with  us 
in  a  treaty  mutually  guaranteeing 
that  island  to  Spain.14  But  Mr. 
Edward  Everett,  as  Secretary  of 
State  to  Mr.  Fillmore,  rejected  the 
overture  in  an  exceedingly  smart 
dispatch. 

The  formal  proposition  for  a  joint 
agreement  of  perpetual  renunciation, 
on  the  part  of  Great  Britain,  France, 
and  the  United  States,  respectively, 
of  any  covetous  designs  on  Cuba, 

bind  themselves  to  discountenance  all  attempts 
to  that  effect  on  the  part  of  any  power  or  indi- 
viduals whatever. 

"The  high  contracting  parties  declare,  seve- 
rally and  collectively,  that  they  will  not  obtain 
or  maintain,  for  themselves,  or  for  any  one  of 
themselves,  any  exclusive  control  over  the  said 
island,  nor  assume  nor  exercise  any  dominion 
over  the  same." 


MR.  EVERETT  TO  FR 


AN  CE  AND  ENGLAND. 


271 


was  presented,  on  the  23d  of  April, 
to  Mr.  Webster,  then  our  Secretary 
of  State,  and  by  him  courteously 
acknowledged,  six  days  later,  in  a 
note  which,  though  not  without 
demur,  expressed  the  acquiescence 
of  our  Government  in  the  general 
views  expressed  by  France  and  Eng- 
land with  reference  to  Cuba,  and 
gave  assurances  that,  "  The  Presi- 
dent will  take  M.  de  Sartiges'  com- 
munication into  consideration,  and 
give  it  his  best  reflections." 

Mr.  Webster  being  dead 16  and  Mr. 
Everett  duly  installed  as  his  succes- 
sor,-the  latter  answered16  a  note  of 
M.  de  Sartiges,  recalling  Mr.  Web- 
ster's attention  to  this  subject,  under 
date  of  July  8th.  In  this  answer, 
our  Government  peremptorily  de- 
clines, for  various  and  elaborately 
stated  reasons,  any  such  convention 
or  compact  as  that  proposed  to  it  by 
France  and  England.  While  still 
disclaiming,  pro  forma,  any  desire 
or  intention  on  our  part  of  acquir- 
ing Cuba,  this  document  affords  the 
strongest  evidence  of  a  contrary  dis- 
position. It  assumes  that  the  Sen- 
ate would  inevitably  refuse  its  as- 
sent to  the  treaty  proposed,  and 
adds:  "  its  certain  rejection  by  that 
body  would  leave  the  question  of 
Cuba  in  a  more  unsettled  position 
than  it  is  now."  It  doubts  the  con- 
stitutional power  "  to  impose  a  per- 
manent disability  on  the  American 
Government  for  all  coming  time." 
It  parades,  with  significant  emphasis, 
the  repeated  and  important  acqui- 
sitions of  territory  by  our  Govern- 
ment, through  the  purchase  of  Lou- 
isiana in  1803,  and  of  Florida  in 
1819,  as  also  through  the  annexation 


of  Texas ;  as  to  which,  Mr.  Everett — 
overdoing  his  part,  as  is  natural  in  a 
Federalist  turned  fillibuster — volun- 
teers the  wrholly  gratuitous  assertion 
that  "  there  never  was  an  extension 
of  territory  more  naturally  or  justifi- 
ably made."  Ignoring  the  fact  that 
Great  Britain  has  still  possessions  in 
this  hemisphere  nearly,  if  not  quite, 
equal  in  extent  to  those  of  our  own 
country,  and  that  her  important 
island  of  Jamaica  is  quite  as  near 
to  Cuba  as  is  any  portion  of  our 
Southern  coast,  Mr.  Everett  says  : 

"  The  President  does  not  covet  the  acqui- 
sition of  Cuba  for  the  United  States ;  at  the 
same  time,  he  considers  the  acquisition  of 
Cuba  as  mainly  an  American  question. 
The  proposed  convention  proceeds  on  a 
different  principle.  It  assumes  that  the 
United  States  have  no  other  or  greater 
interest  in  the  question  than  France  or 
England;  whereas,  it  is  necessary  only  to 
cast  one's  eye  on  the  map  to  see  how  re- 
mote are  the  relations  of  Europe,  and  how 
intimate  those  of  the  United  States,  with 
this  island." 

If  three  strong  men  were  travers- 
ing a  desert  in  company  with  a 
fourth  rich,  but  weak,  companion, 
and  two  of  them  should  propose  to 
the  other  a  mutual  stipulation  not  to 
rob  or  otherwise  abuse  their  weak 
brother,  it  could  hardly  fail  to  aston- 
ish them  to  hear  their  proposition 
declined,  as  contemplating  an  "  en- 
tangling alliance" — a  perplexing  and 
troublesome  undertaking,  whereof 
no  one  could  fully  calculate  the  scope 
and  ultimate  consequences.  Yet  Mr. 
Everett  sees  fit  to  say  that 

"  There  is  another  strong  objection  to 
the  proposed  agreement.  Among  the  old- 
est traditions  of  the  Federal  Government  is 
an  aversion  to  political  alliances  with  Euro- 
pean powers.  In  his  memorable  Farewell 
Address,  President  Washington  says  :  '  The 
great  rule  of  conduct  for  us  in  regard 
to  foreign  nations  is,  in  extending  our  com- 


16  Oct.  24th,  1852. 


19  December  1,  1852. 


272 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


mercial  relations,  to  have  with  them  as 
little  political  connection  as  possible.  So 
far  as  we  have  already  formed  engage- 
ments, let  them  be  fulfilled  with  perfect 
good  faith.  Here  let  us  stop.'  President 
Jefferson,  in  his  Inaugural  Address  in  1801, 
warned  the  country  against  '  entangling  al- 
liances.' This  expression,  now  become  pro- 
verbial, was  unquestionably  used  by  Mr. 
Jefferson  in  reference  to  the  alliance  with 
France  of  1778 — an  alliance,  at  the  time,  of 
incalculable  benefit  to  the  United  States; 
but  which,  in  less  than  twenty  years,  came 
near  involving  us  in  the  wars  of  the  French 
Revolution,  and  laid  the  foundation  of 
heavy  claims  upon  Congress,  not  extin- 
guished to  the  present  day.  It  is  a  sig- 
nificant coincidence,  that  the  particular 
provision  of  the  alliance  which  occasioned 
these  evils  was  that  under  which  France 
called  upon  us  to  aid  her  in  defending  her 
"West  Indian  possessions  against  England. 
Nothing  less  than  the  unbounded  influence 
of  Washington  rescued  the  Union  from  the 
perils  of  that  crisis,  and  preserved  our 
neutrality." 

Mr.  Everett  proceeds : 

"  But  the  President  has  a  graver  objection 
to  entering  into  the  proposed  convention. 
He  has  no  wish  to  disguise  the  feeling  that 
the  compact,  although  equal  in  its  terms, 
would  be  very  unequal  in  substance.  France 
and  England,  by  entering  into  it,  would  dis- 
able themselves  from  obtaining  possession  of 
an  island  remote  from  their  seats  of  govern- 
ment, belonging  to  another  European  pow- 
er, whose  natural  right  to  possess  it  must 
always  be  as  good  as  their  own — a  distant 
island  in  another  hemisphere,  and  one  which, 
by  no  ordinary  or  peaceful  course  of  things, 
could  ever  belong  to  either  of  them.  *  *  * 
The  United  States,  on  the  other  hand,  would, 
by  the  proposed  convention,  disable  them- 
selves from  making  an  acquisition  which 
might  take  place  without  any  disturbance 
of  existing  foreign  relations,  and  in  the  nat- 
ural order  of  things.  The  island  of  Cuba 
lies  at  our  doors.  It  commands  the  ap- 
proach to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  which  washes 
the  shores  of  five  of  our  States.  It  bars  the 
entrance  of  that  great  river  which  drains 
half  the  North  American  continent,  and  with 
its  tributaries  forms  the  largest  system  of  in- 
ternal water  communication  in  the  world. 
It  keeps  watch  at  the  doorway  of  our  inter- 
course with  California  by  the  Isthmus  route. 
If  an  island  like  Cuba,  belonging  to  the 
Spanish  crown,  guarded  the  entrance  of  the 
Thames  and  the  Seine,  and  the  United  States 
should  propose  a  convention  like  this  to 
France  and  England,  those  powers  would 
assuredly  feel  that  the  disability  assumed  by  | 


ourselves  was  far  less  serious  than  that 
which  we  asked  them  to  assume." 

Mr.  Everett,  having  thus,  in  effect, 
apprised  the  civilized  world  that  the 
acquisition  of  Cuba  is  essential  to  our 
independence,  and  that  we  shall  pro- 
ceed in  our  own  time  to  appropriate 
it,  turns  to  give  our  slaveholders  a 
meaning  hint  that  they  must  not  be 
too  eager  in  the  pursuit,  or  they  will 
overreach  themselves.    He  says : 

"The  opinions  of  American  statesmen,  at 
different  times,  and  under  varying  circum- 
stances, have  differed  as  to  the  desirableness 
of  the  acquisition  of  Cuba  by  the  United 
States.  Territorially  and  commercially,  it 
would,  in  our  hands,  be  an  extremely  val- 
uable possession.  Under  certain  contin- 
gencies, it  might  be  almost  essential  to 
our  safety.  Still,  for  domestic  reasons,  on 
which,  in  a  communication  of  this  kind,  it 
might  not  be  proper  to  dwell,  the  President 
thinks  that  the  incorporation  of  the  island 
into  the  Union  at  the  present  time,  although 
effected  with  the  consent  of  Spain,  would  be 
a  hazardous  measure ;  and  he  would  consider 
its  acquisition  by  force,  except  in  a  just  war 
with  Spain  (should  an  event  so  greatly  to  be 
deprecated  take  place),  as  a  disgrace  to  the 
civilization  of  the  age." 

In  another  place,  he  gives  them  an- 
other intimation  of  the  solicitude  with 
which  our  Government  watches  and 
wards  against  any  subversion  of  Sla- 
very in  Cuba ;  saying : 

"  Even  now,  the  President  cannot  doubt 
that  both  France  and  England  would  prefer 
any  change  in  the  condition  of  Cuba  to  that 
which  is  most  to  be  apprehended,  viz. :  an 
internal  convulsion  which  should  renew  the 
horrors  and  the  fate  of  San  Domingo  " 

But  Cuba,  it  seems,  is  not  merely 
a  slaveholding,  but  a  slave-trading 
dependency,  which  affords  still  an- 
other reason  why  Spain  should  lose 
and  we  gain  it.    Says  Mr.  Everett : 

"  I  will  intimate  a  final  objection  to  the 
proposed  convention.  M.  de  Turgot  and 
Lord  Malmesbury  put  forward,  as  the  reason 
for  entering  into  such  a  compact,  'the  at- 
tacks which  have  lately  been  made  on  the 
island  of  Cuba  by  lawless  bands  of  adven- 
turers from  the  United  States,  with  the 
avowed  design  of  taking  possession  of  that 


THE  OSTBND  MEETI 


1ST  G-  AND  CIRCULAR. 


273 


island.'  The  President  is  convinced  that  the 
conclusion  of  such  a  treaty,  instead  of  put- 
ting a  stop  to  these  lawless  proceedings, 
would  give  a  new  and  powerful  impetus 
to  them.  It  would  strike  a  death-blow  to 
the  conservative  policy  hitherto  pursued  in 
this  country  toward  Cuba.  No  administra- 
tion of  this  Government,  however  strong  in 
the  public  confidence  in  other  respects,  could 
stand  a  day  under  the  odium  of  having  stip- 
ulated with  the  Great  Powers  of  Europe, 
that,  in  no  future  time,  under  no  change  of 
circumstances,  by  no  amicable  arrangement 
with  Spain,  by  no  act  of  lawful  war  (should 
that  calamity  unfortunately  occur),  by  no 
consent  of  the  inhabitants,  should  they,  like 
the  possessions  of  Spain  on  the  American 
continent,  succeed  in  rendering  themselves 
independent;  in  fine,  by  no  overruling  ne- 
cessity of  self-preservation,  should  the  Uni- 
ted States  ever  make  the  acquisition  of 
Cuba." 

After  all  this,  and  much  more  of 
the  same  purport,  a  smile  must  have 
irradiated  the  countenance  of  even 
the  most  impassive  European  diplo- 
matist on  reading  the  concluding 
paragraph  of  Mr.  Everett's  dispatch, 
viz. : 

"  For  these  reasons,  which  the  President 
has  thought  advisable,  considering  the  im- 
portance of  the  subject,  to  direct  me  to  un- 
fold at  some  length,  he  feels  constrained  to 
decline  respectfully  the  invitation  of  France 
and  England  to  become  parties  to  the  pro- 
posed convention.  He  is  persuaded  that 
these  friendly  powers  will  not  attribute  this 
refusal  to  any  insensibility  on  his  part  to 
the  advantages  of  the  utmost  harmony  be- 
tween the  great  maritime  States  on  a  subject 
of  such  importance.  As  little  will  Spain 
draw  any  unfavorable  inference  from  this 
refusal;  the  rather,  as  the  emphatic  dis- 
claimer of  any  designs  against  Cuba  on  the 
part  of  this  Government,  contained  in  the 
present  note,  affords  all  the  assurance  which 
the  President  can  constitutionally,  or  to 
any  useful  purpose,  give,  of  a  practical  con- 
currence with  France  and  England  in  the 
wish  not  to  disturb  the  possession  of  that 
island  by  Spain."  , 

Soon  after  the  passage  of  the  Ne- 
braska bill,  President  Pierce,  through 
a  dispatch  from  Gov.  Marcy  as  Sec- 
retary of  State,17  directed  Messrs. 


James  Buchanan,  John  Y.  Mason, 
and  Pierre  Soule,  our  Embassadors 
at  London,  Paris,  and  Madrid  re- 
spectively, to  convene  in  some  Euro- 
pean city,  there  to  confer  with  regard 
to  the  best  means  of  getting  posses- 
sion of  Cuba.  They  met  according- 
ly at  Ostend,18  and  sat  three  days; 
adjourning  thence  to  Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle,  where  they  held  sweet  council 
together  for  several  days  more,  and 
the  result  of  their  deliberations  was 
transmitted  to  our  Government  in  a 
dispatch  known  as  the  '  Ostend  Mani- 
festo.'   In  that  dispatch,  they  say : 

"  ~We  firmly  believe  that,  in  the  course  of 
human  events,  the  time  has  arrived  when 
the  vital  interests  of  Spain  are  as  seriously 
involved  in  the  sale,  as  those  of  the  United 
States  in  the  purchase,  of  the  island,  and 
that  the  transaction  will  prove  equally  hon- 
orable to  both  nations. 

"  Under  these  circumstances,  we  cannot 
anticipate  a  failure,  unless,  possibly,  through 
the  malign  influence  of  foreign  powers,  who 
possess  no  right  whatever  to  interfere  in  the 
matter. 

"  "We  proceed  to  state  some  of  the  reasons 
which  have  brought  us  to  this  conclusion ; 
and,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  we  shall  spe- 
cify them  under  two  distinct  heads : 

"1.  The  United  States  ought,  if  practica- 
ble, to  purchase  Cuba  with  as  little  delay  as 
possible. 

"2.  The  probability  is  great  that  the 
Government  and  Cortes  of  Spain  will  prove 
willing  to  sell  it ;  because  this  would  essen- 
tially promote  the  highest  and  best  interests 
of  the  Spanish  people. 

"Then,  1.  It  must  be  clear  to  every  re- 
flecting mind  that,  from  the  peculiarity  of 
its  geographical  position,  and  the  considera- 
tions attendant  on  it,  Cuba  is  as  necessary 
to  the  North  American  republic  as  any  of 
its  present  members,  and  that  it  belongs  nat- 
urally to  that  great  family  of  States  of  which 
the  Union  is  the  providential  nursery. 

"From  its  locality,  it  commands  the 
mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  and  the  immense 
and  annually  increasing  trade  which  must 
seek  this  avenue  to  the  ocean. 

"On  the  numerous  navigable  streams, 
measuring  an  aggregate  course  of  some 
thirty  thousand  miles,  which  disembogue 
themselves  through  this  magnificent  river 


17  Dated  Washington,  August  16,  1854. 

18 


18  October  9,  1854. 


274 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  the  increase  of  the 
population  within  the  last  ten  years  amounts 
to  more  than  that  of  the  entire  Union  at  the 
time  Louisiana  was  annexed  to  it. 

"The  natural  and  main  outlet  to  the 
products  of  this  entire  population,  the  high- 
way of  their  direct  water-course  with  the 
Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  States,  can  never  be 
secure,  but  must  ever  be  endangered,  whilst 
Cuba  is  a  dependency  of  a  distant  pc»wer,  in 
whose  possession  it  has  proved  to  be  a 
source  of  constant  annoyance  and  embar- 
rassment to  their  interests. 

"  Indeed,  the  Union  can  never  enjoy  re- 
pose, nor  possess  reliable  security,  as  long 
as  Cuba  is  not  embraced  within  its  bounda- 
ries." 

These  arguments  for  the  necessity 
of  acquiring  Cuba  on  our  part, 
though  not  so  strong  intrinsically  as 
might  be  adduced  to  justify  the  ac- 
quisition of  Great  Britain  by  France, 
are  still  further  amplified;  inter- 
mingled with  demonstrations  that 
Spain  would  be,  pecuniarily,  the 
gainer  by  the  sale,  and  insults  which 
would  seem  offered  on  purpose  to 
render  her  compliance  impossible. 
Witness  these  specimens : 

u  Such  is  her  present  wretched  financial 
condition,  that  her  best  bonds  are  sold  upon 
her  own  Bourse  at  about  one-third  of  their 
par  value;  whilst  another  class,  on  which 
she  pays  no  interest,  have  but  a  nominal 
value,  and  are  quoted  at  about  one-sixth  the 
amount  for  which  they  were  issued.  Be- 
sides, these  latter  are  held  principally  by 
British  creditors,  who  may,  from  day  to  day, 
obtain  the  effective  interposition  of  their 
own  Government  for  the  purpose  of  co- 
ercing payment.  Intimations  to  that  effect 
have  been  already  thrown  out  from  high 
quarters;  and,  unless  some  new  source  of 
revenue  shall  enable  Spain  to  provide  for 
such  exigencies,  it  is  not  improbable  that 
they  may  be  realized. 

"  Extreme  oppression,  it  is  now  universal- 
ly admitted,  justifies  any  people  in  endeavor- 
ing to  relieve  themselves  from  the  yoke  of 
their  oppressors.  The  sufferings  which  the 
corrupt,  arbitrary,  and  unrelenting  local  ad- 
ministration necessarily  entails  upon  the  in- 
habitants of  Cuba,  cannot  fail  to  stimulate 
and  keep  alive  that  spirit  of  resistance  and 
revolution  against  Spain,  which  has  of  late 
years  been  so  often  manifested.  In  this  con- 
dition of  affairs,  it  is  vain  to  expect  that  the 
sympathies  of  the  people  of  the  United 


States  will  not  be  warmly  enlisted  in  favor 
of  their  oppressed  neighbors. 

"  We  know  that  the  President  is  justly 
inflexible  in  his  determination  to  execute 
the  neutrality  laws;  but,  should  the  Cubans 
themselves  rise  in  revolt  against  the  oppres- 
sion which  they  suffer,  no  human  power 
could  prevent  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
and  liberal-minded  men  of  other  countries, 
from  rushing  to  their  assistance.  Besides, 
the  present  is  an  age  of  adventure,  in  which 
restless  and  daring  spirits  abound  in  every 
portion  of  the  world. 

"It  is  not  improbable,  therefore,  that 
Cuba  may  be  wrested  from  Spain  by  a  suc- 
cessful revolution :  and,  in  that  event,  she 
will  lose  both  the  island  and  the  price  which 
we  are  now  willing  to  pay  for  it — a  price  far 
beyond  what  was  ever  paid  by  one  people  to 
another  for  any  province." 

Finally,  Spain  is  frankly  told  by 
our  model  diplomatists  that  we  will 
have  Cuba  at  any  rate ;  that  resist- 
ance on  her  part  will  only  serve  to 
deprive  her  of  the  liberal  bonus  we 
are  prepared  to  pay  for  its  peaceful 
cession.    Here  is  the  language : 

"  But  if  Spain,  dead  to  the  voice  of  her 
own  interest,  and  actuated  by  stubborn 
pride  and  a  false  sense  of  honor,  should  re- 
fuse to  sell  Cuba  to  the  United  States,  then 
the  question  will  arise,  What  ought  to  be 
the  course  of  the  American  Government 
under  such  circumstances  ? 

"  Self-preservation  is  the  first  law  of  na- 
ture, with  States  as  well  as  with  individuals. 
All  nations  have,  at  different  periods,  acted 
upon  this  maxim.  Although  it  has  been 
made  the  pretext  for  committing  flagrant 
injustice,  as  in  the  partition  of  Poland  and 
other  similar  cases  which  history  records, 
yet  the  principle  itself,  though  often  abused, 
has  always  been  recognized.  *  *  *  * 
After  we  shall  have  offered  Spain  a  price 
for  Cuba  far  beyond  its  present  value,  and 
this  shall  have  been  refused,  then  it  will 
be  time  to  consider  the  question,  Does  Cuba, 
in  the  possession  of  Spain,  seriously  endan- 
ger our  internal  'peace  and  the  existence  of 
our  cherished  Union  ? 

"  Should  this  question  be  answered  in  the 
affirmative,  then,  by  every  law,  human  and 
divine,  we  shall  be  justified  in  wresting  it 
from  Spain,  if  we  possess  the  power :  and 
this  upon  the  very  same  principle  that  would 
I  justify  an  individual  in  tearing  down  the 
burning  house  of  his  neighbor  if  there  was 
no  other  means  of  preventing  the  flames 
from  destroying  his  own  home. 

"Under  such  circumstances,  we  ought 


THE  OSTEXD   CIRCULAR  IN  EUROPE. 


275 


neither  to  connt  the  cost  nor  regard  the  odds 
which  Spain  might  enlist  against  us.  We 
forbear  to  enter  into  the  question  whether 
the  present  condition  of  the  island  would 
justify  such  a  measure.  We  should,  how- 
ever, be  recreant  to  our  duty,  be  unworthy 
of  our  gallant  forefathers,  and  commit  base 
treason  against  our  posterity,  should  we 
permit  Cuba  to  be  Africanized  and  become 
a  second  St.  Domingo,  with  all  its  attendant 
horrors  to  the  white  race,  and  suffer  the 
flames  to  extend  to  our  own  neighboring 
shores,  seriously  to  endanger,  or  actually  to 
consume,  the  fair  fabric  of  our  Union. 

"  We  fear  that  the  course  and  current  of 
events  are  rapidly  tending  toward  such  a 
catastrophe.  We,  however,  hope  for  the 
best,  though  we  ought  certainly  to"  be  pre- 
pared for  the  worst." 

"When  this  dispatch  was  made  pub- 
lic in  Europe  through  the  newspapers, 
the  first  sensation  created  by  it  was 
one  of  stubborn  incredulity.  The 
journal  which  contained  it  having  a 
far  higher  reputation  for  enterprise 
than  for  accuracy,  our  minister  at 
one  of  the  minor  courts  did  not  hesi- 
tate at  once  to  assure  the  diplomatic 
circle  that  it  was  a  transparent  and 
unquestionable  hoax ;  and  such  it  was 
quite  commonly  adjudged  until  later 
advices  had  left  no  room  for  doubt. 

The  civilized  world,  unhappily,  was 
not  now  for  the  first  time  to  make  the 
acquaintance  of  the  rule  of  the 
strongest.  The  partition  of  Poland, 
Napoleon's  perfidious  clutch  of  Spain 
and  her  royal  Bourbons,  with  a  por- 
tion of  the  doings  of  the  triumphant 
despots  who  resettled  Europe  by  di- 
viding it  among  themselves  at  the 
Congress  of  Yienna  in  1815,  and  sev- 
eral less  conspicuous  examples,  had 
already  guarded  the  intelligent  classes 
against  the  delusion  that,  in  Chris- 
tendom any  more  than  out  of  it, 
temptations  to  gigantic  robbery  will 
be  uniformly  resisted  even  by  nations 
and  their  rulers — that  rapacity  ever 
needs  any  other  excuse  than  the  prox- 
imity and  defenselessness  of  its  prey. 


But,  though  the  exactions  of  morality 
are  often  disregarded  by  monarchs 
and  cabinets  in  our  day,  the  require- 
ments of  decorum  are  very  rarely  de- 
fied and  derided  by  any  power  north 
of  the  Mediterranean ;  and  the  black- 
est political  crimes  of  the  present  age 
have  usually  been  perpetrated  in  the 
abused  names  of  Order,  of  Legitima- 
cy, and  of  Religion.  That  the  Uni- 
ted States  should  covet  Cuba,  and 
seek  by  any  means  to  acquire  it,  did 
not  severely  shock  Europe's  sense  of 
decency;  that  we  should  openly, 
boldly,  set  forth  such  justifications  of 
our  lust,  clearly  did.  The  coarseness, 
the  effrontery,  and  the  shamelessness 
of  the  Ostend  Manifesto  seemed  to 
carry  the  world  back  to  the  days  of 
Attila  or  Genghis  Khan,  and  to  threat- 
en the  centers  of  civilization  and  re- 
finement, the  trophies  of  art  and  the 
accumulations  of  wealth,  with  a  new 
irruption  of  barbarians  from  the  re- 
mote, forbidding  West.  No  other 
document  that  ever  emanated  from 
our  Government  was  so  well  calcu- 
lated to  deepen  and  diffuse  the  dis- 
trust and  apprehension  wherewith  the 
growth  and  power  of  our  country 
had  already  come  to  be  regarded  by 
the  more  polite,  intelligent,  and  in- 
fluential classes  of  the  Old  World. 

The  doctrines  of  this  Manifesto 
were  in  no  respect  disavowed,  modi- 
fied, or  explained,  by  our  Govern- 
ment. None  of  our  citizens  who 
had  openly,  notoriously  contributed 
to  fit  out  and  man  the  Lopez  expedi- 
tion were  brought  to  justice,  or  ex- 
posed to  any  punishment  whatever. 
While  strenuous  efforts  were  made 
to  procure  the  pardon  and  release  of 
such  Americans  as  had  been  cap- 
tured while  participating  in  that 
ill-fated    adventure,   evidence  was 


276 


THE  AMEBIC 


AN  CONFLICT. 


soon  afforded  that  the  spirit  which 
impelled  to  that  crime  would  find 
aliment,  but  not  satiety,  in  the 
conquest  of  Cuba.  Yery  soon  after 
the  appearance  of  the  Ostend  Circu- 
lar, one  William  Walker,  a  Tennes- 
sean,  recently  resident  in  California, 
left  that  State,  at  the  head  of  a  band 
as  reckless  and  desperate  as  himself, 
for  Nicaragua,  which  he  entered  in 
the  character  of  ally  to  one  of  the 
factions  habitually  disputing  the 
mastery  of  that,  as  well  as  of  most 
other  Spanish  American  countries. 
Though  he  never  evinced  much  mili- 
tary  or  other  capacity,  Walker,  so 
long  as  he  acted  under  color  of  au- 
thority from  the  chiefs  of  the  faction 
he  patronized,  was  generally  success- 
ful against  the  pitiful  rabble  styled 
soldiers  by  whom  his  progress  was 
resisted,  capturing19  at  last  by  surprise 
the  important  city  of  Granada,  which 
was  deemed  the  stronghold  of  the 
adverse  faction,  and  assuming  there- 
on the  rank  of  General.  But  his  very 
successes  proved  the  ruin  of  the  fac- 
tion to  which  he  had  attached  him- 
self, by  exciting  the  natural  jealousy 
and  alarm  of  the  natives  who  mainly 
composed  it ;  and  his  assumption, 
soon  afterward,  of  the  title  of  Presi- 
dent of  Nicaragua,  speedily  followed 
by  a  decree  reestablishing  Slavery  in 
that  country,  exposed  his  purpose 
and  insured  his  downfall.  As  if 
madly  bent  on  ruin,  he  proceeded  to 
confiscate  the  steamboats  and  other 
property  of  the  Nicaragua  Transit 
Company,  thereby  arresting  all 
American  travel  to  and  from  Cali- 
fornia through  that  country,  and  cut- 
ting himself  off  from  all  hope  of  fur- 
ther recruiting  his  forces  from  the 


throngs  of  sanguine  or  of  baffled 
gold-seekers,  who  might  otherwise 
have  been  attracted  to  his  standard. 
Yet  he  maintained  the  unequal  con- 
test for  about  two  years,  succumbing 
at  last  to  a  coalition  of  the  Central 
American  States,  and  surrendering 
his  remnant  of  some  two  hundred 
men  at  Rivas.20  By  the  interposition 
of  Commander  C.  H.  Davis,  of  our 
sloop  of  war  St.  Mary's,  on  the  Pa- 
cific coast,  he  and  sixteen  of  his 
party  were  brought  away  unharmed, 
and  landed  at  Panama,  whence  he 
returned  to  this  country,  and  imme- 
diately commenced  at  New  Orleans 
the  fitting  out  of  a  new  Nicaraguan 
military  expedition.  Here  he  was 
arrested,  and  compelled  to  give  bonds 
in  the  sum  of  two  thousand  dollars 
to  desist  from  unlawful  enterprises; 
notwithstanding  which,  he  very  soon 
left  that  city  on  a  steamboat  freight- 
ed with  armed  men  and  military 
stores,  ostensibly  for  Mobile,  but 
which,  once  at  sea,  headed  for  Nica- 
ragua, landing  him  and  his  followers 
at  Punta  Arenas,  Nov.  25th.  Here 
Commodore  Paulding  of  our  Navy 
compelled  him  to  surrender,21  with 
one  hundred  and  thirty-two  of  his 
followers,  bringing  him  to  New- York 
as  a  prisoner.  President  Buchanan, 
by  Special  Message  to  Congress,22 
condemned  the  Commodore  for  thus 
violating  the  sovereignty  of  a  foreign 
country  !  and  declined  to  hold  Walk- 
er as  a  prisoner.  Being  thus  set  at 
liberty,  the  £  gray-eyed  Man  of  Des- 
tiny' traversed  the  South,  exciting 
the  more  fanatical  Slavery  propagan- 
dists to  aid  him  in  fitting  out  a  third 
expedition,  with  which  he  got  off  from 
Mobile;23  but  was  arrested  near  the 


19  October  13,  1855.    50 May  1,  1857.    21  December  8th.    22  January  7,  1858.     «  October  7th. 


WM.  WALKER  'REGEFERAT 


IN6f'   CENTRAL  AMERICA.  277 


mouths  of  the  Mississippi  for  having 
left  port  without  a  clearance.  Being 
taken  to  New  Orleans,  he  and  his 
associates  were  tried  before  the  Fede- 
ral Court  and  all  acquitted ;  when  he 
immediately  recommenced  his  opera- 
tions, so  that  in  June,  1860,  he  was 
again  afloat,  with  an  expedition 
bound  to  Central  America.  He,  this 
time,  landed  on  the  island  of  Ruatan,24 
and  finally  at  Truxillo,25  which  he 
took  with  little  loss,  thence  issuing  a 
proclamation  to  the  people,  assuring 
them,  in  the  usual  fashion,  that  he 
did  not  come  to  make  war  on  them, 
but  on  their  Government.  Yery 
soon,  the  President  of  Honduras  ap- 
peared,26 at  the  head  of  seven  hun- 
dred men,  while  the  commander  of 
an  English  man-of-war  in  the  harbor 
ordered  Walker  to  decamp.  He 
obeyed,  marching  with  eighty  men 
southward  along  the  coast,  and  was 
soon  captured,27  brought  back  to 
Truxillo,  tried  by  court-martial,  con- 
demned, and  shot.  He  was  small  in 
size,  cold  in  demeanor,  of  light  com- 
plexion, slow  of  speech,  and  unim- 
pressive in  manner,  and  was  often 
accused  by  his  followers  of  utter  reck- 
lessness as  to  their  sufferings  or 
perils.  His  death  put  a  decided 
damper  on  the  spirit  whereof  his  later 
life  was  so  striking  a  manifestation. 

In  the  heyday  of  Walker's  career, 
and  while  it  was  exciting  much  ad- 
miration among  the  more  reckless 
youth  of  our  great  cities,  especially 
at  the  South,  the  Democratic  Nation- 
al Convention,  which  nominated  Mr. 
Buchanan  at  Cincinnati,  unanimous- 
ly adopted  the  following : 28 

"1.  Resolved,  That  there  are  questions 
connected  with  the  foreign  policy  of  this 


country,  which  are  inferior  to  no  domestic 
question  whatever.  The  time  has  come  for 
the  people  of  the  United  States  to  declare 
themselves  in  favor  of  free  seas,  and  'pro- 
gressive free-trade  throughout  the  world, 
and,  by  solemn  manifestations,  to  place 
their  moral  influence  at  the  side  of  their 
successful  example. 

"  2.  Resolved,  That  our  geographical  and 
political  position  with  reference  to  the  other 
States  of  this  continent,  no  less  than  the  in- 
terest of  our  commerce,  and  the  develop- 
ment of  our  growing  power,  requires  that 
we  should  hold  sacred  the  principles  of  the 
Monroe  doctrine. 

"  3.  Resolved,  That  the  great  highway 
which  nature,  as  well  as  the  States  most  im- 
mediately interested  in  its  maintenance,  has 
marked  out  for  free  communication  between 
the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  Oceans,  consti- 
tutes one  of  the  most  important  achieve- 
ments realized  by  the  spirit  of  modern  times, 
in  the  unconquerable  energy  of  our  people; 
and  that  result  would  be  secured  by  a  timely 
and  efficient  exertion  of  the  control  which 
we  have  the  right  to  claim  over  it;  and  no 
power  on  earth  should  be  suffered  to  impede 
or  clog  its  progress  by  any  interference  with 
relations  that  it  may  suit  our  policy  to  es- 
tablish between  our  Government  and  the 
Government  of  the  States  within  whose 
dominions  it  lies  ;  we  can  under  no  circum- 
stances surrender  our  preponderance  in  the 
adjustment  of  all  questions  arising  out  of  it. 

"4.  Resolved,  That,  in  view  of  so  com- 
manding an  interest,  the  people  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  cannot  but  sympathize  with  the 
efforts  which  are  being  made  by  the  people 
of  Central  America  to  regenerate™  that  por- 
tion of  the  continent  which  covers  the  pas- 
sage  across  the  inter-oceanic  isthmus. 

"5.  Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  party 
will  expect  of  the  next  Administration  that 
every  proper  effort  be  made  to  insure  our 
ascendency  in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  to 
maintain  permanent  protection  to  the  great 
outlets  through  which  are  emptied  into  its 
waters  the  products  raised  out  of  the  soil 
and  the  commodities  created  by  the  industry 
of  the  people  of  our  western  valleys  and  of 
the  Union  at  large.1' 

Hon.  Albert  G.  Brown,  Senator 
from  Mississippi,  visited  Mr.  Buchan- 
an at  Lancaster  soon  after  his  nomi- 
nation for  President  in  1856,  as  one 
of  the  Committee  appointed  by  the 
Convention  to  apprise  him  officially 


84 June  25th.  "June  27th. 

26  August  23d.        27  September  3d. 


28  May  22,  1856.  29  Alluding  to  Walker, 

then  militant  in  Central  America. 


278 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


of  the  fact,  and  was,  of  course,  very 
cordially  received.  After  his  return 
to  Washington,  he  wrote 30  to  his  friend 
and  constituent,  Hon.  S.  R.  Adams, 
an  account  of  his  interview,  mainly 
devoted  to  a  report  of  Mr.  Buchan- 
an's sayings  on  that  occasion.  Of 
these,  the  material  portion  is  as  fol- 
lows : 

"  After  thus  speaking  of  Kansas  and  the 
Slavery  issue,  Mr.  Buchanan  passed  to  our 
foreign  policy.  Ho  approved,  in  general 
terms,  of  the  Cincinnati  resolutions  on*  this 
subject,  hut  said  that,  while  enforcing  our 
own  policy,  wo  must  at  all  times  scrupulous- 
ly regard  the  just  rights  and  proper  policy  of 
other  nations.  He  was  not  opposed  to  ter- 
ritorial extension.  All  our  acquisitions  had 
been  fairly  and  honorably  made.  Our  neces- 
sities might  require  us  to  make  other  acqui- 
sitions. He  regarded  the  acquisition  of  Cu- 
ba as  very  desirable  now,  and  it  was  likely 
to  become  a  National  necessity.  Whenever 
we  could  obtain  the  island  on  fair,  honora- 
ble terms,  he  was  for  taking  it.  But,  he 
added,  it  must  be  a  terrible  necessity  that 
would  induce  me  to  sanction  any  movement 
that  would  bring  reproach  upon  us,  or  tar- 
nish the  honor  and  glory  of  our  beloved 
country. 

"  After  the  formal  interview  was  over,  Mr. 
Buchanan  said  playfully,  but  in  the  presence 
of  the  whole  audience,  '  If  I  can  be  instru- 
mental in  settling  the  Slavery  question  upon 
the  terras  I  have  mentioned,  and  then  add 
Cuba  to  the  Union,  I  shall,  if  President,  be 
willing  to  give  up  the  ghost,  and  let  Breck- 
inridge take  the  Government.'  Could  there 
be  a  more  noble  ambition  ?  *  *  * 
In  my  judgment,  he  is  as  worthy  of  South- 
ern confidence  and  Southern  votes  as  ever 
Mr.  Calhoun  was." 31 

The  Republican  National  Conven- 


tion of  1856,  in  the  platform  of  prin- 
ciples framed  and  adopted  by  it,  allu- 
ded to  this  subject  as  follows  : 

"Resolved,  That  the  highwayman's  plea 
that  '  might  makes  right,'  embodied  in  the 
Ostend  Circular,  was  in  every  respect  unwor- 
thy of  American  diplomacy,  and  would  bring 
shame  and  dishonor  on  any  government  or 
people  that  gave  it  their  sanction." 

At  the  last  Democratic  National 
Convention,  which  met  at  Charleston, 
April  23,  1860,  while  discord  reign- 
ed with  regard  to  candidates  and  the 
domestic  planks  of  their  platform, 
there  was  one  topic  whereon  a  perfect 
unanimity  was  demonstrated.  In  the 
brief  platform  of  the  majority  was 
embodied  the  following : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  party  are 
in  favor  of  the  acquisition  of  the  island  of 
Cuba,  on  such  terms  as  shall  be  honorable  to 
ourselves  and  just  to  Spain." 

This  resolve  was  first  reported  to 
the  Convention  by  Mr.  Avery,  of  N. 
C,  from  the  majority  of  the  grand 
Committee,  was  accepted  on  all 
hands,  and  was  unanimously  adopted 
by  the  bolting,  or  Breckinridge,  as 
well  as  by  the  Douglas,  or  majority, 
Convention.  It  thus  forms  about  the 
only  surviving  and  authentic  article 
of  the  Democratic  creed,  and  may 
serve  as  the  nucleus  of  a  grand  "re- 
construction." 


30  June  18,  1856. 

31  Among  the  letters  found  by  the  Union  sol- 
diers at  the  residence  of  Jefferson  Davis,  in 'Mis- 
sissippi, when  in  1863  they  advanced,  under 
Gen.  Grant,  into  the  heart  of  that  State,  was  the 
following  from  a  prominent  Democratic  politician 
of  Pennsylvania: 

"Philadelphia,  March  1,  1850. 
"  Mr.  Jefferson  Davis, — My  Dear  Sir :  Can 
you  tell  me  if  Gen.  Larmon  is  likely  to  remain 
much  longer  in  Nicaragua  ?    I  should  like  to  go 


to  that  country,  and  help  open  it  to  civilization 
and  niggers.  I  could  get  strong  recommendations 
from  the  President's  special  friends  in  Pennsyl- 
vania for  the  place  were  the  mission  vacant,  and, 
I  think,  I  would  prove  a  live  Minister. 

"  I  am  tired  of  being  a  white  slave  at  the  North, 
and  long  for  a  home  in  the  sunny  South. 

"  Please  let  me  hear  from  you  when  you  have 
leisure. 

"  Mrs.  Brodhead  joins  me  in  sending  kind  re- 
membrances to  Mrs.  Davis  and  yourself. 

"  Sincerely  and  gratefully  your  friend, 
"John  Brodhead." 


JOHX  BROWN  AT  HARPER'S  FERRY. 


279 


XX. 

JOHN  BEOWK. 


On  the  17th  of  October,  1859,  this 
country  was  bewildered  and  astound- 
ed, while  the  fifteen  Slave  States 
were  convulsed  with  fear,  rage,  and 
hate,  by  telegraphic  dispatches  from 
Baltimore  and  Washington,  announc- 
ing the  outbreak,  at  Harper's  Ferry, 
of  a  conspiracy  of  Abolitionists  and 
negroes,  having  for  its  object  the  de- 
vastation and  ruin  of  the  South,  and 
the  massacre  of  her  white  inhabitants. 
A  report  that  President  Buchanan 
had  been  proclaimed  Emperor  and 
Autocrat  of  the  North  American 
continent,  and  had  quietly  arrested 
and  imprisoned  all  the  members  of 
Congress  and  Judges  of  the  Supreme 
Court,  by  way  of  strengthening  his 
usurpation,  would  not  have  seemed 
more  essentially  incredible,  nor  have 
aroused  a  more  intense  excitement. 
Here  follow  the  dispatches  which 
gave  the  first  tidings  of  this  auda- 
cious and  amazing  demonstration : 

"insurrection"  at  harper's  eerry! 
"  To  the  Associated  Press : 

u  Baltimore,  Monday,  Oct.  17,  1859. 

"A  dispatch  just  received  here  from 
Frederick,  and  dated  this  morning,  states 
that  an  insurrection  has  broken  out  at 
Harper's  Ferry,  where  an  armed  band  of 
Abolitionists  have  full  possession  of  the 
Government  Arsenal.  The  express  train 
going  east  was  twice  fired  into,  and  one  of 
the  railroad  hands  and  a  negro  killed,  while 
they  were  endeavoring  to  get  the  train 
through  the  town.  The  insurrectionists 
stopped  and  arrested  two  men,  who  had 
come  to  town  with  a  load  of  wheat,  and, 
seizing  their  wagon,  loaded  it  with  rifles, 
and  sent  them  into  Maryland.  The  insur- 
rectionists number  about  250  whites,  and 
are  aided  by  a  gang  of  negroes.  At  last 
accounts,  fighting  was  going  on. 

"The  above  is  given  just  as  it  was  re- 
ceived here.  It  seems  very  improbable,  and 
should  be  received  with  great  caution,  uutil 


affirmed  by  further  advices.  A  later  dis- 
patch, received  at  the  railroad  office,  says 
the  affair  has  been  greatly  exaggerated. 
The  reports  had  their  foundation  in  a  diffi- 
culty at  the  Armory,  with  which  negroes 
had  nothing  to  do. 

"Baltimore,  10  o'clock. 

"  It  is  apprehended  that  the  affair  at  Har- 
per's Ferry  is  more  serious  than  our  citizens 
seem  willing  to  believe.  The  wires  from 
Harper's  Ferry  are  cut,  and  consequently 
we  have  no  telegraphic  communication  with 
Monocacy  Station.  The  southern  train, 
which  was  due  here  at  an  early  hour  this 
morning,  has  not  yet  arrived.  It  is  rumor- 
ed that  there  is  a  stampede  of  negroes  from 
this  State.  There  are  many  other  wild 
rumors,  but  nothing  authentic  as  yet. 

"  Baltimore,  Monday,  Oct.  17—2  p.m. 

"  Another  account,  received  by  train, 
says  the  bridge  across  the  Potomac  was 
filled  with  insurgents,  all  armed.  Every 
light  in  the  town  was  extinguished,  and  the 
hotels  closed.  All  the  streets  were  in  the 
possession  of  the  mob,  and  every  road  and 
lane  leading  thereto  barricaded  and  guard- 
ed. Men  were  seen  in  every  quarter  with 
muskets  and  bayonets,  who  arrested  the 
citizens,  and  impressed  them  into  the  ser- 
vice, including  many  negroes.  This  done, 
the  United  States  Arsenal  and  Government 
Pay-house,  in  which  was  said  to  be  a  large 
amount  of  money,  and  all  other  public 
works,  were  seized  by  the  mob.  Some  were 
of  the  opinion  that  the  object  was  entirely 
plunder,  and  to  rob  the  Government  of  the 
funds  deposited  on  Saturday  at  the  Pay- 
house.  During  the  night,  the  mob  made  a 
demand  on  the  Wager  Hotel  for  provisions, 
and  enforced  the  claim  by  a  body  of  armed 
men.  The  citizens  were  in  a  terrible  state 
of  alarm,  and  the  insurgents  have  threatened 
to  burn  the  town. 

"  The  following  has  just  been  received 
from  Monocacy,  this  side  of  Harper's  Ferry  : 

"  '  The  Mail  Agent  on  the  western-bound 
train  has  returned,  and  reports  that  the 
train  was  unable  to  get  through.  The 
town  is  in  possession  of  the  negroes,  who 
arrest  every  one  they  can  catch  and  im- 
prison. The  train  due  here  at  3  p.  m., 
could  not  get  through,  and  the  Agent  came 
down  on  an  empty  engine.'  " 


Probably  the  more  prevalent  ser^ 


280  THE  AMEBIC 

sation  at  first  excited  by  this  intelli- 
gence was  that  of  blank  incredulity. 
Harper's  Ferry  being  the  seat  of  a 
National  Armory,  at  which  a  large 
number  of  mechanics  and  artisans 
were  usually  employed  by  the  Gov- 
ernment, it  was  supposed  by  many 
that  some  collision  respecting  wages 
or  hours  of  labor  had  occurred  be- 
tween the  officers  and  the  workmen, 
which  had  provoked  a  popular  tu- 
mult, and  perhaps  a  stoppage  of  the 
trains  passing  through  that  village 
on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad ; 
and  that  this,  magnified  by  rumor 
and  alarm,  had  afforded  a  basis  for 
these  monstrous  exaggerations.  Yet, 
as  time  wore  on,  further  advices,  with 
particulars  and  circumstances,  left  no 
room  to  doubt  the  substantial  truth 
of  the  original  report.  An  attempt 
had  actually  been  made  to  excite  a 
slave  insurrection  in  Northern  Vir- 
ginia, and  the  one  man  in  America 
to  whom  such  an  enterprise  would 
not  seem  utter  insanity  and  suicide, 
was  at  the  head  of  it. 


John  Brown  was  sixth  in  descent 
from  Peter  Brown,  a  carpenter  by 
trade,  and  a  Puritan  by  intense  con- 
viction, who  was  one  of  the  glorious 
company  who  came  over  in  the  May- 
flower, and  landed  at  Plymouth  Rock, 
on  that  memorable  22d  of  December, 
1620.  The  fourth  in  descent  from 
Peter  the  pilgrim,  was  John  Brown, 
born  in  1728,  who  was  captain  of 
the  West  Simsbury  (Connecticut) 
train-band,  and  in  that  capacity 
joined  the  Continental  Army  at  New 
York  in  the  Spring  of  1776,  and, 
after  two  months'  service,  fell  a  vic- 
tim to  camp-fever,  dying  in  a  barn  a 
%w  miles  north  of  the  city.  His 

•andson,  John  Brown,  of  Osawato- 


AN  CONFLICT. 

mie,  son  of  Owen  and  Ruth  Brown, 
was  born  in  Torrington,  Conn.,  May 
9,  1800.  On  his  mother's  side,  he 
was  descended  from  Peter  Miles,  an 
emigrant  from  Holland,  who  settled 
at  Bloomfield,  Conn.,  about  1700  ; 
and  his  grandfather  on  this  side, 
Gideon  Mills,  also  served  in  the 
Revolutionary  war,  and  attained  the 
rank  of  lieutenant. 

When  John  was  but  five  years  old, 
his  father  migrated  to  Hudson,  Ohio, 
where  he  died  a  few  years  since,  aged 
eighty-seven.  He  was  engaged,  dur- 
ing the  last  war,  in  furnishing  beef 
cattle  to  our  forces  on  the  northern 
frontier ;  and  his  son,  John,  then 
twelve  to  fourteen  years  of  age,  ac- 
companied him  as  a  cattle-driver,  and, 
in  that  capacity,  witnessed  Hull's  sur- 
render at  Detroit,  in  1812.  He  was 
so  disgusted  with  what  he  saw  of  mil- 
itary life  that  he  utterly  refused,  when 
of  suitable  age,  to  train  or  drill  in 
the  militia,  but  paid  fines  or  evaded 
service  during  his  entire  liability  to 
military  duty.  In  an  autobiograph- 
ical fragment, written  by  him  in  1857, 
for  a  child  who  had  evinced  a  deep 
interest  in  his  Kansas  efforts,  speaking 
of  himself  in  the  third  person,  he  says : 

"During  the  war  with  England,  a  circum- 
stance occurred  that  in  the  end  made  him  a 
most  determined  Abolitionist,  and  led  him  to 
declare,  or  swear,  eternal  war  with  Slavery. 
He  was  staying,  for  a  short  time,  with  a 
very  gentlemanly  landlord,  once  a  United 
States  Marshal,  who  held  a  slave-boy  near 
his  own  age,  active,  intelligent,  and  good- 
feeling,  and  to  whom  John  was  under  con- 
siderable obligation  for  numerous  little  acts 
of  kindness.  The  master  made  a  great  pet 
of  John,  brought  him  to  table  with  his 
first  company  and  friends — called  their  atten- 
tion to  every  little  smart  thing  he  said  or  did, 
and  to  the  fact  of  his  being  more  than  a  hun- 
dred miles  from  home  with  a  drove  of  cattle 
alone  ;  while  the  negro  boy  (who  was  fully, 
if  not  more  than,  his  equal,)  was  badly 
clothed,  poorly  fed  and  lodged  in  cold  weath- 
er, and  beaten  before  his  eyes  with  iron 


THE    EARLIER   LIFE    OF   JOHN  BROWN. 


281 


shovels  or  any  other  thing  that  came  first  to 
hand.  This  brought  John  to  reflect  on  the 
wretched,  hopeless  condition  of  fatherless 
and  motherless  slave  children  ;  for  such  chil- 
dren have  neither  fathers  nor  mothers  to 
protect  and  provide  for  them.  He  some- 
times would  raise  the  question,  Is  God  their 
Father?" 

Young  John  had  very  little  of 
what  is  called  education ;  poverty 
and  hard  work  being  his  principal 
teachers.  At  sixteen  years  of  age, 
he  joined  the  Congregational  Church 
in  Hudson  ;  and  from  fifteen  to  twen- 
ty he  learned  the  trade  of  tanner  and 
currier.  He  returned  to  New  Eng- 
land while  still  a  minor,  and  com- 
menced, at  Plainfield,  Mass.,  a  course 
of  study  with  a  view  to  the  Christian 
ministry ;  but,  being  attacked  with 
inflammation  of  the  eyes,  which  ulti- 
mately became  chronic,  lie  relin- 
quished this  pursuit  and  returned  to 
Ohio,  where  he  married  his  first  wife, 
Dianthe  Lusk,  when  a  little  more 
than  twenty  years  of  age.  By  her, 
he  had  seven  children ;  the  last  of 
whom,  born  in  1832,  was  buried  with 
her  three  days  after  its  birth.  He  next 
year  married  Mary  A.  Day  (who  sur- 
vives him),  by  whom  he  had  thirteen 
children,  of  whom  three  sons  were 
with  him  at  Harper's  Ferry,  two  of 
whom  lost  their  lives  there,  and  the 
third  escaped.  Eight  of  his  children 
were  living  at  the  time  of  his  death. 

Brown  worked  for  himself  as  a 
tanner  and  farmer  five  or  six  years  in 
northern  Ohio,  and,  for  nine  or  ten 
years  thereafter,  in  Crawford  County, 
Pennsylvania,  enjoying  general  re- 
spect as  a  sincere,  earnest,  upright, 
pious  man.  One  who  knew  him  in 
those  days  remembers  that  the  wrong 
of  Slavery  was  a  favorite  topic  with 
him,  and  that,  though  stern  in  man- 
ner, he  was  often  affected  to  tears 
when  depicting  the  unmerited  suffer- 


ings of  slaves.  So  early  as  1839, 
the  idea  of  becoming  himself  a  libe- 
rator of  the  unhappy  race  was  cher- 
ished by  him.  From  1835  to  1846, 
he  lived  once  more  in  northern  Ohio, 
removing  thence  to  Springfield,  Mass., 
where  he  engaged  in  wool-dealing 
under  the  firm  of  Perkins  &  Brown, 
selling  wool  extensively  on  commis- 
sion for  growers  along  the  southern 
shore  of  Lake  Erie,  and  undertaking 
to  dictate  prices  and  a  system  of  gra 
ding  wools  to  the  manufacturers  of 
New  England,  with  whom  he  came 
to  an  open  rupture,  which  induced 
him  at  length  to  ship  two  hundred 
thousand  pounds  of  wool  to  London, 
and  go  thither  to  sell  it.  This  bold 
experiment  proved  a  failure,  wool 
bringing  far  higher  prices  in  this 
country  than  in  any  other.  He  final- 
ly sold  at  a  fearful  loss  and  came 
home  a  bankrupt.  But,  meantime, 
he  had  traveled  considerably  over 
Europe,  and  learned  something  of 
the  ways  of  the  world. 

In  1849,  he  removed  with  his  fam- 
ily to  North  Elba,  Essex  County,  New 
York,  to  some  land  given  him  by  Ger- 
rit  Smith.  He  went  thither  express- 
ly to  counsel  and  benefit  the  negroes 
settled  in  that  vicinity,  on  lands  like- 
wise bestowed  upon  them  by  our  no- 
blest philanthropist.  The  location 
was  a  hard  one,  high  up  among  the 
glens  of  the  Adirondack  Mountains, 
rugged,  cold,  and  bleak.  The  negroes 
generally  became  discouraged,  in  view 
of  the  incessant  toil,  privation,  and 
hardships,  involved  in  hewing  a  farm 
and  a  habitation  out  of  the  primitive 
wilderness,  in  a  secluded,  sterile  re- 
gion, and  gave  over  in  despair  after 
a  brief  trial;  but  John  Brown  and 
his  sons  persevered,  ultimately  mak- 
ing homes  for  themselves,  which, 


282 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


though  not  luxurious  nor  inviting, 
their  families  retain.  In  1851,  the 
father  returned  with  his  family  to 
Akron,  Ohio,  where  he  once  more 
carried  on  the  wool  business  and  man- 
aged the  farm  of  a  friend ;  but,  in  1855, 
on  starting  for  Kansas,  he  moved  his 
family  back  to  their  own  home  at 
North  Elba,  where  they  remain,  with 
his  grave  in  the  midst  of  them. 

In  1854,  his  four  elder  sons — all  by 
his  first  wife,  and  all  living  in  Ohio — 
determined  to  migrate  to  Kansas. 
They  went  thither,  primarily,  to 
make  that  a  Free  State ;  secondly,  to 
make  homes  for  themselves  and  their 
families.  They  went  unarmed,  hav- 
ing a  very  inadequate  idea  of  the 
nature  and  spirit  of  the  fiend  they 
were  defying.  They  settled  in  Ly- 
kins  County,  southern  Kansas,  about 
eight  miles  distant  from  the  present 
village  of  Osawatomie,  and  not  far 
from  the  Missouri  border.  Here  they 
were  soon  so  harassed,  threatened, 
insulted,  and  plundered,  by  gangs  of 
marauding  ruffians  from  Missouri, 
that  they  found  it  impossible  to  re- 
main without  arms,  and  they  wrote  to 
their  father  to  procure  such  as  they 
needed.  He  obtained  them  ;  and,  to 
make  sure  work  of  it,  went  with  them. 
Nearly  all  others  went  to  Kansas  in 
the  hope  of  thereby  improving  their 
worldly  condition,  or,  at  least,  of 
making  homes  there.  John  Brown 
went  there  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
fighting,  if  need  were,  for  Liberty. 
He  left  his  family  behind  him,  for  he 
had  no  intention  of  making  Kansas 
his  home.  He  was  no  politician,  in 
the  current  acceptation  of  the  term, 
having  taken  little  or  no  interest  in 
party  contests  for  many  years.  His 


intimate  follower  and  admiring  biog- 
rapher, Redpath,  says  of  him : 

u  It  has  been  asserted  that  he  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Republican  party.  It  is  false. 
He  despised  the  Republican  party.  It  is  true 
that,  like  every  Abolitionist,  he  was  opposed 
to  the  extension  of  Slavery :  and,  like  the 
majority  of  anti-Slavery  men,  in  favor,  also, 
of  organized  political  action  against  it.  But 
he  was  too  earnest  a  man,  and  too  devout  a 
Christian,  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  only  ac- 
tion against  Slavery  consistent  with  one's 
duty  as  a  citizen,  according  to  the  usual  Re- 
publican interpretation  of  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution. It  teaches  that  we  must  content 
ourselves  with  resisting  the  extension  of 
Slavery.  Where  the  Republicans  said, 
'  Halt!'  John  Brown  shouted,  4  Forward!  to 
the  rescue!'  He  was  an  Abolitionist  of  the 
Bunker  Hill  school.  He  followed  neither 
Garrison  nor  Seward,  Gerrit  Smith  nor 
Wendell  Phillips;  but  the  Golden  Rule  and 
the  Declaration  of  Independence,  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Hebrew  warriors,  and  in  the 
God-applauded  mode  that  they  adopted. 
k  The  Bible  story  of  Gideon,'  records  a  man 
who  betrayed  him,  '  had  manifestly  a  great 
influence  on  his  actions.'  He  believed  in  hu- 
man brotherhood  and  in  the  God  of  Battles ; 
he  admired  Nat  Turner,  the  negro  patriot, 
equally  with  George  Washington,  the  white 
American  deliverer.  He  could  not  see  that 
it  was  heroic  to  fight  against  a  petty  tax  on 
tea,  and  war  seven  long  years  for  a  political 
principle,  yet  wrong  to  restore,  by  force  of 
arms,  to  an  outraged  race,  the  rights  with 
which  their  Maker  had  endowed  them,  but 
of  which  the  South,  for  two  centuries,  had 
robbed  them.  The  old  man  distrusted  the 
Republican  leaders.  He  thought  that  their 
success  in  1860  would  be  a  serious  check  to 
the  cause  he  loved. 1  His  reason  was  that  the 
people  had  confidence  in  these  leaders,  and 
would  believe  that,  by  their  action  in  Con- 
gress, they  would  peacefully  and  speedily 
abolish  Slavery.  That  the  people  would 
be  deceived — that  the  Republicans  would 
become  as  conservative  of  Slavery  as  the 
Democrats  themselves — he  sincerely  and 
prophetically  believed.  Apathy  to  the  wel- 
fare of  the  slave  would  follow ;  and  hence, 
to  avert  this  moral  and  national  calamity, 
he  hurried  on  to  Harper's  Ferry. 

"  He  was  no  politician.  He  despised  that 
class  with  all  the  energy  of  his  earnest  and 
determined  nature.  He  was  too  large  a  man 
to  stand  on  any  party  platform.  He  plants 
ed  his  feet  on  the  Rock  of  Ages — the  Eter- 
nal Truth — and  was  therefore  never  shaken 
in  his  policy  or  principles." 


1  "  'The  Republicans  of  1 858  will  be  the  Dem- 
ocrats of  I860' — a  pithy  prophecy,  found  among 


the  manuscripts  at  Harper's  Ferry — is  a  brief 
and  clear  statement  of  John  Brown's  ideas." 


JOHN   BROWN   IN  KANSAS. 


283 


Of  course,  he  was  not  pleased  with 
what  he  found  and  saw  in  Kansas. 
There  were  too  much  policy,  too 
much  politics,  and  too  general  a  re- 
gard for  personal  safety  and  comfort. 
He  would  have  preferred  a  good  deal 
less  riding  about,  especially  at  night, 
with  more  solid  fighting.  Eedpath, 
who  visited  him  in  his  camp  near 
Prairie  City,  not  long  before  the  bat- 
tle of  Black  Jack,  says : 

"I  shall  not  soon  forget  the  scene  that 
there  opened  to  my  view.  Near  the  edge  of 
the  creek,  a  dozen  horses  were  tied,  all  ready 
saddled  for  a  ride  for  life,  or  a  hunt  after 
Southern  invaders.  A  dozen  rifles  and  sa- 
bres were  stacked  around  the  trees.  In  an 
open  space,  amid  the  shady  and  lofty  woods, 
there  was  a  great  blazing  fire  with  a  pot  on 
it;  a  woman,  bare-headed,  with  an  honest, 
sun-burnt  face,  was  picking  blackberries 
from  the  bushes ;  three  or  four  armed  men 
were  lying  on  red  and  blue  blankets  on  the 
grass ;  and  two  fine-looking  youths  were 
standing,  leaning  on  their  arms,  on  guard, 
near  by.  One  of  them  was  the  youngest  son 
of  Old  Brown,  and  the  other  was  '  Charley,' 
the  brave  Hungarian,  who  was  subsequently 
murdered  at  Osawatomie.  Old  Brown  him- 
self stood  near  the  fire,  with  his  shirt-sleeves 
rolled  up,  and  a  large  piece  of  pork  in  his 
hand.  He  was  cooking  a  pig.  He  was 
poorly  clad,  and  his  toes  protruded  from  his 
boots.  The  old  man  received  me  with  great 
cordiality,  and  the  little  band  gathered  about 
me.  But  it  was  for  a  moment  only  ;  for  the 
Captain  ordered  them  to  renew  their  work. 
He  respectfully  but  firmly  forbade  conversa- 
tion on  the  Pottawatomie ;  and  said  that,  if 
I  desired  any  information  from  the  company 
in  relation  to  their  conduct  or  intentions,  he, 
as  their  Captain,  would  answer  for  them 
whatever  it  was  proper  to  communicate. 

u  In  this  camp,  no  manner  of  profane  lan- 
guage was  permitted ;  no  man  of  immoral 
character  was  allowed  to  stay,  except  as 
a  prisoner  of  war.  He  made  prayers,  in 
which  all  the  company  united,  every  morn- 
ing and  evening;  and  no  food  was  ever 
tasted  by  his  men  until  the  Divine  blessing 
had  been  asked  on  it.  After  every  meal, 
thanks  were  returned  to  the  Bountiful  Giver. 
Often,  I  was  told,  the  old  man  would  retire 
to  the  densest  solitudes  to  wrestle  with  his 
God  in  secret  prayer.  One  of  his  company 
eubsequently  informed  me  that,  after  these 
retirings,  he  would  say  that  the  Lord  had 
directed  him  in  visions  what  to  do  ;  that,  for 
himself,  he  did  not  love  warfare,  but  peace 


— only  acting  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  the 
Lord,  and  fighting  God's  battles  for  His 
children's  sake. 

"  It  was  at  this  time  that  the  old  man 
said  to  me:  'I  would  rather  have  the 
small-pox,  yellow  fever,  and  cholera,  all  to- 
gether in  my  camp,  than  a  man  without 
principles.  It 's  a  mistake,  Sir,'  he  continued, 
'that  our  people  make,  when  they  think 
that  bullies  are  the  best  fighters,  or  that 
they  are  the  men  fit  to  oppose  these  South- 
erners. Give  me  men  of  good  principles — 
God-fearing  men,  men  who  respect  them- 
selves— and,  with  a  dozen  of  them,  I  will 
oppose  any  hundred  such  men  as  these  Bu- 
ford  ruffians.' 

"  I  remained  in  the  camp  about  an  hour. 
Never  before  had  I  met  such  a  band  of  men. 
They  were  not  earnest,  but  earnestness  in- 
carnate. Six  of  them  were  John  Brown's 
sons." 

In  the  August  following,  a  new  in- 
vasion, on  an  extensive  scale,  of  Kan- 
sas, from  the  Missouri  border,  was 
planned  and  executed.  Inflammatory 
proclamations  were  issued,  which  af- 
firmed that  the  pro-Slavery  settlers 
either  had  been  or  were  about  to  be 
all  killed  or  driven  out  of  the  Terri- 
tory by  the  Abolitionists,  and  the 
Missourians  were  exhorted  to  rally 
all  their  forces  for  the  conflict.  Lex- 
ington, Mo.,  was  assigned  as  the 
place,  and  August  20th  as  the  time, 
of  assemblage  for  La  Fayette  County, 
and  ~New  Santa  Fe,  Jackson  County, 
as  the  general  rendezvous.  "  Bring 
your  guns,  your  horses,  and  your 
clothing,  all  ready  to  go  on  to  Kan- 
sas :  our  motto  will  be  this  time,  6  No 
Quarter !'  Let  no  one  stay  away !"  A 
similar  appeal  was  issued  from  West- 
port,  signed  by  Atchison,  Stringfel- 
low,  and  others.  A  force  of  two 
thousand  men  was,  by  virtue  of  these 
appeals,  collected  at  the  petty  village 
of  Santa  Fe,  directly  on  the  border  ; 
but  soon  divided  into  two  expeditions, 
one  of  which,  led  by  Senator  Atchi- 
son, was  confronted  at  Bull's  Creek 
by  not  more  than  half  its  number 


284 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


under  Gen.  J.  H.  Lane,  and  turned 
back  without  a  fight — first  halting^ 
and  refusing  to  advance  against  the 
determined  front  of  the  Free-State 
men,  and  finally  disappearing  in  the 
course  of  the  ensuing  night.  The 
other  and  smaller  party,  led  by  Gen. 
Reid,  consisted  of  four  to  five  hun- 
dred men,  well  armed  with  United 
States  cannon,  muskets,  bayonets,  and 
revolvers,  and  liberally  supplied  with 
ammunition.  They  pursued  a  more 
southerly  course,  and,  at  daylight  on 
the  morning  of  August  30th,  ap- 
proached the  little  village  of  Osawa- 
tomie,  which  was  defended  by  barely 
thirty  Free-State  men  ;  but  their  lead- 
er was  old  John  Brown.  His  son 
Frederick  was  shot  dead,  about  a 
mile  and  a  half  from  the  village,  by 
the  Rev.  Martin  White,  who  led  the 
pro-Slavery  advance  or  scouting  party, 
before  young  Brown  was  aware  of 
their  hostile  character.  Two  other 
Free-State  men  were  likewise  sur- 
prised and  killed  early  in  the  morn- 
ing. 

John  Brown,  with  his  thirty  com- 
patriots, took  position  in  great  haste 
in  the  timber  on  the  southern  bank 
of  the  little  river  Osage,  here  known 
as  the  Marais-des-Cygnes,  a  little  to 
the  northwest  of  the  village,  and  here 
fought  the  advance  of  the  foe  as  they 
approached,  until  thirty-one  or  two  of 
them  were  killed  and  from  forty  to 
fifty  wounded.    The  Free-State  men, 
fighting  generally  under  cover  against 
an  undisciplined  and  badly  managed 
force,  lost  but  five  or  six  in  all ;  but 
the  disproportion  was  too  great,  and, 
their  ammunition  becoming  exhaust- 
ed, they  were  forced  to  retreat,  leav- 
ing Osawatomie  to  be  sacked  and 
burned  again.  Brown  himself  contin- 
ued steadily  firing,  as  well  as  direct- 


ing his  men,  throughout  the  conflict, 
amid  an  incessant  shower  of  grape- 
shot  and  bullets.  Not  until  he  saw 
the  whites  of  the  enemy's  eyes  did  he 
give  the  order  to  his  little  band  to 
retreat.  The  Ruffians  killed  the  only 
wounded  prisoner  whom  they  took, 
as  also  a  Mr.  Williams,  whom  they 
found  in  Osawatomie,  and  who  had 
taken  no  part  in  the  conflict.  The 
Missourians  returned  to  their  homes 
in  triumph,  boasting  that  they  had 
killed  old  Brown  and  dispersed  his 
band ;  but  their  wagon-loads  of  dead 
and  wounded  created  a  salutary  awe, 
which  was  very  efficient  in  prevent- 
ing future  invasions,  or  rendering 
them  comparatively  infrequent. 

The  Rev.  Martin  White,  for  his 
services  in  this  expedition,  was  chosen 
a  member  of  the  next  Lecompton 
(pro-Slavery)  Legislature,  which  he 
attended ;  and,  in  the  course  of  its 
deliberations,  he  entertained  his  fel- 
low-members with  a  graphic  and  hu- 
morous account  of  his  killing  of 
Frederick  Brown.  When  the  session 
was  finished,  he  started  for  home,  but 
never  reached  it.  His  body  was 
found  cold  and  stiff  on  the  prairie, 
with  a  rifle-ball  through  his  vitals. 

Six  weeks  after  the  Osawatomie 
fight,  Capt.  Brown  was  in  Lawrence, 
stopping  over  Sunday  on  his  way 
home  from  Topeka,  when  the  start- 
ling announcement  was  made  that 
2,800  Missourians,  under  Atchison 
and  Reid,  were  advancing  upon  that 
town.  Not  more  than  two  hundred 
men  in  all  could  be  rallied  for  its  de- 
fense. Brown  was  unanimously  cho- 
sen their  leader.  He  made  a  speech 
from  a  dry-goods  box  in  Main-street, 
opposite  the  post-office,  substantially 
as  follows : 

"  Gentlemen,  it  is  said  there  are  twenty- 


FINAL  TROUBLES  IN 


SOUTHERN  KANSAS. 


285 


five  hundred  Missourians  down  at  Franklin, 
and  that  they  will  be  here  in  two  hours. 
You  can  see  for  yourselves  the  smoke  they 
are  making  by  setting  fire  to  the  houses  in 
that  town.  Now  is  probably  the  last  op- 
portunity you  will  have  of  seeing  a  fight ;  so 
that  you  had  better  do  your  best.  If  they 
should  come  up  and  attack  us,  don't  yell  and 
make  a  great  noise,  but  remain  perfectly  si- 
lent and  still.  Wait  till  they  get  within 
twenty-five  yards  of  you ;  get  a  good  object ; 
be  sure  you  see  the  hind-sight  of  your  gun : 
then  fire.  A  great  deal  of  powder  and  lead, 
and  very  precious  time,  are  wasted  by  shoot- 
ing too  high.  You  had  better  aim  at  their 
legs  than  at  their  heads.  In  either  case,  be 
sure  of  the  hind-sights  of  your  guns.  It  is 
from  this  reason  that  I  myself  have  so  many 
times  escaped;  for,  if  all  the  bullets  which 
have  been  aimed  at  me  had  hit  me,  I  should 
have  been  as  full  of  holes  as  a  riddle." 

He  proceeded  to  post  his  men  so 
admirably  as  to  conceal  entirely  their 
paucity  of  numbers,  taking  advantage 
of  a  gentle  ridge  running  east  and 
west,  at  some  distance  south  of  the 
town.  The  hostile  forces  remained 
through  the  night  about  half  a  mile 
from  each  other,  with  a  corn-field  be- 
tween, each  man  covered  by  the 
grass  and  the  inequalities  of  the 
ground,  their  positions  only  revealed 
by  the  flashes  and  reports  of  their 
guns.  When  the  sun  rose  next  morn- 
ing, the  Missourians  had  decamped. 

Capt.  Brown  left  soon  after  for  the 
East  by  the  circuitous  land  route 
through  Nebraska  and  Iowa ;  that 
through  Missouri  being  closed  against 
Free-State  men.  He  took  a  fugitive 
slave  in  his  wagon,  and  saw  him  safe- 
ly on  his  way  to  freedom.  He  made 
two  or  three  visits  to  the  East  in  quest 
of  aid  and  of  funds,  returning  for  the 
last  time  to  Southern  Kansas  in  the 
Autumn  of  1858.  Peace  had  finally 
been  secured  in  all  that  part  of  the 
Territory  lying  north  of  the  Kansas 
river,  by  the  greatly  increased  num- 

•Deo.  15,  1858. 


bers  and  immense  preponderance  of 
the  Free-State  settlers,  rendering  raids 
from  Missouri,  whether  to  carry  elec- 
tions or  devastate  settlements,  too 
perilous  to  be  lightly  undertaken. 
When  the  Missourians  still  rallied,  in 
obedience  to  habit,  at  Kansas  elec- 
tions, they  did  so  at  Oxford,  Santa 
Fe,  and  other  polls  held  just  along 
the  border,  where  they  could  sudden- 
ly concentrate  force  enough  to  make 
the  operation  a  tolerably  safe  one. 
But  Southern  Kansas  was  still  very 
thinly  settled,  in  part  by  Missourians ; 
while  Fort  Scott,  a  military  post  and 
land-office  in  the  heart  of  that  section, 
afforded  a  nucleus  and  a  rallying- 
point  for  pro-Slavery  terrorism.  The 
Missourians,  recognizing  and  acting 
under  the  Territorial  Legislature  and 
local  officers  created  by  the  Border 
Ruffian  irruptions  and  fraudulent  elec- 
tions, claimed  to  be  the  party  of  Law 
and  Order,  and  often,  if  not  usually, 
committed  their  outrages  under  the 
lead  of  a  marshal  or  a  sheriff.  The 
Free-State    men,   repudiating  and 
scouting  those  elections  and  their 
fruits,  were  regarded  and  treated,  not 
only  by  the  pro-  Slavery  party  on  ei- 
ther side  of  the  border,  but  by  the 
Federal  Administration  and  its  in- 
struments in  Kansas,  as  outlaws  and 
criminals.    At  length,  Fort  Scott  it- 
self was  captured2  by  Montgomery,3 
one  of  the  boldest  of  the  Free- State 
leaders,  who,  with  150  men,  entered 
it  by  night,  made  temporary  prison- 
ers of  its  dignitaries,  and  liberated  a 
Free-State  man  imprisoned  there. 
Montgomery  soon  after  surrendered 
himself  to  the  Federal  Governor  of 
the  Territory,  when  a  treaty  or  un- 
derstanding was  had  between  them, 


Since,  Colonel  of  the  First  South  Carolina  (Colored)  Volunteers. 


286  THE  AMERICA 

tinder  which  the  region  gradually 
settled  into  comparative  peace. 

But,  while  the  ferment  was  at  its 
hight,  and  forces  were  gathering  on 
both  sides  for  the  conflict,  a  slave 
named  Jim  came  secretly  across  the 
border  to  Capt.  Brown's  cabin,  and 
told  him  that  himself  and  his  family 
had  been  sold,  and  were  to  be  sent 
off  to  Texas  next  day.  Brown,  with 
twenty  men,  divided  into  two  par- 
ties, crossed  the  border  in  the  night, 
liberated  Jim  and  his  family,  and, 
proceeding  to  the  house  of  another 
slaveholder,  gave  deliverance  to  live 
more  slaves.  The  other  party,  under 
Kagi,  called  at  several  houses  in 
search  of  slaves,  but  found  none  until 
they  reached  the  residence  of  David 
Cruse,  who,  learning  their  object, 
seized  his  rifle  and  raised  it  to  fire, 
but  was  instantly  shot  dead.  He 
had  but  one  slave,  who  accompanied 
his  liberators  on  their  retreat.  One 
of  the  captured  slaveholders  was  car- 
ried several  miles  into  the  Territory 
to  prevent  his  raising  a  hue-and-cry 
for  rescue. 

A  furious  excitement  throughout 
Western  Missouri  inevitably  follow- 
ed. The  Governor  offered  a  reward 
of  three  thousand  dollars  for  the 
arrest  of  Brown,  on  his  part ;  to 
which  President  Buchanan  added 
two  hundred  and  fifty  dollars.  It 
was  reported  that  the  slave  popula- 
tion of  the  two  adjacent  Missouri 
counties  was  diminished  from  five 
hundred  to  fifty  within  a  few  weeks, 
mainly  by  removal  for  sale.  The 
more  moderate  Free-State  men  earn- 
estly disavowed  all  sympathy  with 
Brown's  doings  over  the  border,  or 
any  acts  of  violence  by  Free-State 

4  They  probably  were  already  aware,  though 
Brown  was  not,  that  a  party  of  mounted  men 


N  CONFLICT. 

men  on  their  adversaries,  not  com- 
mitted in  necessary  self-defense. 
Brown  soon  learned  that  he  must 
leave  Kansas,  or  remain  there  de- 
nounced and  condemned  by  those 
who  had  hitherto  been  his  friends. 
He  resolved  to  leave,  and  started 
early  in  January,  1859,  passing 
through  Lawrence  on  his  northward 
route.  He  had  four  white  compan- 
ions, three  of  whom  afterward  fought 
under  him  at  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
three  negroes,  beside  women  and 
children.  He  was  pursued  by  thirty 
pro-Slavery  men  from  Lecompton  so 
sharply  that  he  was  compelled  to 
halt  and  prepare  for  a  defense.  He 
took  possession  of  two  deserted  log- 
cabins  in  the  wilderness,  which  his 
pursuers  surrounded,  at  a  respectful 
distance,  and  sent  to  Atchison  and 
Lecompton  for  reinforcements.  From 
Atchison,  twelve  men  arrived,  mak- 
ing their  force  forty-two  to  his  eight. 
As  they  were  preparing  to  attack, 
Brown  and  his  seven  companions 
suddenly  issued  from  the  wood,  in 
order  of  battle,  when  the  valorous 
posse  turned  and  fled.4  Not  a  shot 
was  fired,  as  they,  putting  spurs  to 
their  horses,  galloped  headlong  across 
the  prairie,  and  were  soon  lost  to  the 
view.  Only  four  men  stood  their 
ground,  and  these  were  made  pris- 
oners forthwith.  Brown  ordered 
them  to  dismount,  and  give  their 
horses  to  his  negroes.  This  command 
occasioned — not  to  say  provoked — 
profane  language  on  their  part ; 
whereupon  he  commanded  silence, 
saying  he  would  permit  no  blas- 
phemy in  his  presence.  At  this,  they 
only  swore  the  louder  and  the  harder. 
" Kneel!"  exclaimed  the  stern  Puri- 

from  Topeka  were  hastening  to  his  rescue,  and 
were  then  within  a  short  distance 


JOHN  BROWN'S  PROVISIONAL  CONSTITUTION.  287 


tan,  suddenly  presenting  his  pistol. 
There  was  no  alternative  but  a 
deadly  one,  and  they  all  knelt. 
"  Now,  pray !"  It  was  probably  their 
first  attempt  in  that  line  for  many 
years,  and  their  success  could  hardly 
have  been  brilliant ;  but  he  kept 
them  at  it  until  they  had  at  least 
manifested  an  obedient  and  docile 
spirit.  They  never  swore  again  in 
his  presence,  though  he  held  them 
prisoners  for  five  days,  compelling 
them,  each  and  all,  to  pray  night  and 
morning.  These  four  were  from 
Atchison ;  and,  being  finally  liberat- 
ed, returned  to  that  still  pro-Slavery 
city,  where  one  of  them  was  green 
enough  to  tell  the  story  of  their  cap- 
ture, and  their  discipline  under  old 
John  Brown.  The  laugh  was  so 
general  and  so  hearty  that  they  soon 
left,  never  to  return. 

Brown  was  joined,  soon  after  this 
"  Battle  of  the  Spurs,"  by  Kagi,  with 
forty  mounted  men  from  Topeka,  of 
whom  seventeen  escorted  him  safely 
to  Nebraska  City.  He  there  crossed 
the  Mississippi  into  Iowa,  and  travel- 
ed slowly  through  that  State,  Illi- 
nois, and  Michigan,  to  Detroit,  where 
he  arrived  on  the  12th  of  March, 
crossing  immediately  into  Canada, 
where  his  twelve  blacks — one  of  them 
born  since  he  left  Missouri — were 
legally,  as  well  as  practically,  free. 
All  of  them  were  industrious,  pros- 
perous, and  happy,  when  last  heard 
from,  many  months  thereafter. 

A  secret  convention,  called  by 
Brown,  and  attended  only  by  such 
whites  and  blacks  as  he  believed  in 
thorough  sympathy  with  his  views, 
had  assembled  in  a  negro  church  at 
Chatham,  Canada  West,  May  8, 
1858;  at  which  Convention  a  "Pro- 
visional Constitution  and  Ordinances 


for  the  People  of  the  United  States" 
had  been  adopted.  It  was,  of  course, 
drafted  by  Brown,  and  was  essen- 
tially an  embodiment  of  his  political 
views.  The  nature  of  this  Constitu- 
tion is  sufficiently  exhibited  in  the 
following  extracts : 

"Pkeamble. —  Whereas,  Slavery,  through- 
out its  entire  existence  in  the  United  States, 
is  none  other  than  the  most  barbarous,  un- 
provoked, and  unjustifiable  war  of  one  por- 
tion of  its  citizens  against  another  portion, 
the  only  conditions  of  which  are  perpetual 
imprisonment  and  hopeless  servitude,  or  ab- 
solute extermination,  in  utter  disregard  and 
violation  of  those  eternal  and  self-evident 
truths  set  forth  in  our  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence : 

u  Therefore,  We,  the  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  and  the  oppressed  people,  who,  by  a 
recent  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,  are 
declared  to  have  no  rights  which  the  white 
man  is  bound  to  respect,  together  with  all 
the  other  people  degraded  by  the  laws 
thereof,  do,  for  the  time  being,  ordain  and 
establish  for  ourselves  the  following  Provis- 
ional Constitution  and  ordinances,  the  better 
to  protect  our  people,  property,  lives,  and 
liberties,  and  to  govern  our  actions. 

"  Article  I.  Qualifications  of  Member- 
ship.— All  persons  of  mature  age,  whether 
proscribed,  oppressed,  and  enslaved  citizens, 
or  of  proscribed  and  oppressed  races  of  the 
United  States,  who  shall  agree  to  sustain 
and  enforce  the  Provisional  Constitution 
and  ordinances  of  organization,  together 
with  all  minor  children  of  such  persons, 
shall  be  held  to  be  fully  entitled  to  protec- 
tion under  the  same." 

"  Art.  XXVIII.  Property. — All  captured 
or  confiscated  property,  and  all  property 
the  product  of  the  labor  of  those  belonging 
to'  this  organization,  and  of  their  families, 
shall  be  held  as  the  property  of  the  whole 
equally,  without  distinction,  and  may  be 
used  for  the  common  benefit,  or  disposed  of 
for  the  same  object.  And  any  person,  officer 
or  otherwise,  who  shall  improperly  retain, 
secrete,  use,  or  needlessly  destroy,  such 
property,  or  any  property  found,  captured, 
or  confiscated,  belonging  to  the  enemy,  or 
shall  willfully  neglect  to  render  a  full  and 
fair  statement  of  such  property  by  him  so 
taken  or  held,  shall  be  guilty  of  a  misde- 
meanor, and,  on  conviction,  shall  be  pun- 
ished accordingly. 

"Aet.  XXIX.  Safety  or  Intelligence 
Fund. — All  money,  plate,  watches,  or  jewel- 
ry, captured  by  honorable  warfare,  found, 
taken,  or  confiscated,  belonging  to  the 
enemy,  shall  be  held  sacred,  to  constitute  a 


288 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


liberal  safety  or  intelligence  fund ;  and  any 
person  who  shall  improperly  retain,  dispose 
of,  hide,  use,  or  destroy,  such  money  or 
other  articles  above  named,  contrary  to  the 
provisions  and  spirit  of  this  article,  shall  be 
deemed  guilty  of  theft,  and,  on  conviction 
thereof,  shall  be  punished  accordingly.  The 
Treasurer  shall  furnish  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  at  all  times  with  a  full  statement  of 
the  condition  of  such  fund,  and  its  nature." 

"Art.  XXXIII.  Volunteers. — All  per- 
sons who  may  come  forward,  and  shall  vol- 
untarily deliver  up  slaves,  and  have  their 
names  registered  on  the  books  of  this  organ- 
ization, shall,  so  long  as  they  continue  at 
peace,  be  entitled  to  the  fullest  protection 
in  person  and  property,  though  not  con- 
nected with  this  organization,  and  shall  be 
treated  as  friends,  and  not  merely  as  persons 
neutral. 

"  Art.  XXXIV.  Neutrals. — The  persons 
and  property  of  all  non-slaveholders  who 
shall  remain  absolutely  neutral  shall  be  re- 
spected so  far  as  circumstances  can  allow  of 
it,  but  they  shall  not  be  entitled  to  any 
active  protection. 

"  Art.  XXXV.  No  Needless  Waste.— The 
needless  waste  or  destruction  of  any  useful 
property  or  article  by  fire,  throwing  open  of 
fences,  fields,  buildings,  or  needless  killing 
of  animals,  or  injury  of  either,  shall  not  be 
tolerated  at  any  time  or  place,  but  shall  be 
promptly  and  peremptorily  punished. 

"Art.  XXXVI.  Property  Confiscated. — 
The  entire  personal  and  real  property  of  all 
persons  known  to  be  acting,  either  directly 
or  indirectly,  with  or  for  the  enemy,  or 
found  in  arms  with  them,  or  found  willfully 
holding  slaves,  shall  be  confiscated  and 
taken  whenever  and  wherever  it  may  be 
found,  in  either  Free  or  Slave  States." 

"  Art.  XLVI.  These  Articles  not  for  the 
Overthrow  of  Government. — The  foregoing 
articles  shall  not  be  construed  so  as  in  any 
way  to  encourage  the  overthrow  of  any 
State  Government,  or  of  the  General  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States,  and  look  to 
no  dissolution  of  the  Union,  but  simply  to 
amendment  and  repeal ;  and  our  flag  shall  be 
the  same  that  our  fathers  fought  under  in 
the  Eevolution." 

Under  this  Constitution,  the  offices 
of  President  and  Commander-in- 
Chief  were  to  be  separate,  and  in  all 
cases  to  be  held  by  different  persons. 
John  Brown  was  chosen  Commander- 
in-Chief  ;  J.  H.  Kagi,  Secretary  of 
War  ;  Owen  Brown  (son  of  John), 
Treasurer ;  Eichard  Kealf,  Secretary 
of  State. 


Brown  returned  to  the  States  soon 
after  his  triumphal  entry  into  Canada 
as  a  liberator,  and  was  at  Cleveland 
from  the  20th  to  the  30th  of  March. 
He  entered  his  name  on  the  hotel' 
book,  as  "  John  Brown,  of  Kansas," 
advertised  two  horses  for  sale  at  auc- 
tion ;  and,  at  the  time  of  the  sale, 
stood  in  front  of  the  auctioneer's 
stand,  notifying  all  bidders  that  the 
title  might  be  considered  defective, 
since  he  had  taken  the  horses  with 
the  slaves  whom  he  liberated  in 
Western  Missouri,  finding  it  neces- 
sary to  his  success  that  the  slaves 
should  have  horses,  and  that  the 
masters  should  not.  "But,"  he 
added,  when  telling  the  story  after- 
ward, "  they  brought  a  very  excellent 
price." 

Early  in  April  following,  he  was  in 
Ashtabula  County,  Ohio,  sick  of  the 
ague.  He  visited  his  family  in 
Essex  County,  New  York,  toward 
the  end  of  that  month.  In  May,  he 
was  in  New  York  City,  Kochester, 
and  Boston,  where  he  learned  to 
manufacture  crackers.  On  the  3d 
of  June,  he  was  at  Collinsville,  Conn., 
where  he  closed  a  contract  for  a 
thousand  pikes,  that  he  had  ordered 
some  time  before. 

He  was  soon  afterward  again  in 
Northern  Ohio,  and  in  Western 
Pennsylvania,  proceeding  by  Pitts- 
burg and  Bedford  to  Chambersburg, 
where  he  remained  several  days.  He 
was  in  Hagerstown,Md.,  on  the  30th, 
where  he  registered  his  name  as 
"  Smith,  and  two  sons,  from  Western 
New  York."  He  told  his  landlord 
that  they  had  been  farming  in  West- 
ern New  York,  but  had  been  discou- 
raged by  losing  two  or  three  years' 
crops  by  frost,  and  they  were  now 
looking  for  a  milder  climate,  in  a  lo- 


BROWN  PREPAR 

cation  adapted  to  wool-growing,  etc. 
After  looking  about  Harper's  Ferry 
for  several  days,  they  found,  five  or 
six  miles  from  that  village,  a  large 
farm,  with  three  unoccupied  houses, 
the  owner,  Dr.  Booth  Kennedy,  hav- 
ing died  the  last  Spring.  These 
houses  they  rented  for  a  trifle  until 
the  next  March,  paying  the  rent  in 
advance,  purchasing  for  cash  a  lot  of 
hogs  from  the  family,  and  agreeing 
to  take  care  of  the  stock  on  the  farm 
until  it  could  be  sold,  which  they 
faithfully  did.  After  they  had  lived 
there  a  few  weeks,  attracting  no  ob- 
servation, others  joined  them  from 
time  to  time,  including  two  of 
Brown's  young  daughters ;  and  one 
would  go  and  another  come,  without 
exciting  any  particular  remark. 
They  paid  cash  for  everything,  were 
sociable  and  friendly  with  their  neigh- 
bors, and  seemed  to  pass  their  time 
mainly  hunting  in  the  mountains ; 
though  it  was  afterward  remembered 
that  they  never  brought  home  any 
game.  On  one  occasion,  a  neighbor 
remarked  to  the  elder  Mr.  Smith 
(as  old  Brown  was  called),  that  he 
had  observed  twigs  and  branches 
bent  down  in  a  peculiar  manner ; 
which  Smith  explained  by  stating 
that  it  was  the  habit  of  Indians,  in 
traveling  through  a  strange  country, 
to  mark  their  path  thus,  so  as  to  be 
able  to  find  their  way  back.  He  had 
no  doubt,  he  said,  that  Indians  passed 
over  these  mountains,  unknown  to 
the  inhabitants. 

Meantime,  the  greater  number  of 
the  men  kept  out  of  sight  during  the 
day,  so-  as  not  to  attract  attention, 
while  their  arms,  munitions,  etc., 

*  A  certain  "  Col."  Hugh  Forbes,  an  English 
adventurer,  and  general  dabbler  in  civil  discord, 
who  had  been  with  Brown  in  Iowa,  if  not  in 
19 


ING   TO    STRIKE.  289 

were  being  gradually  brought  from 
Chambersburg,  in  well-secured  boxes. 
No  meal  was  eaten  on  the  farm, 
while  old  Brown  was  there,  until  a 
blessing  had  been  asked  upon  it ;  and 
his  Bible  was  in  daily  requisition. 

The  night  of  the  24th  of  October 
was  originally  fixed  upon  by  Brown 
for  the  first  blow  against  Slavery  in 
Virginia,  by  the  capture  of  the  Fede- 
ral Arsenal  at  Harper's  Ferry ;  and 
his  biographer,  Redpath,  alleges  that 
many  were  on  their  way  to  be  with 
him  on  that  occasion,  when  they  were 
paralyzed  by  the  intelligence  that  the 
blow  had  already  been  struck,  and 
had  failed.  The  reason  given  for 
this,  by  one5  who  was  in  his  confi- 
dence, is,  that  Brown,  who  had  been 
absent  on  a  secret  journey  to  the 
ISTorth,  suspected  that  one  of  his  party 
was  a  traitor,  and  that  he  must  strike 
prematurely,  or  not  at  all.  But  the 
women  who  had  been  with  them  at 
the  Kennedy  farm — the  wives  or 
daughters  of  one  or  another  of  the 
party — had  already  been  quietly  sent 
away ;  and  the  singular  complexion 
of  their  household  had  undoubtedly 
begun  to  excite  curiosity,  if  not 
alarm,  among  their  neighbors.  On 
Saturday,  the  15th,  a  council  was 
held,  and  a  plan  of  operations  dis- 
cussed. On  Sunday  evening,  another 
council  was  held,  and  the  programme 
of  the  chief  unanimously  approved. 
He  closed  it  with  these  words  : 

"  And  now,  gentlemen,  let  me  press  this 
one  thing  on  jour  minds.  You  all  know 
how  dear  life  is  to  you,  and  how  dear  your 
lives  are  to  your  friends;  and,  in  remember- 
ing that,  consider  that  the  lives  of  others 
are  as  dear  to  them  as  yours  are  to  you. 
Do  not,  therefore,  take  the  life  of  any  one  if 
you  can  possibly  avoid  it ;.  but,  if  it  is  neces- 

Kansas,  afterward  figured  as  a  revealer  of  his 
secrets,  or  what  were  alleged  to  be  such.  He  had 
been  disappointed  in  his  pecuniary  expectations. 


290 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


sary  to  take  life  in  order  to  save  your  own, 
then  make  sure  work  of  it." 

Harper's  Ferry  was  then  a  village 
of  some  five  thousand  inhabitants, 
lying  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the 
Potomac,  and  on  either  side  of  its 
principal  tributary,  the  Shenandoah, 
which  here  enters  it  from  the  South. 
Its  site  is  a  mere  nest  or  cup  among 
high,  steep  mountains;  the  passage 
of  the  united  rivers  through  the  Blue 
Ridge  at  this  point  having  been  pro- 
nounced by  Jefferson  a  spectacle 
which  one  might  well  cross  the  At- 
lantic to  witness  and  enjoy.  Here 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad 
crosses  the  Potomac;  and  the  rich 
valley  of  the  Shenandoah  is  traversed, 
for  a  considerable  distance  hence,  by 
the  Winchester  and  Harper's  Ferry 
Railroad.  Washington  is  fifty-seven 
miles  distant  by  turnpike ;  Baltimore 
eighty  miles  by  railroad.  Modest  as 
the  village  then  was,  space  had  been 
with  difficulty  found  for  its  habita- 
tions, some  of  which  were  perched 
upon  ground  four  hundred  feet  above 
the  surface  of  the  streams.  One  of 
its  very  few  streets  was  entirely  occu- 
pied by  the  work-shops  and  offices 
of  the  National  Armory,  and  had 
an  iron  railing  across  its  entrance. 
In  the  old  Arsenal  building,  there 
were  usually  stored  from  100,000  to 
200,000  stand  of  arms.  The  knowl- 
edge of  this  had  doubtless  determined 
the  point  at  which  the  first  blow  of 
the  liberators  was  to  be  struck. 

The  forces  with  which  Brown  made 
his  attack  consisted  of  seventeen  white 
and  five  colored  men,  though  it  is  said 
that  others  who  escaped  assisted  out- 
side, by  cutting  the  telegraph  wires 
and  tearing  up  the  railroad  track. 
The  entrance  of  this  petty  army  into 
Harper's  Ferry  on  Sunday  evening, 


October  17th,  seems  to  have  been  ef- 
fected without  creating  alarm.  They 
first  rapidly  extinguished  the  lights 
of  the  town  ;  then  took  possession  of 
the  Armory  buildings,  which  were 
only  guarded  by  three  watchmen, 
whom,  without  meeting  resistance  or 
exciting  alarm,  they  seized  and  lucked 
up  in  the  guard-house.  It  is  probable 
that  they  were  aided,  or,  at  least, 
guided,  by  friendly  negroes  belong- 
ing in  the  village.  At  half-past  ten, 
the  watchman  at  the  Potomac  bridge 
was  seized  and  secured.  At  mid- 
night, his  successor,  arriving,  was 
hailed  by  Brown's  sentinels,  but  ran, 
one  shot  being  fired  at  him  from  the 
bridge.  He  gave  the  alarm,  but  still 
nothing  stirred.  At  a  quarter-past 
one,  the  western  train  arrived,  and 
its  conductor  found  the  bridge  guard- 
ed by  armed  men.  He  and  others 
attempted  to  walk  across,  but  were 
turned  back  by  presented  rifles.  One 
man,  a  negro,  was  shot  in  the  back, 
and  died  next  morning.  The  passen- 
gers took  refuge  in  the  hotel,  and  re- 
mained there  several  hours ;  the  con- 
ductor properly  refusing  to  pass  the 
train  over,  though  permitted,  at  three 
o'clock,  to  do  so. 

A  little  after  midnight,  the  house 
of  Col.  Washington  was  visited  by 
six  of  Brown's  men  under  Capt.  Ste- 
vens, who  captured  the  Colonel, 
seized  his  arms,  horses,  etc.,  and  libe- 
rated his  slaves.  On  their  return, 
Stevens  and  party  visited  the  house 
of  Mr.  Alstadtt  and  his  son,  whom 
they  captured,  and  freed  their  slaves. 
These,  with  each  male  citizen  as  he 
appeared  in  the  street,  were  confined 
in  the  Armory  until  they  numbered 
between  forty  and  fifty.  Brown  in- 
formed his  prisoners  that  they  could 
be  liberated  on  condition  of  writing 


JOHN   BROWN   HOLD IN 


G    HARPER'S  FERRY. 


291 


To  their  friends  to  send  a  negro  apiece 
as  ransom.  At  daylight,  the  train 
proceeded,  Brown  walking  over  the 
bridge  with  the  conductor.  When- 
ever any  one  asked  the  object  of  their 
captors,  the  uniform  answer  was,  "  To 
free  the  slaves ;"  and  when  one  of  the 
workmen,  seeing  an  armed  guard  at 
the  Arsenal  gate,  asked  by  what  au- 
thority they  had  taken  possession  of 
the  public  property,  he  was  answered, 
"  By  the  authority  of  God  Almighty !" 

The  passenger  train  that  sped  east- 
ward from  Harper's  Ferry,  by  Brown's 
permission,  in  the  early  morning  of 
Monday,  October  17th,  left  that  place 
completely  in  the  military  possession 
of  the  insurrectionists.  They  held, 
without  dispute,  the  Arsenal,  with 
its  offices,  workshops,  and  grounds. 
Their  sentinels  stood  on  guard  at  the 
bridges  and  principal  corners,  and 
were  seen  walking  up  and  down  the 
streets.  Every  workman,  who  igno- 
rantly  approached  the  Armory,  as 
day  dawned,  was  seized  and  impri- 
soned, with  all  other  white  males 
who  seemed  capable  of  making  any 
trouble.  By  eight  o'clock,  the  num- 
ber of  prisoners  had  been  swelled  to 
sixty-odd,  and  the  work  was  still  pro- 
ceeding. 

But  it  was  no  longer  entirely  one- 
sided. The  white  Virginians,  who 
had  arms,  and  who  remained  unmo- 
lested in  their  houses,  prepared  to 
use  them.  Soon  after  daybreak,  as 
Brown's  guards  were  bringing  two 
citizens  to  a  halt,  they  were  fired  on 
by  a  man  named  Turner,  and,  direct- 
ly afterward,  by  a  grocer  named 
Boerly,  who  was  instantly  killed  by 
the  return  fire.  Several  Virginians 
soon  obtained  possession  of  a  room 
overlooking  the  Armory  gates,  and 
fired  thence  at  the  sentinels  who 


guarded  them,  one  of  whom  fell 
dead,  and  another  —  Brown's  son 
Watson — was  mortally  wounded. 
Still,  throughout  the  forenoon,  the 
liberators  remained  masters  of  the 
town.  There  were  shots  fired  from 
one  side  or  the  other  at  intervals,  but 
no  more  casualties  reported.  The 
prisoners  were  by  turns  permitted  to 
visit  their  families  under  guard,  to 
give  assurance  that  they  still  lived 
and'  were  kindly  treated.  Had 
Brown  chosen  to  fly  to  the  moun- 
tains with  his  few  followers,  he  might 
still  have  done  so,  though  with  a 
much  slenderer  chance  of  impunity 
than  if  he  had,  according  to  his  ori- 
ginal plan,  decamped  at  midnight, 
with  such  arms  and  ammunition  as 
he  could  bear  away.  Why  he  lin- 
gered, to  brave  inevitable  destruc- 
tion, is  not  certain ;  but  it  may  fairly 
be  presumed  that  he  had  private  as- 
surances that  the  negroes  of  the  sur- 
rounding country  would  rise  at  the 
first  tidings  of  his  movement,  and 
come  flocking  to  his  standard;  and 
he  chose  to  court  the  desperate 
chances  of  remaining  where  arms 
and  ammunition  for  all  could  abund- 
antly be  had.  True,  he  afterward 
said  that  he  had  arms  enough  alrea- 
dy, either  on  or  about  his  premises ; 
but,  if  so,  why  seize  Harper's  Ferry 
at  all  \ 

At  all  events,  if  his  doom  was  al- 
ready sealed,  his  delay  at  least  has- 
tened it.  Half  an  hour  after  noon, 
a  militia  force,  one  hundred  strong, 
arrived  from  Charlestown,  the  county 
seat,  and  were  rapidly  disposed  so  as 
to  command  every  available  exit  from 
the  place.  In  taking  the  Shenandoah 
bridge,  they  killed  one  of  the  insur- 
gents, and  captured  William  Thomp- 
son, a  neighbor  of  Brown  at  Elba, 


292 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


unwounded.  The  rifle-works  were 
next  attacked,  and  speedily  carried, 
being  defended  by  five  insurgents 
only.  These  attempted  to  cross  the 
river,  and  four  of  them  succeeded  in 
reaching  a  rock  in  the  middle  of  it, 
whence  they  fought  with  two  hun- 
dred Virginians,  who  lined  either 
bank,  until  two  of  them  were  dead, 
and  a  third  mortally  wounded,  when 
the  fourth  surrendered.  Kagi, 
Brown's  Secretary  of  War,  was  one 
of  the  killed.  William  Ii.  Leeman, 
one  of  Brown's  captains,  being  pur- 
sued by  scores,  plunged  into  the 
river,  a  Virginian  wading  after  him. 
Leeman  turned  round,  threw  up  his 
empty  hands,  and  cried,  "Don't 
shoot !"  The  Virginian  fired  his  pis- 
tol directly  in  the  youth's  face — he 
was  but  twenty-two — and  shattered 
his  head  into  fragments. 

By  this  time,  all  the  houses  around 
the  Armory  buildings  were  held  by 
the  Virginians.  Capt.  Turner,  who 
had  fired  the  first  shot  in  the  morn- 
ing, was  killed  by  the  sentinel  at  the 
Arsenal  gate,  as  he  was  raising  his 
rifle  to  fire.  Here  Dangerfield  New- 
by,  a  Virginia  slave,  and  Jim,  one  of 
Col.  Washington's  negroes,  with  a  free 
negro,  who  had  lived  on  Washing- 
ton's estate,  were  shot  dead ;  and 
Oliver  Brown,  another  of  the  old 
man's  sons,  being  hit  by  a  ball,  came 
inside  of  the  gate,  as  his  brother 
Watson  had  done,  lay  quietly  down 
without  a  word,  and  in  a  few  mo- 
ments was  dead.  Mr.  Beckham, 
mayor  of  the  town,  who  came  within 
range  of  the  insurgents'  rifles  as  they 
were  exchanging  volleys  with  the 
Virginians,  was  likewise  killed. 

At  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  Kitzmil- 
ler,  one  of  Brown's  prisoners,  Aaron 
D.  Stevens,  one  of  his  most  trusted 


followers  from  Kansas,  was  sent  out 
with  a  flag  of  truce  to  call  a  parley, 
but  was  instantly  shot  down  by  the 
Virginians,  receiving  six  balls  in  his 
person.  Thompson,  their  prisoner, 
was  attacked  by  scores  of  them  in 
the  parlor  where  he  was  confined, 
but  saved  for  the  moment  by  a  young 
lady  throwing  herself  between  him 
and  their  presented  rifles,  because,  as 
she  afterward  explained,  she  "did 
not  want  the  carpet  spoiled."  He 
was  dragged  out  to  the  bridge,  there 
shot  in  cold  blood,  and  his  body  rid- 
dled with  balls  at  the  base  of  the 
pier,  whither  he  had  fallen  forty  feet 
from  the  bridge. 

By  this  time,  more  militia  had  ar- 
rived from  every  quarter,  and  a  party 
from  Martinsburgh,  led  by  a  railroad 
conductor,  attacked  the  Armory 
buildings  in  the  rear,  while  a  detach- 
ment of  the  same  force  assailed  them 
in  front.  Brown,  seeing  that  his  as- 
sailants were  in  overwhelming  force, 
retreated  to  the  engine-house,  where 
he  repulsed  his  assailants,  who  lost 
two  killed  and  six  wounded. 

Still,  militia  continued  to  pour  in ; 
the  telegraph  and  railroad  having 
been  completely  repaired,  so  that  the 
Government  at  Washington,  Gov. 
Wise  at  Richmond,  and  the  authori- 
ties at  Baltimore,  were  in  immediate 
communication  with  Harper's  Ferry, 
and  hurrying  forward  troops  from  all 
quarters  to  overwhelm  the  remaining 
handful  of  insurgents,  whom  terror 
and  rumor  had  multiplied  to  twenty 
times  their  actual  number.  At  five, 
P.  M.,  Capt.  Simms  arrived,  with 
militia  from  Maryland,  and  complet- 
ed the  investment  of  tjie  Armory 
buildings,  whence  eighteen  prisoners 
had  already  been  liberated  upon  the 
retreat  of  Brown  to  the  engine-house. 


DEFEAT    AND    CAPTURE    OF  BROWN. 


293 


Col.  Baylor  commanded  in  chief. 
The  firing  ceased  at  nightfall.  Brown 
offered  to  liberate  his  prisoners,  upon 
condition  that  his  men  should  be 
permitted  to  cross  the  bridge  in  safe- 
ty, which  was  refused.  JSTight  found 
Brown's  forces  reduced  to  three  un- 
wounded  whites  beside  himself,  with 
perhaps  half  a  dozen  negroes  from 
the  vicinity.  Eight  of  the  insurgents 
were  already  dead ;  another  lay 
dying  beside  the  survivors ;  two 
were  captives  mortally  wounded,  and 
one  other  unhurt.  Around  the  few 
survivors  were  fifteen  hundred  arm- 
ed, infuriated  foes.  Half  a  dozen  of 
the  party,  who  had  been  sent  out  at 
early  morning  by  Brown  to  capture 
slaveholders,  and  liberate  slaves,  were 
absent,  and  unable,  even  if  willing, 
to  rejoin  their  chief.  They  fled  dur- 
ing the  night  to  Maryland  and  Penn- 
sylvania ;  but  most  of  them  were  ul- 
timately captured.  During  that 
night,  Col.  Lee,  with  ninety  United 
States  marines  and  two  pieces  of 
artillery,  arrived,  and  took  possession 
of  the  Armory  guard,  very  close  to 
the  engine-house. 

Brown,  of  course,  remained  awake 
and  alert  through  the  night,  discom- 
fited and  beyond  earthly  hope,  but 
perfectly  cool  and  calm.  Said  Gov. 
Wise,  in  a  speech  at  Richmond  soon 
after : 

"  Col.  "Washington  said  that  Brown  was 
the  coolest  man  he  ever  saw  in  defying  death 
and  danger.  With  one  son  dead  by  his  side, 
and  another  shot  through,  he  felt  the  pulse 
of  his  dying  son  with  one  hand,  held  his  rifle 
with  the  other,  and  commanded  his  men 
with  the  utmost  composure,  encouraging 
them  to  be  firm,  and  to  sell  their  lives  as 
dearly  as  possible." 

Conversing  with  Col.  Washington 

during  that  solemn  night,  he  said  he 

had  not  pressed  his  sons  to  join  him 

in  this  expedition,  but  did  not  regret 


their  loss — they  had  died  in  a  good 
cause. 

At  seven  in  the  morning,  after  a 
parley  which  resulted  in  nothing,  the 
marines  advanced  to  the  assault, 
broke  in  the  door  of  the  engine- 
house  by  using  a  ladder  as  a  batter- 
ing-ram, and  rushed  into  the  build- 
ing. One  of  the  defenders  was  shot 
and  two  marines  wounded ;  but  the 
odds  were  too  great ;  in  an  instant, 
all  resistance  was  over.  Brown  was 
struck  in  the  face  with  a  saber  and 
knocked  down,  after  which  the  blow 
was  several  times  repeated,  while  a 
soldier  ran  a  bayonet  twice  into  the 
old  man's  body.  All  the  insurgents, 
it  was  said,  would  have  been  killed 
on  the  spot,  had  the  Virginians  been 
able  to  distinguish  them  with  cer- 
tainty from  their  prisoners. 

Of  course,  all  Virginia,  including 
her  Governor,  rushed  to  Harper's 
Ferry  upon  learning  that  all  was 
over,  and  the  insurrection  completely 
suppressed.  The  bleeding  survivors 
were  subjected  to  an  alternation  of 
queries  and  execrations,  which  they 
met  bravely,  as  they  had  confronted 
the  bullets  of  their  numerous  and 
ever-increasing  foes.  They  answered 
frankly,  save  where  their  replies 
might  possibly  compromise  persons 
still  at  liberty;  and  none  of  them 
sought  to  conceal  the  fact  that  they 
had  struck  for  Universal  Freedom  at 
all  hazards.  The  bearing  of  Brown 
was  especially  praised  by  his  ene- 
mies (many  of  whom  have  since  won 
notoriety  in  the  ranks  of  the  Re- 
bellion), as  remarkably  simple  and 
noble.  Among  others,  Mr.  C.  L. 
Vallandigham,  of  Ohio,  hastened  to 
visit  and  catechise  Brown,  in  the 
hope  of  making  political  capital  out 
of  his  confessions,  and  was  answered 


294 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


frankly  and  fully.  On  his  return  to 
Ohio,  lie  said : 

u  It  is  in  vain  to  underrate  either  the  man 
or  the  conspiracy.  Capt.  John  Brown  is  as 
brave  and  resolute  a  man  as  ever  headed  an 
insurrection;  and,  in  a  good  cause,  and  with 
a  sufficient  force,  would  have  been  a  consum- 
mate partisan  commander.  lie  has  coolness, 
daring,  persistency,  the  stoic  faith  and  pa- 
tience, and  a  firmness  of  will  and  purpose 
unconquerable.  He  is  the  farthest  possible 
remove  from  the  ordinary  ruffian,  fanatic,  or 
madman.  Certainly,  it  was  one  of  the  best 
planned  and  best  executed  conspiracies  that 
ever  failed." 

On  Wednesday  evening,  October 
19th,  after  thirty  hours  of  this  disci- 
pline, the  four  surviving  prisoners 
were  conveyed  to  the  j;iil  at  Charles- 
town  under  an  escort  of  marines. 
Brown  and  Stevens,  badly  wounded, 
were  taken  in  a  wagon ;  Green  and 
Coppoc,  unhurt,  walked  between  files 
of  soldiers,  followed  by  hundreds, 
who  at  first  cried,  "Lynch  them!" 
but  were  very  properly  shamed  into 
silence  by  Gov.  Wise. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  linger  here 
over  the  legal  proceedings  in  this 
case  ;  nor  do  the  complaints,  so  freely 
made  at  the  time,  of  indecent  haste 
and  unfair  dealing,  on  the  part  of  the 
Virginia  authorities,  seem  fully  justi- 
fied. That  the  conviction  and  death 
of  Brown  and  his  associates  were  pre- 
determined, is  quite  probable ;  but 
the  facts  and  the  nature  of  the  case 
were  notorious,  beyond  dispute  ;  and 
Virginia  had  but  this  alternative — 
to  hang  John  Brown,  or  to  abol- 
ish Slavery.  She  did  not  choose 
to  abolish  Slavery ;  and  she  had  no 
remaining  choice  but  to  hang  John 
Brown.  And  as  to  trying  him  and 
Stevens  while  still  weak  and  suffer- 
ing severely  from  their  wounds — nei- 
ther able  at  times  to  stand  up — it 
must  be  considered  that  the  whole 
State  had  been  terror-stricken  by  the 


first  news  of  their  attempt,  and  that 
fears  of  insurrection  and  of  an  armed 
rescue  were  still  widely  prevalent. 
That  the  lawyers  of  the  vicinage  who 
were  assigned  to  the  defense  of  the 
prisoners  did  their  duty  timidly  and 
feebly,  is  certain;  but  they  shared, 
of  course,  not  only  the  prejudices  but 
the  terrors  of  their  neighbors,  and 
knew  that  the  case,  at  any  rate,  was 
hopeless. 

Brown's  conduct  throughout  com- 
manded the  admiration  of  his  bitter- 
est enemies.  When  his  papers  were 
brought  into  court  to  be  identified, 
he  said :  "  I  will  identify  any  of  my 
handwriting,  and  save  all  trouble.  I 
am  ready  to  face  the  music."  When 
a  defense  of  insanity  was  suggested 
rather  than  interposed,  he  repelled  it 
with  indignation.  When,  after  his 
conviction,  he  was  suddenly  brought 
into  court,  on  the  1st  of  November, 
to  listen  to  the  judgment,  and  directed 
to  stand  up,  and  say  why  sentence 
should  not  be  passed  upon  him, 
though  taken  by  surprise  and  some- 
what confused,  he  spoke  gently  and 
tenderly  as  follows : 

"  In  the  first  place,  I  deny  every  thing  but 
what  I  have  all  along  admitted — the  design 
on  my  part  to  free  the  slaves.  I  intended 
certainly  to  have  made  a  clear  thing  of  that 
matter,  as  I  did  last  winter,  when  I  went 
into  Missouri,  and  there  took  slaves  without 
the  snapping  of  a  gun  on  either  side,  moved 
them  through  the  country,  and  finally  left 
them  in  Canada.  I  designed  to  have  done 
the  same  thing  again,  on  a  larger  scale. 
That  was  all  I  intended.  I  never  did  intend 
murder,  or  treason,  or  the  destruction  of 
property,  or  to  excite  or  incite  slaves  to 
rebellion,  or  to  make  insurrection. 

MI  have  another  objection:  and  that  is, 
it  is  unjust  that  I  should  suffer  such  a 
penalty.  Had  I  interfered  in  the  manner 
which  I  admit  has  been  fairly  proved — (for 
I  admire  the  truthfulness  and  candor  of  the 
greater  portion  of  the  witnesses  who  have 
testified  in  this  case) — had  I  so  interfered  in 
behalf  of  the  rich,  the  powerful,  the  intelli- 
gent, the  so-called  great,  or  in  behalf  of  any 


JOHN  BROWN  TO  L.   MARIA  CHILD.  295 


of  their  friends,  either  father,  mother, 
brother,  sister,  wife,  or  children,  or  any  of 
that  class,  and  suffered  and  sacrificed  what  I 
have  in  this  interference,  it  would  have 
been  all  right,  and  every  man  in  this  Court 
would  have  deemed  it  an  act  worthy  of  re- 
ward rather  than  punishment. 

"This  Court  acknowledges,  as  I  suppose, 
the  validity  of  the  Law  of  God.  I  see  a 
book  kissed  here  which  I  suppose  to  be  the 
Bible,  or,  at  least,  the  New  Testament. 
That  teaches  me  that  all  things  '  whatsoever 
I  would  that  men  should  do  unto  me,  I 
should  do  even  so  to  them.'  It  teaches  me, 
further,  to  'remember  those  that  are  in 
bonds  as  bound  with  them.'  I  endeavored 
to  act  upon  that  instruction.  I  say,  I  am 
yet  too  young  to  understand  that  God  is 
any  respecter  of  persons.  I  believe  that  to 
have  interfered  as  I  have  done,  as  1  have 
always  freely  admitted  I  have  done,  in 
behalf  of  His  despised  poor,  was  not  wrong, 
but  right.  Now,  if  it  is  deemed  necessary 
that  I  should  forfeit  my  life  for  the  further- 
ance of  the  ends  of  justice,  and  mingle  my 
blood  further  with  the  blood  of  my  children, 
and  with  the  blood  of  millions  in  this  slave 
country  whose  rights  are  disregarded  by 
wicked,  cruel,  and  unjust  enactments — I 
submit:  so  let  it  be  done. 

"  Let  me  say  one  word  further : 

"I  feel  entirely  satisfied  with  the  treat- 
ment I  have  received  on  my  trial.  Consid- 
ering all  the  circumstances,  it  has  been 
more  generous  than  I  expected.  But  I  feel 
no  consciousness  of  guilt.  I  have  stated 
from  the  first  what  was  my  intention  and 
what  was  not.  I  never  had  any  design 
against  the  life  of  any  person,  nor  any  dis- 
position to  commit  treason,  or  excite  slaves 
to  rebel,  or  make  any  general  insurrection. 
I  never  encouraged  any  man  to  do  so,  but 
always  discouraged  any  idea  of  that  kind. 

"Let  me  say,  also,  a  word  in  regard  to 
the  statements  made  by  some  of  those  con- 
nected with  me.  I  hear  it  has  been  stated 
by  some  of  them  that  I  have  induced  them 
to  join  me.  But  the  contrary  is  true.  I  do 
not  say  this  to  injure  them,  but  as  regretting 
their  weakness.  There  is  not  one  of  them 
but  joined  me  of  his  own  accord,  and  the 
greater  part  at  their  own  expense.  A  num- 
ber of  them  I  never  saw,  and  never  had  a 
word  of  conversation  with,  till  the  day  they 
came  to  me,  and  that  was  for  the  purpose  I 
have  stated. 

"  Now  I  have  done." 

Among  the  many  letters  addressed 
to  him  while  in  prison  was  one  from 
Lydia  Maria  Child,  who  sought,  but 
did  not  obtain,  from  the  Yirginia  au- 


thorities, permission  to  visit  him  in 
his  prison.  Her  letter  to  Brown  was 
answered  as  follows : 

"  Mes.  L.  Maria  Child  : 

"  My  dear  Friend  (such  you  prove  to  be, 
though  a  stranger) : — Your  most  kind  letter 
has  reached  me,  with  the  kind  offer  to  come 
here  and  take  care  of  me.  Allow  me  to  ex- 
press my  gratitude  for  your  great  sympathy, 
and  at  the  same  to  propose  to  you  a  differ- 
ent course,  together  with  my  reasons  for 
wishing  it.  I  should  certainly  be  greatly 
pleased  to  become  personally  acquainted  with 
one  so  gifted  and  so  kind;  but  I  cannot 
avoid  seeing  some  objections  to  it,  under 
present  circumstances.  First,  I  am  in 
charge  of  a  most  humane  gentleman,  wbo, 
with  his  family,  have  rendered  me  every 
possible  attention  I  have  desired,  or  that 
could  be  of  the  least  advantage ;  and  I  am 
so  far  recovered  from  my  wounds  as  no 
longer  to  require  nursing.  Then,  again,  it 
would  subject  you  to  great  personal  incon- 
venience and  heavy  expense,  without  doing 
me  any  good. 

"  Allow  me  to  name  to  you  another  chan- 
nel through  which  you  may  reach  me  with 
your  sympathies  much  more  effectually.  I 
have  at  home  a  wTife  and  three  young  daugh- 
ters— the  youngest  but  little  over  five  years 
old,  the  oldest  nearly  sixteen.  I  have  also 
two  daughters-in-law,  whose  husbands  have 
both  fallen  near  me  here.  There  is  also 
another  widow,  Mrs.  Thompson,  whose 
husband  fell  here.  Whether  she  is  a  mother 
or  not,  I  cannot  say.  All  these,  my  wife  in- 
cluded, live  at  North  Elba,  Essex  County, 
New  York.  I  have  a  middle-aged  son,  who 
has  been,  in  some  degree,  a  cripple  from 
his  childhood,  who  would  have  as  much  as 
he  could  well  do  to  earn  a  living.  He  was 
a  most  dreadful  sufferer  in  Kansas,  and  lost 
all  he  had  laid  up.  He  has  not  enough  to 
clothe  himself  for  the  winter  comfortably 
I  have  no  living  son,  or  son-in-law,  who  did 
not  suffer  terribly  in  Kansas. 

"Now,  dear  friend,  would  you  not  as 
soon  contribute  fifty  cents  now,  and  a  like 
sum  yearly,  for  the  relief  of  those  very  poor 
and  deeply  afflicted  persons,  to  enable  them 
to  supply  themselves  and  their  children  with 
bread  and  very  plain  clothing,  and  to  enable 
the  children  to  receive  a  common  English 
education  ?  Will  you  also,  devote  your  ener- 
gies to  induce  others  to  join  in  giving  a  like 
amount,  or  any  other  amount,  to  constitute 
a  little  fund  for  the  purpose  named? 

"  I  cannot  see  how  your  coming  here 
can  do  me  the  least  good,  and  I  am  quite 
certain  you  can  do  me  immense  good  where 
you  are.  I  am  quite  cheerful  under  all  ray 
afflicting  circumstances  and  prospects ;  hav- 


296 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ing,  as  I  humbly  trust,  '  the  peace  of  God, 
which  passeth  all  understanding,'  to  rule  in 
niy  heart.  You  may  make  such  use  of  this 
as  you  see  fit.  God  Almighty  bless  and  re- 
ward you  a  thousand  fold ! 

M  Yours,  in  sincerity  and  truth, 

"John  Brown." 

His  letter  to  his  family,  written  a 
week  after  his  sentence  to  death,  is 
as  follows : 

"  Charlestown.  Jefferson  Co.,  Va., 
"8th  Nov.,  1859. 

"Dear  Wife  and  Children — Every  one: 
I  will  begin  by  saying  that  I  have  in  some 
degree  recovered  from  my  wounds,  but  that 
I  am  quite  weak  in  my  back,  and  sore  about 
my  left  kidney.  My  appetite  has  been  quite 
good  for  most  of  the  time  since  I  was  hurt. 
I  am  supplied  with  almost  every  thing  I 
could  desire  to  make  me  comfortable,  and 
the  little  I  do  lack  (some  articles  of  clothing, 
which  I  lost),  I  may  perhaps  soon  get  again. 
I  am,  besides,  quite  cheerful,  having  (as  I 
trust)  the  peace  of  God,  which  '  passeth  all 
understanding,'  to  'rule  in  my  heart,'  and 
the  testimony  (in  some  degree)  of  a  good 
conscience  that  I  have  not  lived  altogether 
in  vain.  I  can  trust  God  with  both  the 
time  and  the  manner  of  my  death,  believing, 
as  I  now  do,  that  for  me  at  this  time  to  seal 
my  testimony  (for  God  and  humanity)  with 
my  blood,  will  do  vastly  more  toward  ad- 
vancing the  cause  I  have  earnestly  endeav- 
ored to  promote,  than  all  I  have  done  in  my 
life  before.  I  beg  of  you  all  meekly  and 
quietly  to  submit  to  this ;  not  feeling  your- 
selves in  the  least  degraded  on  that  account. 
Eemember,  dear  wife  and  children  all,  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  suffered  a  most  excruciat- 
ing death  on  the  cross  as  a  felon,  under  the 
most  aggravating  circumstances.  Think, 
also,  of  the  prophets,  and  apostles,  and 
Christians  of  former  days,  who  went  through 
greater  tribulations  than  you  or  I ;  and  (try 
to)  be  reconciled.  May  God  Almighty  com- 
fort all  your  hearts,  and  soon  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  your  eyes.  To  Him  be  endless 
praise.  Think,  too,  of  the  crushed  millions 
who  'have  no  comforter.'  I  charge  you  all 
never  (in  your  trials)  to  forget  the  griefs  of 
'  the  poor  that  cry,  and  of  those  that  have 
none  to  help  them.'  I  wrote  most  earnestly 
to  my  dear  and  afflicted  wife  not  to  come  on, 
for  the  present  at  any  rate.  I  will  now  give 
her  my  reasons  for  doing  so.  First,  it 
would  use  up  all  the  scanty  means  she  has, 
or  is  at  all  likely  to  have,  to  make  herself 
and  children  comfortable  hereafter.  For  let 
me  tell  you  that  the  sympathy  that  is  now 
aroused  in  your  behalf  may  not  always  follow 
you.  There  is  but  little  more  of  the  ro- 
mantic about  helping  poor  widows  and  their 


children  than  there  is  about  trying  to  relieve 
poor  '  niggers.'  Again,  the  little  comfort  it 
might  afford  us  to  meet  again  would  be 
dearly  bought  by  the  pains  of  a  final  separa- 
tion. We  must  part ;  and,  I  feel  assured,  for 
us  to  meet  under  such  dreadful  circumstan- 
ces would  only  add  to  our  distress.  If  she 
come  on  here,  she  must  be  only  a  gazing- 
stock  throughout  the  whole  journey,  to  be 
remarked  upon  in  every  look,  word,  and 
action,  and  by  all  sorts  of  creatures,  and  by 
all  sorts  of  papers  throughout  the  whole 
country.  Again,  it  is  my  most  decided 
judgment  that  in  quietly  and  submissively 
staying  at  home,  vastly  more  of  generous 
sympathy  will  reach  her,  without  such 
dreadful  sacrifice  of  feeling  as  she  must  put 
up  with  if  she  comes  on.  The  visits  of  one 
or  two  female  friends  that  have  come  on 
here  have  produced  great  excitement,  which 
is  very  annoying,  and  they  cannot  possibly 
do  me  any  good.  O  Mary,  do  not  come; 
but  patiently  wait  for  the  meeting  (of  those 
who  love  God  and  their  fellow-men)  where 
no  separation  must  follow.  '  They  shall  go 
no  more  out  forever.'  I  greatly  long  to 
hear  from  some  one  of  you,  and  to  learn  any 
thing  that  in  any  way  affects  your  welfare. 
I  sent  you  ten  dollars  the  other  day.  Did 
you  get  it  ?  I  have  also  endeavored  to  stir 
up  Christian  friends  to  visit  and  write  to 
you  in  your  deep  affliction.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  some  of  them,  at  least,  will  heed  the 
call.  Write  to  me,  care  of  Capt.  John  Avis, 
Charlestown,  Jefferson  County,  Va. 

"  'Finally,  my  beloved,  be  of  good  com- 
fort.' May  all  your  names  be  'written  in 
the  Lamb's  book  of  life 7 — may  you  all  have 
the  purifying  and  sustaining  influence  of 
the  Christian  religion — is  the  earnest  prayer 
of  your  affectionate  husband  and  father, 
"  John  Brown. 

"P.  S.  I  cannot  remember  a  night  so 
dark  as  to  have  hindered  the  coming  day, 
nor  a  storm  so  furious  or  dreadful  as  to  pre- 
vent the  return  of  warm  sunshine  and  a 
cloudless  sky.  But,  beloved  ones,  do  re- 
member that  this  is  not  your  rest,  that  in 
this  world  you  have  no  abiding-place  or 
continuing  city.  To  God  and  His  infinite 
mercy  I  always  commend  you.       J.  B." 

"  Nov.  9." 

During  the  forty-two  days  of  his 
confinement  at  Charlestown,  Brown 
received  several  visits  from  sympa- 
thizing Northern  friends,  many  of 
whom  had  never  before  seen  him. 
His  wife,  overcoming  many  obstacles, 
was  finally  permitted  to  spend  a  few 
hours  in  his  cell,  and  to  take  supper 


JOHN"  BROWN'S 


LAST  HOURS. 


297 


with  him  a  short  time  before  his 
death.  No  Virginians,  so  far  as  is 
known,  proffered  him  any  words  of 
kindness,  unless  it  were  the  reverend 
clergy  of  the  neighborhood,  who  ten- 
dered him  the  solace  of  religion  after 
their  fashion,  which  he  civilly,  but 
firmly,  declined.  He  conld  not  re- 
cognize any  one  who  justified  or  pal- 
liated Slavery  as  a  minister  of  the 
God  he  worshiped,  or  the  Saviour 
in  whom  he  trusted.  He  held  argu- 
ments on  several  occasions  with  pro- 
Slavery  clergymen,  but  recognized 
them  as  men  only,  and  not  as  invest- 
ed with  any  peculiar  sanctity.  To 
one  of  them,  who  sought  to  reconcile 
Slavery  with  Christianity,  he  said : 
"My  dear  Sir,  you  know  nothing 
about  Christianity  ;  you  will  have  to 
learn  the  A  B  Cs  in  the  lesson  of 
Christianity,  as  I  find  you  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  meaning  of  the  word. 
I,  of  course,  respect  you  as  a  gentle- 
man ;  but  it  is  as  a  heathen  gentle- 
man."   The  argument  here  closed. 

The  following  characteristic  letter 
was  written  by  him,  while  under  sen- 
tence of  death,  to  a  relative  then  re- 
siding in  "Windham,  Ohio : 

"  Charlestown,  Jefferson  Co.,  Ya.,  ) 
19th  Nov.,  1859.  \ 

"Rev.  Luther  Humphrey — My  Dear 
Friend :  Your  kind  letter  of  the  12th  instant 
is  now  before  me.  So  far  as  iny  knowledge 
goes  as  to  our  mutual  kindred,  I  suppose  I 
am  the  first  since  the  landing  of  Peter  Brown 
from  the  Mayflower  that  has  either  been 
sentenced  to  imprisonment  or  to  the  gallows. 
But,  my  dear  old  friend,  let  not  that  fact 
alone  grieve  you.  You  cannot  have  forgot- 
ten how  and  where  our  grandfather  (Cap- 
tain John  Brown)  fell  in  1776,  and  that  he, 
too,  might  have  perished  on  the  scaffold  had 
circumstances  been  but  very  little  different. 
The  fact  that  a  man  dies  under  the  hand  of 
an  executioner  (or  otherwise)  has  but  little 
to  do  with  his  true  character,  as  I  suppose. 
John  Rogers  perished  at  the  stake,  a  great 
and  good  man,  as  I  suppose :  but  his  doing 
so  does  not  prove  that  any  other  man  who 


has  died  in  the  same  way  was  good  or  other- 
wise. Whether  I  have  any  reason  to  1  be  of 
good  cheer'  (or  not)  in  view  of  my  end,  I  can 
assure  you  that  I  feel  so ;  and  that  I  am  to- 
tally blinded  if  I  do  not  really  experience 
that  strengthening  and  consolation  you  so 
faithfully  implore  in  my  behalf.  The  God 
of  our  Fathers  reward  your  fidelity  !  I  nei- 
ther feel  mortified,  degraded,  nor  in  the  least 
ashamed  of  my  imprisonment,  my  chain,  or 
my  near  prospect  of  death  ly  hanging.  I  feel 
assured  '  that  not  one  hair  shall  fall  from 
my  head  without  the  will  of  my  heavenly 
Father.'  I  also  feel  that  I  have  long  been 
endeavoring  to  hold  exactly  '  such  a  fast  as 
God  has  chosen.'  See  the  passage  in  Isaiah 
which  you  have  quoted.  No  part  of  my  life 
has  been  more  happily  spent  than  that  I  have 
spent  here,  and  I  numbly  trust  that  no  part 
has  been  spent  to  better  purpose.  I  would 
not  say  this  boastingly ;  but  '  thanks  be  unto 
God  who  giveth  us  the  victory,'  through  in- 
finite grace. 

u  I  should  be  60  years  old  were  I  to  live 
till  May  9,  1860.  I  have  enjoyed  much  of 
life  as  it  is,  and  have  been  remarkably  pros- 
perous, having  early  learned  to  regard  the 
welfare  and  prosperity  of  others  as  my  own. 
I  have  never,  since  I  can  remember,  required 
a  great  amount  of  sleep,  so  that  I  conclude 
that  I  have  already  enjoyed  full  an  average 
number  of  waking  hours  with  those  who 
reach  their  'three-score  years  and  ten.'  I 
have  not  as  yet  been  driven  to  the  use  of 
glasses,  but  can  see  to  read  and  write  quite 
comfortably.  But,  more  than  that,  I  have 
generally  enjoyed  remarkably  good  health. 
I  might  go  on  to  recount  unnumbered  and 
unmerited  blessings,  among  which  would  be 
some  very  severe  afflictions ;  and  those  the 
most  needed  blessings  of  all.  And  now, 
when  I  think  how  easily  I  might  be  left  to 
spoil  all  I  have  done  or  suffered  in  the  cause 
of  Freedom,  I  hardly  dare  wish  another  voy- 
age, even  if  I  had  the  opportunity.  It  is  a 
longtime  since  we  met;  but  we  shall  now 
soon  come  together  in  our  'Father's  house,' 
I  trust.  '  Let  us  hold  fast  that  we  already 
have,'  remembering  '  we  shall  reap  in  due 
time  if  we  faint  not.'  '  Thanks  be  ever  unto 
God.  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.'  And  now,  my  old 
warm-hearted  friend,  1  Good-bye.' 

"  Your  affectionate  cousin, 

uJohn  Brown." 

The  2d  of  December  was  the  day 
appointed  for  his  execution.  Nearly 
three  thousand  militia  were  early  on 
the  ground.  Fears  of  a  forcible  rescue 
or  of  a  servile  insurrection  prevented 
a  large  attendance  of  citizens.  Can- 


298  THE  AMERICA 

non  were  so  planted  as  to  sweep  every 
approach  to  the  jail,  and  to  blow  the 
prisoner  into  shreds  npon  the  first  in- 
timation of  tumult.  Virginia  held 
her  breath  until  she  heard  that  the 
old  man  was  dead. 

Brown  rose  at  daybreak,  and  con- 
tinued writing  with  energy  until  half- 
past  ten,  when  he  was  told  to  prepare 
to  die.  He  shook  hands  with  the 
sheriff,  visited  the  cell  of  Copeland 
and  Green,  to  whom  he  handed  a 
quarter  of  a  dollar  each,  saying  he 
had  no  more  use  for  money,  and  bade 
them  adieu.  He  next  visited  Cook 
and  Coppoc,  the  former  of  whom  had 
made  a  confession,  which  he  pro- 
nounced false ;  saying  he  had  never 
sent  Cook  to  Harper's  Ferry,  as  he 
had  stated.  He  handed  a  quarter  to 
Coppoc  also,  shook  hands  with  him, 
and  parted.  He  then  visited  and 
bade  a  kindly  good-bye  to  his  more 
especial  comrade,  Stevens,  gave  him 
a  quarter,  and  charged  him  not  to 
betray  his  friends.  A  sixth,  named 
Hazlett,  was  confined  in  the  same 
prison,  but  he  did  not  visit  him,  de- 
nying all  knowledge  of  him. 

He  walked  out  of  the  jail  at  11 
o'clock ;  an  eye-witness  said — "  with 
a  radiant  countenance,  and  the  step 
of  a  conqueror."  His  face  was  even 
joyous,  and  it  has  been  remarked 
that  probably  his  was  the  lightest 
heart  in  Charlestown  that  day.  A 
black  woman,  with  a  little  child  in 
her  arms,  stood  by  the  door.  He 
stopped  a  moment,  and,  stooping, 
kissed  the  child  affectionately.  An- 
other black  woman,  with  a  child,  as 
he  passed  along,  exclaimed :  "  God 
bless  you,  old  man !  I  wish  I  could 
help  you ;  but  I  can't."  He  looked 
at  her  with  a  tear  in  his  eye.  He 
mounted  the  wagon  beside  his  jailor, 


N  CONFLICT. 

Capt.  Avis,  who  had  been  one  of  the 
bravest  of  his  captors,  who  had  treat- 
ed him  very  kindly,  and  to  whom  he 
was  profoundly  grateful.  The  wagon 
was  instantly  surrounded  by  six  com- 
panies of  militia.  Being  asked,  on 
the  way,  if  he  felt  any  fear,  he  re- 
plied :  "It  has  been  a  characteristic 
of  me  from  infancy  not  to  suffer  from 
physical  fear.  I  have  suffered  a 
thousand  times  more  from  bashful- 
ness  than  from  fear."  The  day  was 
clear  and  bright,  and  he  remarked,  as 
he  rode,  that  the  country  seemed 
very  beautiful.  Arrived  at  the  gal- 
lows, he  said :  "  I  see  no  citizens 
here ;  where  are  they  ?"  "  None  but 
the  troops  are  allowed  to  be  present," 
was  the  reply.  "  That  ought  not  to 
be,"  said  he;  "citizens  should  be 
allowed  to  be  present  as  well  as  oth- 
ers." He  bade  adieu  to  some  ac- 
quaintances at  the  foot  of  the  gal- 
lows, and  was  first  to  mount  the  scaf- 
fold. His  step  was  still  firm,  and 
his  bearing  calm,  yet  hopeful.  The 
hour  having  come,  he  said  to  Capt. 
Avis :  "  I  have  no  words  to  thank 
you  for  all  your  kindness  to  me."  His 
elbows  and  ankles  being  pinioned, 
the  white  cap  drawn  over  his  eyes, 
the  hangman's  rope  adjusted  around 
his  neck,  he  stood  waiting  for  death. 
"  Capt. .  Brown,"  said  the  sheriff 
"  you  are  not  standing  on  the  drop. 
Will  you  come  forward  ?"  "  I  can't 
see,"  was  his  firm  answer ;  "  you 
must  lead  me."  The  sheriff  led  him 
forward  to  the  center  of  the  drop. 
"  Shall  I  give  you  a  handkerchief, 
and  let  you  drop  it  as  a  signal  ?" 
"  ~No ;  I  am  ready  at  any  time ;  but 
do  not  keep  me  needlessly  waiting." 
In  defiance  of  this  reasonable  request, 
he  was  kept  standing  thus  several 
minutes,  while  a  military  parade  and 


THE  VOTE  FOR  ERE 


MONT  AND  DAYTON. 


299 


display  of  readiness  to  repel  an  ima- 
ginary foe  were  enacted.  The  time 
seemed  an  hour  to  the  impatient 
spectators ;  even  the  soldiers  began 
to  murmur — "  Shame  !"  At  last,  the 
order  was  given,  the  rope  cut  with  a 
hatchet,  and  the  trap  fell ;  but  so 
short  a  distance  that  the  victim  con- 
tinued to  struggle  and  to  suffer  for 
a  considerable  time.  Being  at  length 
duly  pronounced  dead,  he  was  cut 
down  after  thirty-eight  minutes'  sus- 


pension. His  body  was  conveyed  to 
Harper's  Ferry,  and  delivered  to  his 
widow,  by  whom  it  was  borne  to  her 
far  northern  home,  among  the  moun- 
tains he  so  loved,  and  where  he  was 
so  beloved.6 

There  let  it  rest  forever,  while  the 
path  to  it  is  worn  deeper  and  deeper 
by  the  pilgrim  feet  of  the  race  he 
so  bravely  though  rashly  endeavored 
to  rescue  from  a  hideous  and  debas- 
ing thraldom ! 


XXI. 


THE  PRESIDENTIAL  CANVASS  OF  1860. 


The  vote  polled  for  Fremont  and 
Dayton  in  1856  considerably  exceed- 
ed the  solid  strength,  at  that  time,  of 
the  Republican  party.  It  was  swelled 
in  part  by  the  personal  popularity  of 
Col.  Fremont,  whose  previous  career 
of  adventure  and  of  daring — his  ex- 
plorations, discoveries,  privations,  and 
perils — appealed,  in  view  of  his  com- 
parative youth  for  a  Presidential  can- 
didate, with  resistless  fascination,  to 
the  noble  young  men  of  our  country ; 
while  his  silence  and  patience  through- 
out the  canvass,  under  a  perfect  tem- 
pest of  ,  preposterous  yet  annoying 
calumnies,  had  contributed  to  widen 
the  circle  of  his  admirers  and  friends. 
A  most  wanton  and  brutal  personal 
assault1  on  Senator  Sumner,  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, by  Representative  Brooks 
of  South  Carolina,  abetted  by  Repre- 


sentatives Keitt,  of  South  Carolina, 
and  Edmundson,  of  Yirginia,  doubt- 
less contributed  also  to  swell  the  Re- 
publican vote  of  the  following  Au- 
tumn. Mr.  Sumner  had  made  an 
elaborate  speech  in  the  Senate  on  the 
Kansas  question — a  speech  not  with- 
out grave  faults  of  conception  and  of 
style,  but  nowise  obnoxious  to  the 
charge  of  violating  the  decencies  of 
debate  by  unjustifiable  personalities. 
Yet,  on  the  assumption  that  its  au- 
thor had  therein  unwarrantably  as- 
sailed and  ridiculed  Judge  Butler — 
one  of  South  Carolina's  Senators, 
and  a  relative  of  Mr.  Brooks* — he 
was  assaulted  by  surprise  while  sit- 
ting in  his  place  (though  a  few  min- 
utes after  the  Senate  had  adjourned 
for  the  day),  knocked  to  the  floor 
senseless,  and  beaten,  while  helpless 


6  Cook,  Coppoc,  Copeland,  and  Green  (a  black), 
■were  hanged  at  Charlestown  a  fortnight  after 
Brown — December  16th;  Stevens  and  Hazlitt 
were  likewise  hanged  on  the  16th  of  March 
following.    The  confederates  of  Brown,  who 


succeeded  in  making  their  escape,  were  Owen 
Brown,    Barclay   Coppoc,   Charles    P.  Tidd, 
Francis  Jackson  Merriam,  and  Osborne  P.  An- 
derson, a  colored  man. 
1  May  22,  1856. 


300  THE  AMERICj 

and  unconscious,  till  the  rage  of  his 
immediate  assailant  was  thoroughly 
satiated.  Mr.  Sumner  was  so  much 
injured  as  to  be  compelled  to  aban- 
don his  seat  and  take  a  voyage  to 
Europe,  where,  under  the  best  medi- 
cal treatment,  his  health  was  slowly 
restored.  The  infliction  on  Brooks, 
by  a  Washington  court,  of  a  paltry 
fine2  for  this  outrage,  tended  to  deep- 
en and  diffuse  popular  indignation  at 
the  North,  which  the  unopposed  re- 
election of  Brooks — he  having  re- 
signed, because  of  a  vote  of  censure 
from  a  majority  of  the  House — did 
not  tend  to  allay.  Of  Fremont's  ag- 
gregate vote — 1,341,812 — it  is  proba- 
ble that  all  above  1,200,000  was  giv- 
en him  on  grounds  personal  to  him- 
self, or  from  impulses  growing  out  of 
the  Sumner  outrage. 

Accordingly,  the  elections  of  1857 
exhibited  a  diminution  of  Republi- 
can strength — the  eleven  States  which 
had  voted  for  Fremont,  giving  him  an 
aggregate  popular  majority  of  over 
250,000,  now  giving  but  little  over 
50,000  for  the  Republican  tickets. 
All  the  New  England  States  were 
still  carried  by  the  Republicans,  but 
by  majorities  diminished,  in  the  aver- 
age, more  than  half,  while  that  of 
Connecticut  was  reduced  from  7,715 
to  546.  So,  in  Ohio,  Gov.  Chase  was 
this  year  reelected  by  1,481,  though 
Fremont  had  16,623;  while  Gov. 
Lowe,  in  Iowa,  had  but  2,151,  where 
Fremont  had  received  7,784 ;  and 
Gov.  Randall  was  chosen  in  Wis- 
consin by  barely  118,  where  Fremont 
had  received  13,247.  No  Republi- 
can State  was  actually  revolution- 

2  Of  $300. 

3  Minnesota  chose  three  Members  to  the 
House,  on  the  assumption  that  her  population 
was  sufficient  to  warrant  her  m  claiming  that 


N  CONFLICT. 

ized,  however,  but  New  York ;  where 
— owing,  in  part,  to  local  questions 
and  influences — Fremont's  magnifi- 
cent plurality  of  80,000  was  changed 
to  a  Democratic  plurality  of  18,000. 
It  appeared  in  this,  as  in  most  other 
Free  States,  that  the  decline  or  disso- 
lution of  the  "  American"  or  Fill- 
more party  inured  mainly  to  the 
benefit  of  the  triumphant  Democra- 
cy ;  though  Pennsylvania,  and  possi- 
bly Rhode  Island,  were  exceptions. 
To  swell  the  resistless  tide,  Minne- 
sota and  Oregon — both  in  tjte  ex- 
treme North — each  framed  a  State 
Constitution  this  year,  and  took  po- 
sition in  line  with  the  dominant 
party — Minnesota  by  a  small,  Ore- 
gon by  an  overwhelming,  majority 
— the  two  swelling  by  four  Sena- 
tors and  four3  Representatives  the 
already  invincible  strength  of  the 
Democracy. 

The  Opposition  was  utterly  power- 
less against  this  surge ;  but  what 
they  dare  hardly  undertake,  Mr.  Bu- 
chanan was  able  to  effect.  By  his 
utterly  indefensible  attempt  to  en- 
force the  Lecompton  Constitution 
upon  Kansas,  in  glaring  contradic- 
tion to  his  smooth  and  voluble  pro- 
fessions regarding  "  Popular  Sover- 
eignty," "  the  will  of  the  majority," 
etc.,  etc.,  he  enabled  the  Repub- 
licans, in  1858,  to  hold,  by  majorities 
almost  uniformly  increased,  all  the 
States  they  had  carried  the  preceding 
year,  and  reverse  the  last  year's  ma- 
jority against  them  in  New  York; 
carry  Pennsylvania  for  the  first  time 
by  over  26,000  majority;  triumph 
even  in  New  Jersey  under  an  equiv- 

number — or,  at  least,  soon  would  be.  She  has 
since  chosen  but  two,  being  entitled  to  no  more 
— in  fact,  hardly  to  so  many — under  the  Census 
of  1860. 


THE   IRREPRESSIBLE  CONFLICT. 


301 


ocal  organization;  bring  over  Min- 
nesota by  a  close  vote;  and  swell 
their  majority  in  Ohio  to  fully  20,000. 
They  were  beaten  in  Indiana  on  the 
State  ticket  by  a  very  slender  major- 
ity, but  carried  seven  of  the  eleven 
Representatives  in  Congress,  beside 
helping  elect  an  anti-Lecompton 
Democrat  in  another  district ;  while 
Michigan,  Iowa,  and  Wisconsin,  chose 
Republican  tickets — as  of  late  had 
been  usual  with  them — by  respect- 
able majorities,  and  the  last  named 
by  one  increased  to  nearly  6,000. 
California  and  Oregon  still  adhered 
to  Democracy  of  the  most  pro-Slavery 
type,  by  decisive  majorities. 
•i  Illinois  was  this  year  the  arena  of 
a  peculiar  contest.  Senator  Douglas 
had  taken  so  prominent  and  so  effi- 
cient a  part  in  the  defeat  of  the  Le- 
compton  abomination,  that  a  number 
of  the  leading  Republicans  of  other 
States  were  desirous  that  their  Illinois 
brethren  should  unite  in  choosing  a 
Legislature  pledged  to  return  him, 
by  a  vote  substantially  unanimous,  to 
the  seat  he  had  so  ably  filled.  But 
it  was  hardly  in  human  nature  that 
those  thus  appealed  to  should,  be- 
cause of  one  good  act,  recognize  and 
treat  as  a  friend  one  whom  they  had 
known  for  nearly  twenty  years  as  the 
ablest,  most  indefatigable,  and  by  no 
means  the  most  scrupulous,  of  their 
adversaries.  They  held  a  sort  of 
State  Convention,  therefore,  and  pre- 
sented Abraham  Lincoln  as  a  Re- 
publican competitor  for  Mr.  Doug- 
las's seat ;  and  he  opened  the  canvass 
at  once,4  in  a  terse,  forcible,  and  tho- 
roughly "  radical"  speech,  wherein  he 
enunciated  the  then .  startling,  if  not 
absolutely  novel,  doctrine  that  the 


Union  cannot  permanently  endure 
half  Slave  and  half  Free.  Said  Mr. 
Lincoln : 

"If  we  could  first  know  where  we  are,  and 
whither  we  are  tending,  we  could  better 
judge  what  to  do,  and  how  to  do  it.  We 
are  now  far  into  the  fifth  year  since  a  policy 
was  initiated  with  the  avowed  object  and 
confident  promise  of  putting  an  end  to  Sla- 
very agitation.  Under  the  operation  of  that 
policy,  that  agitation  has  not  only  not 
ceased,  but  has  constantly  augmented.  In 
my  opinion,  it  will  not  cease  until  a  crisis 
shall  have  been  reached  and  passed.  1 A 
house  divided  against  itself  cannot  stand.' 
I  believe  this  Government  cannot  perma- 
nently endure  half  slave  and  half  free.  I  do 
not  expect  the  Union  to  be  dissolved — I  do 
not  expect  the  house  to  fall — but  I  do  expect 
that  it  will  cease  to  be  divided.  It  will  be- 
come all  one  thing  or  all  the  other.  Either 
the  opponents  of  Slavery  will  arrest  the  fur- 
ther spread  of  it,  and  place  it  where  the  pub- 
lic mind  shall  rest  in  the  belief  that  it  is  in 
the  course  of  ultimate  extinction;  or  its  ad- 
vocates will  push  it  forward  till  it  shall  be- 
come alike  lawful  in  all  the  States,  old  as 
well  as  new — North  as  well  as  South." 

This  almost  prophetic  statement, 
from  one  born  in  Kentucky,  and  who 
had  been  known,  prior  to  the  appear- 
ance of  the  Dred  Scott  decision,  as  a 
rather  conservative  Whig,  was  put 
forth,  more  than  four  months  before 
Gov.  Seward,5  as  if  under  a  like  pre- 
monition of  coming  events,  said : 

"These  antagonistic  systems  are  continu- 
ally coming  into  closer  contact,  and  collision 
results. 

"Shall  I  tell  you  what  this  collision 
means  ?  They  who  think  that  it  is  acci- 
dental, unnecessary,  the  work  of  interested 
or  fanatical  agitators,  and  therefore  epheme- 
ral, mistake  the  case  altogether.  It  is  an  ir- 
repressible conflict  between  opposing  and 
enduring  forces;  and  it  means  that  the 
United  States  must  and  will,  sooner  or  later, 
become  either  entirely  a  slave-holding  na- 
tion, or  entirely  a  free-labor  nation.  Either 
the  cotton  and  rice-fields  of  South  Carolina 
and  the  sugar  plantations  of  Louisiana  will 
ultimately  be  tilled  by  free  labor,  and  Charles- 
ton and  New  Orleans  become  marts  for  le- 
gitimate merchandise  alone,  or  else  the  rye- 
fields  and  wheat-fields   of  Massachusetts 


«  At  Springfield,  111.,  June  17,  1858. 


5  At  Rochester,  N  Y.,  Oct.  25,  1858. 


302 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  New  York  must  again  be  surrendered 
by  their  farmers  to  slave  culture  and  to  the 
production  of  slaves,  and  Boston  and  New 
York  become  once  more  markets  for  trade 
in  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men.  It  is  the 
failure  to  apprehend  this  great  truth  that 
induces  so  many  unsuccessful  attempts  at 
final  compromise  between  the  Slave  and 
Free  States;  and  it  is  the  existence  of 
this  great  fact  that  renders  all  such  pretend- 
ed compromises,  when  made,  vain  and 
ephemeral." 

Mr.  Lincoln,  in  his  brief  Spring- 
field speech,  furnished  the  shortest 
and  sharpest  exposition  ever  yet 
given  of  the  doctrine  vaunted  as 
i  Popular  Sovereignty,'  viz. : 

"  This  necessity  [for  a  "popular  indorse- 
ment of  the  policy  embodied  in  the  Nebraska- 
Kansas  bill]  had  not  been  overlooked;  but 
had  been  provided  for,  as  well  as  might  be, 
in  the  notable  argument  of  '  Squatter  Sover- 
eignty,' otherwise  called  'sacred  right  of 
self-government  ;'  which  latter  phrase, 
though  expressive  of  the  only  rightful  basis 
of  any  government,  was  so  perverted,  in 
this  attempted  use  of  it,  as  to  amount  to  just 
this :  That,  if  any  one  man  choose  to  enslave 
another,  no  third  man  shall  be  allowed  to 
object" 

Mr.  Douglas  promptly  joined  issue ; 
and  an  oral  canvass  of  unequaled 
interest,  considering  the  smallness  of 
the  stake,  was  prosecuted  by  these 
capable  and  practiced  popular  de- 
baters, before  immense  audiences  of 
their  fellow-citizens,  up  to  the  eve  of 
the  State  Election.  In  the  event, 
Mr.  Douglas  was  successful,  securing 
54  to  46  of  the  members  of  the  Leg- 
islature, and  being  promptly  reelect- 
ed by  them ;  but  the  candidates  fa- 
vorable to  Mr.  Lincoln  had  a  plurality 
of  the  popular  vote.6 

The  Elections  of  1859  were  not  es- 
pecially significant,  save  that,  in  New 
York,  what  remained  of  the  "  Ame- 
rican" party,  instead  of  nominating  a 

6  For  Lincoln,  124,698;  for  Douglas,  121,130; 
Lincoln's  plurality,  3,568.  But  over  4,000  Dem- 
ocratic votes  were  scattered  and  lost,  in  obe- 


State  ticket  of  their  own  men,  adopt- 
ed the  expedient  of  selecting  their 
candidates  alternately  from  the  tickets 
of  the  two  great  parties — of  course, 
powerfully  aiding  that  which  must 
otherwise  have  been  beaten  through- 
out. The  25,000  votes  thus  cast 
elected  three  of  the  Democratic  can- 
didates by  majorities  of  328  to  1,450 ; 
while  the  Republicans  placed  on  the 
"American  ticket"  had  majorities 
ranging  from  45,104  to  49,447 ;  and 
one  Republican  candidate  was  chosen 
over  the  joint  vote  of  both  the  adverse 
parties.  In  this  "  balance-of-power" 
movement  of  the  Americans  was  fore- 
shadowed the  "  Fusion"  electoral 
tickets  of  1860. 

The  indignant,  scornful  rhetoric 
wherewith  Mr.  Webster  had  scouted 
the  suggestion,  that  Slavery  might 
possibly  be  established  in  JSTew  Mexi- 
co, and  spurned  the  idea  of  "  reenact- 
ing  the  laws  of  God"  by  prohibiting 
it  there,  had  scarcely  died  out  of  the 
public  ear,  when  the  Legislature  of 
that  vast  Territory  proceeded,  at  its 
session  in  1859,  to  do  the  very  thing 
which  he  had  deemed  so  inconceiva- 
ble. Assuming  the  legal  existence 
of  Slavery  in  that  Territory,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  Dred  Scott  deci- 
sion, the  Legislature  proceeded  to 
pass  "  An  act  to  provide  for  the  pro- 
tection of  property  in  slaves,"  where- 
by severe  penalties  were  provided 
for  "  stealing,"  or  "  enticing  away " 
said  property,  or  "  inciting"  said  pro- 
perty to  "  discontent"  or  "  insubordi- 
nation." The  spirit  of  this  notable  act 
is  fairly  exhibited  in  the  following 
provisions : 

dience  to  directions  from  Washington — Mr. 
Douglas's  apprehended  return  being  exceedingly 
distasteful  to  President  Buchanan. 


SLAVERY  LEGALIZE 


D    IN   NEW  MEXICO. 


303 


"Seo.  10.  Any  person  may  lawfully  take 
up  or  apprehend  any  slave  who  shall  have 
run  away,  or  be  absenting  himself  from  the 
custody  or  service  of  his  master  or  owner, 
and  may  lawfully  use  or  employ  such  force 
as  may  be  necessary  to  take  up  or  appre- 
hend such  slave ;  and  such  person,  upon 
the  delivery  of  such  slave  to  his  master  or 
owner,  or  at  such  place  as  his  master  or 
owner  may  designate,  shall  be  entitled  to 
demand  or  recover  by  suit  any  reward 
which  may  have  been  offered  for  the  appre- 
hension or  delivery  of  such  slave.  And,  if 
no  reward  have  been  offered,  then  such  per- 
son so  apprehending  such  slave  shall,  upon 
the  delivery  of  such  slave  to  his  master  or 
owner,  or  to  .  the  sheriff  of  the  county  in 
Avhich  such  slave  was  apprehended,  be  en- 
titled to  demand  and  recover  from  such 
owner  or  master  the  sum  of  twenty  dollars, 
besides'  ten  cents  for  each  mile  of  travel  to 
and  from  the  place  where  such  apprehen- 
sion was  made. 

"  Sec.  1 1 .  If  any  sheriff  of  any  county 
within  this  Territory  shall  fail  or  refuse  to 
receive  with  proper  care  any  runaway  slave 
so  offered  to  him  for  safe-keeping,  by  such 
person  apprehending  the  same,  or  his  agent, 
such  sheriff  shall,  upon  conviction  thereof, 
be  fined  in  a  sum  not  less  than  five  hundred 
dollars  to  the  use  of  the  Territory,  shall 
further  be  liable  to  the  owner  of  such  slave 
for  his  value,  recoverable  by  civil  suit,  and 
shall  be  ineligible  for  reelection  to  the  said 
office. 

"  Sec.  20.  Any  slave  who  shall  conduct 
himself  disorderly  in  a  public  place,  or  shall 
give  insolent  language  or  signs  to  any  free 
white  person,  may  be  arrested  and  taken  by 
such  person  before  a  justice  of  the  peace, 
who,  upon  trial  and  conviction,  in  a  sum- 
mary manner,  shall  cause  his  constable  to 
give  such  slave  any  number  of  stripes  upon 
his  or  her  bare  back,  not  exceeding  thirty- 
nine. 

uSec.  21.  When  any  slave  shall  be  con- 
victed of  any  crime  or  misdemeanor,  for 
which  the  penalty  assigned  by  law  is,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  the  fine  of  a  sum  of  mo- 
ney, the  court  passing  sentence  on  him  may, 
in  its  discretion,  substitute  for  such  fine  cor- 
poral punishment,  or  branding,  or  stripes. 

"  Seo.  26.  No  slaye  shall  be  permitted  to 
go  from  the  premises  of  his  owner  or  mas- 
ter after  sunset  and  before  sunrise,  without 
a  written  pass,  specifying  the  particular 
place  or  places  to  which  such  slave  is  per- 
mitted to  go ;  and  any  white  person  is  au- 
thorized to  take  any  slave  who,  upon  de- 
mand, shall  not  exhibit  such  pass,  before 
any  justice  of  the  peace,  who,  upon  sum- 
mary investigation,  shall  cause  such  slave  to 
be  whipped  with  not  more  than  thirty-nine 
stripes  upon  his  or  her  bare  back,  and  to  be 


committed  to  the  jail,  or  custody  of  a  proper 
officer,  to  be  released  the  next  day,  on  de- 
mand and  payment  of  costs  by  the  owner 
or  master." 

Another  act  passed  by  the  same 
Legislature,  "Amendatory  of  the 
law  relative  to  contracts  between 
masters  and  servants"  (peons),  has 
this  unique  provision,  which  might 
have  afforded  a  hint  to  South  Caro- 
lina in  her  worst  estate  : 

"Seo.  4.— No  Court  of  this  Territory 
shall  have  jurisdiction,  nor  shall  take  cogni- 
zance, of  any  cause  for  the  correction  that 
masters  may  give  their  servants  for  neglect 
of  their  duties  as  servants ;  for  they  are  con- 
sidered as  domestic  servants  to  their  mas- 
ters, and  they  should  correct  their  neglect 
and  faults;  for,  as  soldiers  are  punished  by 
their  chiefs,  without  the  intervention  of 
the  civil  authority,  by  reason  of  the  salary 
they  enjoy,  an  equal  right  should  be  grant- 
ed those  persons  who  pay  their  money  to  be 
served  in  the  protection  of  their  property ; 
Provided,  That  such  correction  shall  not  be 
inflicted  in  a  cruel  manner,  with  clubs  or 
stripes." 

These  acts  were  directly  inspired 
from  Washington,  and  were  enacted 
under  the  supervision  and  tutelage 
of  the  Federal  officers  stationed  in 
the  Territory.  Some  of  these  were 
personally  slaveholders ;  others  were 
only  anxious  to  commend  themselves 
to  the  notice  and  favor  of  their  supe- 
riors ;  and  it  was  easy  for  them  to 
persuade  the  ignorant  Mexicans,  who 
mainly  composed  the  Legislature, 
that  such  acts  would  cause  the  hea- 
venly dews  of  Federal  patronage  to 
fall  in  boundless  profusion  on  the 
arid,  thirsty  hills  of  their  Territory. 
And,  while  the  number  of  slaves  held 
in  New  Mexico  might  never  be  great, 
its  salubrity,  and  the  ease  wherewith 
a  mere  subsistence  is  maintained 
there,  might  well  have  commended 
it  to  favor  as  a  breedinsr-OTound  of 
black  chattels  for  the  unhealthy 
swamps  and  lowlands  of  Arkansas 
and  Louisiana.    In  any  case  its  sub- 


304 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


servience  to  the  Slave  Power  was  as- 
sured by  the  mere  legalization  of  life- 
long bondage  and  unrequited  labor 
on  its  narrow  but  fertile  intervales, 
and  in  its  mines  of  precious  ore. 

The  XXXVIth  Congress  assem- 
bled at  "Washington  Monday,  De- 
cember 5,  1859.  The  Senate  was 
still  strongly  Democratic,  though  the 
Republican  minority  therein  had 
grown  gradually,  until  it  numbered 
twenty-four.  Indiana,  Minnesota, 
California,  and  Oregon,  were  still 
represented  by  Democrats,  as  were 
in  part  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  and  Illi- 
nois ;  but  the  strong  anti-Lecompton 
wave  of  1858  had  swept  into  the 
House  delegations  from  New  York, 
New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio, 
Wisconsin,  Iowa,  and  Minnesota, 
decidedly  hostile  to  the  Administra- 
tion ;  and  these,  with  unanimous 
Republican  delegations  from  all  the 
New  England  States,  left  no  clear 
majority  for  any  party.  On  the  first 
ballot  for  Speaker,  Thomas  S.  Bo- 
cock,  Dem.,  of  Virginia,  received 
eighty-six  votes;  John  Sherman, 
Pep.,  of  Ohio,  sixty-six  ;  Galusha  A. 
Grow,  Pep.,  of  Pennsylvania,  forty- 
three  :  twenty-two  were  divided  be- 
tween three  "  Americans"  or  South- 
ern Whigs,  and  thirteen  were  scat- 
tered mainly  upon  anti-Lecompton 
Democrats  :  whole  number  cast,  230 ; 
necessary  for  a  choice,  116. 

Mr.  Burnett,  of  Kentucky,  now 
moved  that  the  House  adjourn  till 
to-morrow,  which  was  negatived — 
Yeas  100 ;  Nays  130 :  whereupon 
Mr.  John  B.  Clark,7  of  Missouri, 
rose,  and,  amid  a  shower  of  objec- 
tions and  interruptions,  proposed  the 
following  preamble  and  resolution : 


"  Whereas,  certain  members  of  this  House, 
now  in  nomination  for  Speaker,  did  indorse 
and  recommend  the  book  hereinafter  men- 
tioned, 

"Resolved,  That  the  doctrines  and  senti- 
ments of  a  certain  book  called  '  The  Impend- 
ing Crisis  of  the  South — How  to  meet  it,' 
purporting  to  have  been  written  by  one 
Hinton  R.  Helper,  are  insurrectionary  and 
hostile  to  the  domestic  peace  and  tranquillity 
of  the  country ;  and  that  no  member  of  this 
House  who  has  indorsed  and  recommended 
it,  or  the  compend  from  it,  is  fit  to  be  Speak- 
er of  this  House." 

The  book  thus  advertised  was 
written  by  a  young  North  Carolinian 
of  the  poorer  middle  class,  who,  hav- 
ing migrated  to  California,  and  spent 
some  time  in  the  Northern  States, 
had  imbibed  ideas  respecting  Slave- 
ry which  it  was  not  safe  to  express 
in  his  native  State.  Those  ideas  he 
had  embodied  in  his  u  Impending 
Crisis,"  which  was,  in  substance,  a 
vehement  appeal  to  the  poor  whites 
of  the  South  against  persistence  in 
servility  to  the  slaveholders,  backed 
by  ample  statistics,  proving  Slavery 
specially  injurious  and  degrading  to 
them,  as  well  as  baleful  and  blight- 
ing to  the  entire  South.  This  book, 
being  deemed  effective  as  an  anti- 
Slavery  argument,  whether  in  the 
North  or  in  the  South,  had  been  re- 
commended to  general  attention,  in 
a  circular  signed  by  two  thirds,  at 
least,  of  the  Pepublican  members  of 
the  last  Congress,  including,  of 
course,  many  of  those  returned  to 
the  present.  Messrs.  Sherman  and 
Grow,  between  whom  the  Pepubli- 
can vote  for  Speaker  was  divided, 
were  both  among  the  signers  of  this 
circular.  Hereupon,  Mr.  Clark  pro- 
ceeded to  make,  amid  interruptions 
and  questions  of  order,  such  a  speech 
as  a  slaveholder  might  be  expected 
to  make  on  such  a  theme ;  urging 


i  Since  known  as  an  active  and  bitter  Rebel. 


HELPER'S  IMPENDING 


CRISIS  IN  THE  HOUSE. 


305 


that  no  man  who  had  recommended 
such  a  book  as  Helper's  ought  to  be 
chosen  Speaker,  and  insisting  on  dis- 
cussing the  contents  and  bearings  of 
that  book  at  leisure ;  whilst  several 
Republican  members,  instead  of  re- 
prehending this  discreditable  inter- 
ruption of  the  proper  business  of  the 
House,  and  demanding  that  the  Clerk 
should  proceed  to  call  the  roll  for 
another  attempt  to  elect  a  Speaker, 
rose  to  deprecate,  and  explain,  and 
apologize,  and  insist  that,  if  they  had 
signed  a  recommendation  of  any  such 
book,  it  was  in  total  ignorance  of  its 
contents,  which  they  utterly  con- 
demned and  repudiated.  Thus,  amid 
great  confusion,  Mr.  Clark  carried 
the  point  he  was  aiming  at ;  and  the 
House,  after  one  more  refusal — Yeas 
113  ;  Nays  115 — consented  to  adjourn 
at  a  little  past  two  o'clock,  without 
taking  a  second  ballot  for  Speaker. 

In  the  Senate,  also,  Slavery  agita- 
tion was  commenced  from  the  Demo- 
cratic side,  even  before  that  body 
had  been  fairly  organized,  by  a  re- 
solve, introduced  by  Mr.  Mason,  of 
Virginia,  calling  for  the  most  elabo- 
rate inquiry  into  the  recent  tragedy 
at  Harper's  Ferry,  and  requiring  the 
Select  Committee  thereon  to  report 
"  what  legislation  may,  in  their  opin- 
ion, be  necessary  for  the  future  pres- 
ervation of  the  peace  of  the  country," 
etc. ;  and  hereupon  the  Senate  plung- 
ed into  a  discussion,  which  lasted 
several  days. 

Mr.  Clark,  in  like  manner,  resumed 
his  dissertation  on  Helper  immedi- 
ately on  the  assembling  of  the  House 
next  morning,  having  all  manner  of 
documents  read  from  the  Clerk's 
desk ;  and  spinning  out  his  remarks 
to  the  utmost  length.    When  he  had 


closed,  Mr.  John  A.  Gilmer,8  of  K  C, 
moved  a  substitute,  condemning  all 
attempts  at  renewing  Slavery  agita- 
tion ;  whereupon  Mr.  Washburne,  of 
111.,  moved  that  the  whole  subject  be 
laid  on  the  table,  which  was  defeated 
by  a  tie  vote  :  Yeas  116  ;  Nays  116  : 
and  the  debate  went  on,  simulta- 
neously with  that  on  John  Brown 
and  his  doings  in  the  Senate.  A 
second  ballot  for  Speaker  was  not  ob- 
tained until  the  close  of  the  third 
day's  proceedings,  when  Mr.  Sher- 
man received  107  votes ;  Mr.  Bocock 
88 ;  Mr.  Gilmer  22 ;  and  there  were 
14  scattering.  And  still  the  two 
Houses  continued  to  debate  John 
Brown  and  Helper,  by  way  of  dis- 
couraging Slavery  agitation,  inter- 
spersed with  readings  of  the  choicest 
and  spiciest  extracts  from  Helper, 
and  occasional  ballots  for  Speaker — 
Mr.  Sherman's  vote  rising  to  112, 
while  116  were  necessary  for  a  choice. 
The  total  vote  was  diminished,  after 
a  few  days,  as  members  paired  off 
and  left  Washington  ;  but  Mr.  Sher- 
man continued  to  lack  from  three  to 
live  of  an  election  ;  until  finally,  after 
eight  weeks  had  been  thus  spent,  he 
peremptorily  declined ;  and  Mr.  Wil- 
liam Pennington — ex-Governor  of 
New  Jersey,  and  now,  for  the  first 
time,  a  member  of  the  House — was 
presented  in  his  stead.  Mr.  Bocock 
was  also  withdrawn,  and  the  entire 
pro-Slavery  strength  concentrated,  so 
far  as  possible,  on  Mr.  Wm.  JST.  H. 
Smith,  "American,"  of  K  C.  The 
next  (fortieth)  ballot  gave  Penning- 
ton 115  ;  Smith  113 ;  John  G.  Davis, 
anti-Lecompton  Dem.,  of  Ind.,  2;. 
and  there  were  4  scattering:  neces- 
sary to  a  choice  118.  Finally,  on  the 
forty-fourth  ballot,9  Mr.  Smith's  name. 


8  "  American." 

20 


9  February  1,  1860. 


306 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


having  been  withdrawn,  the  vote  was 
declared:  for  Pennington  117 ;  John 
A.  McClernand,  Dem.,  85 ;  John  A. 
Gilmer,  Amer.,  16 ;  and  there  were 
15  scattering.  Mr.  Henry  Winter 
Davis,  of  Md.,  who  had  hitherto  voted 
with  the  Americans,  now  cast  his 
vote  for  Pennington,  and  elected 
him — he  having  the  exact  number 
necessary  to  a  choice.  John  W.  For- 
ney, anti-Lecompton  Dem.,  was  soon 
after  elected  Clerk  by  a  close  vote. 

The  majority  in  the  Senate  was 
not  merely  Democratic  of  the  Le- 
compton  or  extreme  pro-Slavery  caste ; 
it  was  especially  hostile  to  Senator 
Douglas,  and  determined  to  punish 
him  for  his  powerful  opposition  to 
the  Lecompton  bill,  by  reading  him 
out  of  the  party.  To  this  end,  Mr. 
Jefferson  Davis  submitted lu  an  elabo- 
rate series  of  resolves,  whereof  the 
following  is  the  most  material : 

"4.  Resolved,  That  neither  Congress  nor 
a  Territorial  Legislature,  whether  by  direct 
legislation  or  legislation  of  an  indirect  and 
unfriendly  nature,  possess  the  power  to  an- 
nul or  impair  the  constitutional  right  of  any 
citizen  of  the  Ignited  States  to  take  his  slave 
property  into  the  common  Territories ;  but 
it  is  the  duty  of  the  Federal  Government 
there  to  afford  for  that,  as  for  other  species 
of  property,  the  needful  protection ;  and,  if 
experience  should  at  any  time  prove  that  the 
Judiciary  does  not  possess  power  to  insure 
adequate  protection,  it  will  then  become  the 
duty  of  Congress  to  supply  such  deficiency." 

These  resolutions  he  modified,  "after 
a  conference  with  friends,"  and  sub- 
mitted afresh,11  presenting  the  mate- 
rial proposition  in  this  shape  : 

"  4.  Resolved,  That  neither  Congress  nor 
a  Territorial  Legislature,  whether  by  direct 


legislation  or  legislation  of  an  indirect  and 
untriendly  character,  possesses  power  to  an- 
nul or  impair  the  constitutional  right  of  any 
citizen  of  the  United  States  to  take  his  slave 
property  into  the  common  Territories,  and 
there  hold  and  enjoy  the  same  while  the  ter- 
ritorial condition  remains." 

The  discussion  of  the  series  con- 
sumed a  large  share  of  the  time 
and  attention  of  the  Senate  during 
the  entire  session.  It  ultimately 
transpired  that  they  were  the 
work  of  a  '  Lecompton'  or  regular 
Democratic  caucus,  and  that  their 
ulterior  object  was  the  reading  of 
Mr.  Douglas,  and  other  tenacious 
champions  of  1  Popular  Sovereignty,' 
out  'of  the  Democratic  party.  At 
length,12  the  Senate  came  to  a  vote  on 
the  first  of  the  series,  which  was  as 
follows : 

"1.  Resolved,  That,  in  the  adoption  of  the 
Federal  Constitution,  the  States  adopting  the 
same  acted  severally  as  free  and  independ- 
ent sovereignties,  delegating  a  portion  of 
their  powers  to  be  exercised  by  the  Federal 
Government  for  the  increased  security  of 
each  against  dangers,  domestic  as  well  as 
foreign ;  and  that  any  intermeddling  by  any 
one  or  more  States,  or  by  a  combination  of 
their  citizens,  with  the  domestic  institutions 
of  the  others,  on  any  pretext  whatever,  po- 
litical, moral,  or  religious,  with  a  view  to  their 
disturbance  or  subversion,  is  in  violation  of 
the  Constitution,  insulting  to  the  States  so 
interfered  with,  endangers  their  domestic 
peace  and  tranquillity — objects  for  which  the 
Constitution  was  formed — and,  by  necessary 
consequence,  tends  to  weaken  and  destroy 
the  Union  itself." 

This  resolve  was  aimed  directly  at 

the  Republicans,  and  was  passed  by  a 

strict  party  vote — that  is,  by  the  votes 

of  all  others  in  the  affirmative,  against 

the  Republicans  in  the  negative : 

Yeas  36 ;  Kays  19.13 


10  Feb.  2,  1860.  "Feb.  29,  1860. 

12  May  24,  1860. 

13  Yeas — Messrs.  Benjamin,  Bigler,  Bragg, 
Bright,  Brown,  Chesnut,  C.  C.  Clay,  Clingman, 
Crittenden,  Davis,  Fitzpatrick,  Green,  Gwin, 
Hammond.  Hemphill  Hunter,  Iverson,  Johnson, 
of  Ark.,  Johnson,  of  Tenn.,  Kennedy,  Lane 
.(Oregon),  Latham,  Mallory,  Mason,  Nicholson, 


Pearce,  Polk,  Powell,  Pugh,  Rice,  Sebastian, 
Slidell,  Thomson,  of  N.  J.,  Toombs,  "WigfalL  and 
Yulee— 36. 

Nats — Messrs.  Bingham.  Chandler,  Clark, 
Collamer,  Dixon,  Doolittle,  Fessenden,  Fo«t, 
Foster,  Grimes,  Hale,  Hamlin,  Harlan,  King, 
Simmons,  Sumner,  Ten  Eyck,  "Wade,  and  "Wil- 
son— 19. 


"POPULAR   SOVEREIGNTY"    IN   THE  SENATE. 


307 


"2.  Resolved,  That  negro  Slavery,  as  it 
exists  in  fifteen  States  of  this  Union,  compo- 
ses an  important  portion  of  their  domestic 
institutions,  inherited  from  their  ancestors, 
and  existing  at  the  adoption  of  the  Consti- 
tution, by  which  it  is  recognized  as  consti- 
tuting an  important  element  in  the  appor- 
tionment of  powers  among  the  States,  and 
that  no  change  of  opinion  or  feeling  on  the 
part  of  the  non-slaveholding  States  of  the 
Union,  in  relation  to  this  institution,  can 
justify  them  or  their  citizens  in  open  or  cov- 
ert attacks  thereon,  with  a  view  to  its  over- 
throw ;  and  that  all  such  attacks  are  in 
manifest  violation  of  the  mutual  and  solemn 
pledge  to  protect  and  defend  each  other, 
given  by  the  States  respectively  on  entering 
into  the  constitutional  compact  which  formed 
the  Union,  and  are  a  manifest  breach  of 
faith,  and  a  violation  of  the  most  solemn  ob- 
ligations." 

This  was  adopted :  Teas  36  ;  Nays 
20;  the  division  being  identical  with 
the  foregoing,  save  that  Mr.  Trum- 
bull, of  Illinois,  was  now  present, 
adding  one  to  the  Republican  vote. 

While  the  above  resolve  was  under 
consideration,  Mr.  Harlan,  of  Iowa, 
moved  to  add  to  it  as  follows  : 

"But  the  free  discussion  of  the  morality 
and  expediency  of  Slavery  should  never  be 
interfered  with  by  the  laws  of  any  State,  or 
of  the  United  States;  and  the  freedom  of 
speech  and  of  the  press,  on  this  and  every 
other  subject  of  domestic  and  national  pol- 
icy, should  be  maintained  inviolate  in  all  the 
States." 

This  was  rejected :  Yeas  20 ;  Nays 
36  (as  upon  the  adoption  of  the  sec- 
ond resolve,  with  the  order  reversed). 

"3.  Resolved,  That  the  Union  of  these 
States  rests  on  the  equality  of  rights  and 

14  Yeas — Messrs.  Thomson  (John  R.,)  of  New 
Jersey,  Bigler,  of  Pennsylvania,  Rice,  of  Minne- 
sota. Bright,  of  Indiana,  Gwin  and  Latham,  of 
California,  Lane,  of  Oregon — in  all,  seven  from 
Free  States;  with  Messrs.  Kennedy  and  Pearce. 
of  Maryland,  Hunter  and  Mason,  of  Virginia, 
Bragg  and  Clingman,  of  North  Carolina,  Chesnut 
and  Hammond,  of  South  Carolina,  Iverson  and 
Toombs,  of  Georgia,  C.  C.  Clay  and  Fitzpatrick, 
of  Alabama,  Brown  and  Davis,  of  Mississippi, 
Benjamin  and  Slidell,  of  Louisiana,  Mallory  and 
Yulee,  of  Florida,  Hemphill  and  Wigfall,  of 
Texas,  Crittenden  and  Powell,  of  Kentucky,  A. 
Johnson  and  Nicholson,  of  Tennessee,  Green 


privileges  among  its  members ;  and  that  it 
is  especially  the  duty  of  the  Senate,  which 
represents  the  States  in  their  sovereign  ca- 
pacity, to  resist  all  attempts  to  discriminate 
either  in  relation  to  persons  or  property  in 
the  Territories,  which  are  the  common  pos- 
sessions of  the  United  States,  so  as  to  give 
advantages  to  the  citizens  of  one  State  which 
are  not  equally  assured  to  those  of  every 
other  State." 

This  was  also  adopted — Yeas  36  ; 
Nays  18  :  the  Yeas,  as  upon  the  first 
vote ;  as  also  the  Nays,  except  that 
Messrs.  Grimes  and  King  did  not  vote. 

The  next  was  the  touchstone — its 
passage  by  a  party  vote  the  object* 
of  the  movement.    It  reads : 

"4.  Resolved,  That  neither  Congress  nor 
a  Territorial  Legislature,  whether  by  direct 
legislation  or  legislation  of  an  indirect  and 
unfriendly  character,  possesses  power  to  an- 
nul or  impair  the  constitutional  right  of  any 
citizen  of  the  United  States  to  take  his  slave 
property  into  the  common  Territories,  and 
there  hold  and  enjoy  the  same  while  the 
territorial  condition  remains." 

This  important  resolve — the  sen- 
tence and  death-knell  of  "Popular 
Sovereignty" — was  passed  by  the 
decisive  majority  of  thirty-five  Yeas 
to  twenty-one  Nays 14 — every  Demo- 
cratic Senator  present  but  Mr.  Pugh, 
of  Ohio,  voting  for  it ;  though  Messrs. 
Latham,  of  California,  Fitch,  of  Indi- 
ana, Pice,  of  Minnesota,  and  perhaps 
one  or  two  others,  had  been  known  in 
other  days  as  friends  of  Mr.  Douglas, 
and  champions  of  his  doctrine.  Mr. 
Douglas  himself  was  absent  through- 

and  Polk,  of  Missouri,  R.  W.  Johnson  and  Se- 
bastian, of  Arkansas — 28  from  Slave  States 
alone — every  Slave  State  but  Delaware  being 
fully  represented,  and  casting  its  full  vote  for 
this  proposition.    Total  35. 

The  Nays  were — Messrs.  Fessenden  and 
Hamlin,  of  Maine,  Clark  and  Hale,  of  New  Hamp- 
shire, Sumner  and  Wilson,  of  Massachusetts, 
Simmons,  of  Rhode  Island,  Dixon  and  Foster, 
of  Connecticut,  Coilamer  and  Foot,  of  Vermont, 
King,  of  New  York,  Ten  Eyck,  of  New  Jersey, 
Pugh  and  Wade,  of  Ohio,  Trumbull,  of  Illinois, 
Brigham  and  Chandler,  of  Michigan,  Doolittle, 
of  Wisconsin,  Grimes  and  Harlan,  of  Iowa — 21. 


308  THE  AMERICA 

out,  by  reason  of  sickness.  The  neg- 
ative vote  on  this  grave  proposition 
was  made  np  of  the  twenty  Republi- 
cans aforesaid,  and  Mr.  Pugh.  Nei- 
ther Mr.  Crittenden,  nor  either  of 
the  Maryland  Senators,  had  the  cou- 
rage to  oppose  a  proposition  whereby 
Mr.  Jefferson  Davis  and  his  confede- 
rates were  permitted  to  brand,  by  an 
imposing  vote  of  the  Senate,  not  only 
the  Republicans,  but  the  Douglas 
or  anti-Lecompton  Democrats  also — 
composing  an  immense  majority  of 
the  people  of  the  Free  States — in 
effect,  as  unfaithful  to  their  Constitu- 
tional obligations,  and  making  war  on 
the  guaranteed  rights  of  the  South. 

Mr.  Clingman,  of  North  Carolina, 
proposed  the  following : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  existing  condition  of 
the  Territories  of  the  United  States  does  not 
require  the  intervention  of  Congress  for  the 
protection  of  property  in  slaves." 

To  this,  Mr.  Collamer,  of  Vermont, 

moved  to  alter  the  amendment,  so  as 

to  make  it  read  : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  existing  condition  of 
the  Territories  of  the  United  States  does  not, 
and,  in  our  opinion,  never  will,  require,"  etc. 

This  was  rejected — Yeas  16  ;  Nays 
33.  Then  Mr.  Clingman's  amend- 
ment was  adopted :  Yeas  26  ;  Nays 
23.15 

"  5.  Resolved,  That,  if  experience  should 
at  any  time  prove  that  the  Judicial  and  Ex- 
ecutive authority  do  not  possess  means  to 
insure  adequate  protection  to  constitu- 
tional rights  in  a  Territory,  and  if  the  terri- 
torial government  should  fail  or  refuse  to 
provide  the  necessary  remedies  for  that  pur- 
pose, it  will  be  the  duty  of  Congress  to  sup- 
ply such  deficiency." 

Mr.  Clingman  proposed  to  amend 
this,  as  follows : 

15  Yeas — Messrs.  Bigler,  Bingham,  Bragg, 
Chandler,  Clark.  Clingman,  Collamer,  Crittenden,  ! 
Dixon,  Doolittle,  Foot,  Grimes,  Hale,  Hamlin, 
Harlan,  Johnson,  of  Tennessee,  Kennedy,  La- 
tham, Polk,  Pugh,  Simmons,  Ten  Eyck,  Toombs, 
Trumbull,  Wade,  and  Wilson— 26. 


X  CONFLICT. 

"  Provided,  That  it  is  not  hereby  intend- 
ed to  assert  the  duty  of  Congress  to  provide 
a  system  of  laws  for  the  maintenance  of 
Slavery." 

This  was  rejected — Yeas  12 ;  Nays 
31 — only  Messrs.  Clark,  Clingman, 
Dixon,  Foot,  Foster,  Hale,  Hamlin, 
Latham,  Pugh,  Ten  Eyck,  Trumbull, 
and  Wilson,  voting  in  the  affirma- 
tive. 

The  original  resolution  was  then 
adopted  ;  as  follows  :  Yeas  35  ;  Kays 
2 — Messrs.  Hamlin  and  Trumbull: 
the  Yeas  being  as  upon  the  adoption 
of  the  first  resolve,  with  the  subtrac- 
tion of  Messrs.  Brown  and  Thomson, 
and  the  addition  of  Mr.  Ten  Eyck. 

"6.  Resolved,  That  the  inhabitants  of  a 
Territory  of  the  United  States,  when  they 
rightfully  form  a  Constitution  to  be  admit- 
ted as  a  State  into  the  Union,  may  then,  for 
the  first  time,  like  the  people  of  a  State 
when  forming  a  new  Constitution,  decide  for 
themselves  whether  Slavery,  as  a  domestic 
institution,  shall  be  maintained  or  prohib- 
ited within  tbeir  jurisdiction;  and  lthey 
shall  be  admitted  into  the  Union,  with  or 
without  Slavery,  as  their  constitution  may 
prescribe  at  the  time  of  their  admission.'  " 

This  was  also  adopted,  as  follows : 
Yeas  33  —  same  as  on  the  first  re- 
solve, less  Brown,  Mallory,  and  Pugh ; 
Xays  12 — Bingham,  Chandler,  Dix- 
on, Foot,  Foster,  Hale,  Pugh,  Sim- 
mons, Ten  Eyck,  Trumbull,  Wade, 
and  Wilson. 

"  7.  Resolved,  That  the  provision  of  the 
Constitution  for  the  rendition  of  fugitives 
from  service  or  labor,  without  the  adoption 
of  which  the  Union  could  not  have  been 
formed,  and  the  laws  of  1793  and  1850, 
which  were  enacted  to  secure  its  execution, 
and  the  main  features  of  which,  being  simi- 
lar, bear  the  impress  of  nearly  seventy  years 
of  sanction' by  the  highest  judicial  authority, 
should  be  honestly  and  faithfully  observed 
and  maintained  by  all  who  enjoy  the  bene- 

Xays — Messrs.  Benjamin,  Bright,  Brown, 
Chesnut,  Clay,  Davis,  Fitzpatrick,  Green,  Ham- 
mond, Hunter,  Iverson,  Lane,  Mallory,  Mason, 
Nicholson,  Pearce,  Powell,  Rice,  Saulsbury,  Se- 
bastian, Slidell,  Wigfall,  and  Tulee— 23.  [All 
from  Slave  States  but  Bright,  Lane,  and  Rice.] 


THE   DEMOCRACY   AT  CHARLESTON. 


309 


fits  of  our  compact  of  union,  and  that  all 
acts  of  individuals  or  of  State  Legislatures  to 
defeat  the  purpose  or  nullify  the  require- 
ments of  that  provision,  and  the  laws  made 
in  pursuance  of  it,  are  hostile  in  character, 
subversive  of  the  Constitution,  and  revolu- 
tionary in  their  effect." 

This,  the  last  of  the  series,  was 
likewise  adopted,  as  follows:  Yeas 
36 ;  Nays  6  :  Yeas  as  in  the  first  in- 
stance, except  that  Messrs.  Pearce 
and  Thompson  did  not  vote,  their 
places  being  filled  by  Messrs.  Ten 
Eyck  and  Thomson ;  while  the  Nays 
were  Messrs.  Chandler,  Clark,  Foot, 
Hale,  Wade,  and  Wilson. 

The  Senate  then  proceeded,  on 
motion  of  Mr.  Wilson,  of  Massachu- 
setts, to  reconsider  Mr.  Clingmaus 
resolution  hitherto  given — Mr.  Wil- 
son stating  that,  for  himself  and  his 
Mends,  they  wished  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  any  part  of  the  series,  and 
therefore  moved  the  reconsideration ; 
which  prevailed :  Yeas  26 ;  Nays  8. 
And  the  resolution  of  Mr.  Clingman, 
being  reconsidered,  was  rejected. 

And  so,  Mr.  Jefferson  Davis's  en- 
tire series,  without  the  change  of  a 
comma,  affirming  and  emphasizing 
the  worst  points  of  the  Dred  Scott 
decision,  and  asserting  as  vital  truths 
propositions  which  even  the  Southern 
Democracy  voted  down  when  first 
presented  to  a  Democratic  National 
Convention  by  Mr.  Yancey  in  1848, 
were  now  adopted  by  the  United 
States  Senate  as  necessary  deductions 
from  the  fundamental  law  of  the  land. 


The  Democratic  National  Conven- 
tion of  1856  had  decided  that  its 
successor  should  meet  at  Charleston, 
S.  C,  which  it  accordingly  did,  on  the 
23d  of  April,  1860. 

Abundant  premonitions  of  a  storm 
had  already  been  afforded.   One  del- 


egation from  the  State  of  New  York 
had  been  chosen  by  the  Convention 
which  nominated  State  officers  at 
Syracuse  the  preceding  Autumn ; 
while  another  had  been  elected  by  dis- 
tricts, under  the  auspices  of  Mr.  Fer- 
nando Wood,  then  Mayor  of  the  Com- 
mercial Emporium.  The  former  was 
understood  to  favor  tfte  nomination 
of  Senator  Douglas  for  President ;  the 
latter  to  oppose  it,  and  incline  to  en- 
tire acquiescence  in  whatever  the 
South  might  propose  or  desire.  Two 
delegations  had,  in  like  manner,  been 
chosen  from  Illinois,  under  similar 
I  auspices.  The  National  Committee 
i  had  issued  tickets  to  what  it  esteemed 
I  the  regular,  or  anti-Wood,  delegation 
!  from  New  York,  admitting  them  to 
!  seats  in  the  Convention,  and  ex- 
cluding their  competitors.  Francis 
j  B.  Flournoy,  of  Arkansas,  was  chosen 
temporary  Chairman ;  Gen.  Caleb 
Cushing,  of  Massachusetts,  was,  on 
the  second  day,  made  permanent 
President,  and  a  Committee  on  Plat- 
form, consisting  of  one  member  from 
each  State,  appointed.  On  the  third 
day,  the  contests  were  decided  in 
favor  of  the  anti-Wood  delegation 
from  New  York  and  the  Douglas 
men  from  Illinois.  On  the  fourth, 
no  progress  was  made.  On  the  fifth, 
Mr.  Avery,  of  North  Carolina,  from 
a  majority  of  the  Committee  on  Plat- 
form (IT  to  14),  but  representing  a 
minority  of  the  People  and  of  the 
Electors  of  President,  reported  a 
series,  whereof  the  material  proposi- 
tion was  as  follows : 

a  Resolved,  That  the  platform  adopted  at 
Cincinnati  be  affirmed,  with  the  following 
resolutions : 

"That  the  National  Democracy  of  the 
United  States  hold  these  cardinal  principles 
on  the  subject  of  Slavery  in  the  Territories: 
First,  That  Congress  has  no  power  to  abol- 
ish Slavery  in  the  Territories ;  second,  that 


310 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  Territorial  Legislature  has  no  power  to 
abolish  Slavery  in  the  Territories,  nor  to  pro- 
hibit the  introduction  of  slaves  therein,  nor 
any  power  to  destroy  or  impair  the  right  of 
property  in  slaves  by  any  legislation  what- 
ever." 

Mr.  Henry  B.  Payne,  of  Ohio,  on 
behalf  of  the  members  of  said  Com- 
mittee from  all  the  Free  States  but 
California,  Oregon,  and  Massachu- 
setts— States  entitled  to  choose  172 
Electors,  while  those  represented  in 
the  majority  report  were  entitled 
to  but  127  Electors — reported  a  plat- 
form, which,  as  finally  modified,  was 
presented  by  Mr.  Samuels,  of  Iowa, 
in  the  following  shape  : 

"  1.  Resolved,  That  we,  the  Democracy  of 
the  Union,  in  Convention  assembled,  hereby 
declare  our  affirmance  of  the  resolutions 
unanimously  adopted  and  declared  as  a  plat- 
form of  principles  by  the  Democratic  Con- 
vention at  Cincinnati,  in  the  year  1856,  be- 
lieving that  Democratic  principles  are  un- 
changeable in  their  nature,  when  applied  to 
the  same  subject-matters;  and  we  recom- 
mend, as  the  only  further  resolutions,  the  fol- 
lowing : 

.  I  nasmuch  as  differences  of  opinion  exist  in 
the  Democratic  party  as  to  the  nature  and 
extent  of  the  powers  of  a  Territorial  Legis- 
lature, and  as  to  the  powers  and  duties  of 
Congress,  under  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  over  the  institution  of  Slavery 
within  the  Territories : 

"  2.  Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  Party 
will  abide  by  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States  on  the  questions 
of  Constitutional  law. 

"  3.  Resolved,  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
United  States  to  afford  ample  and  complete 
protection  to  all  its  citizens,  whether  at  home 
or  abroad,  and  whether  uative  or  foreign. 

u4.  Resolved,  That  one  of  the  necessities 
of  the  age,  in  a  military,  commercial,  and 
postal  point  of  view,  is  speedy  communica- 
tion between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  States ; 
and  the  Democratic  Party  pledge  such  con- 
stitutional government  aid  as  will  insure  the 
construction  of  a  railroad  to  the  Pacific 
coast,  at  the  earliest  practicable  period. 

"  5.  Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  party 
are  in  favor  of  the  acquisition  of  the  Island 
of  Cuba,  on  such  terms  as  shall  be  honorable 
to  ourselves  and  just  to  Spain. 

"  6.  Resolved,  That  the  enactments  of  State 
Legislatures  to  defeat  the  faithful  execution 
of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  are  hostile  in 
character,  subversive  of  the  Constitution, 
and  revolutionary  in  their  effect." 


Mr.  Avery's  report  from  the  ma- 
jority was  ultimately  modified  by 
him  so  as  to  read  as  follows : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  platform  adopted  by 
the  Democratic  party  at  Cincinnati  be 
affirmed,  with  the  following  explanatory  res- 
olutions : 

"  First.  That  the  government  of  a  Territory 
organized  by  an  act  of  Congress,  is  provi- 
sional and  temporary ;  and,  during  its  exist- 
ence, all  citizens  of  the  United  States  have 
an  equal  right  to  settle  with  their  property 
in  the  Territory  without  their  rights,  either 
of  person  or  property,  being  destroyed  or 
impaired  by  congressional  or  territorial  legis- 
lation. 

"  Second.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Federal 
Government,  in  all  its  departments,  to  pro- 
tect, when  necessary,  the  rights  of  persons 
and  property  in  the  Territories,  and  wherever 
else  its  constitutional  authority  extends. 

"  Third.  That  when  the  settlers  in  a  Terri- 
tory having  an  adequate  population  form  a 
State  Constitution,  the  right  of  sovereignty 
commences,  and,  being  consummated  by  ad- 
mission into  the  Union,  they  stand  on  an 
equal  footing  with  the  people  of  other  States; 
and  the  State  thus  organized  ought  to  be  ad- 
mitted into  the  Federal  Union,  whether  its 
constitution  prohibits  or  recognizes  the  in- 
stitution of  Slavery. 

"  Fourth.  That  the  Democratic  party  are  in 
favor  of  the  acquisition  of  the  Island  of  Cuba, 
on  such  terms  as  shall  be  honorable  to  our- 
selves and  just  to  Spain,  at  the  earliest  prac- 
ticable moment. 

u  Fifth.  That  the  enactments  of  State  legis- 
latures to  defeat  the  faithful  execution  of  the 
Fugitive  Slave  Law,  are  hostile  in  character, 
subversive  of  the  Constitution,  and  revolu- 
tionary in  their  effect. 

"  Sixth.  That  the  Democracy  of  the  United 
States  recognize  it  as  the  imperative  duty  of 
this  Government  to  protect  the  naturalized 
citizen  in  all  his  rights,  whether  at  home  or 
in  foreign  lands,  to  the  same  extent  as  its 
native-born  citizens. 

"  Whereas,  one  of  the  greatest  necessities  of 
the  age,  in  a  political,  commercial,  postal 
and  military  point  of  view,  is  a  speedy  com- 
munication between  the  Pacific  and  Atlantic 
coasts :    Therefore,  be  it 

M  Resolved,  That  the  Democratic  party  do 
hereby  pledge  themselves  to  use  every  means 
in  their  power  to  secure  the  passage  of  some 
bill,  to  the  extent  of  the  constitutional  au- 
thority of  Congress,  for  the  construction  of 
a  Pacific  Railroad,  from  the  Mississippi  Kiver 
to  the  Pacific  Ocean,  at  the  earliest  practica- 
ble period.*' 

[The  report  concludes  with  resolves  5  and 
6  of  the  Douglas  platform,  for  which  see 
preceding  column.] 


AVERT    ON    DEMOCRATIC  PLATFORMS. 


311 


Gen.  Benj.  F.  Butler,  of  Massachu- 
setts, disagreeing  with  both  these  re- 
ports, proposed  simply  to  reaffirm  the 
Cincinnati  platform,  and  there  stop. 

The  majority  report,  it  will  be  no- 
ted, was  concurred  in  by  the  repre- 
sentatives, in  Committee,  of  each  of 
the  fifteen  Slave  States,  with  those  of 
California  and  Oregon.  Mr.  Avery, 
in  introducing  it,  very  frankly  and 
fairly  set  forth  its  object,  and  the 
grounds  of  difference  with  the  minor- 
ity, as  follows : 

"I  have  stated  that  we  demand  at  the 
hands  of  our  Northern  brethren  upon  this 
floor  that  the  great  principle  which  we  cher- 
ish should  be  recognized,  and  in  that  view  I 
speak  the  common  sentiments  of  our  consti- 
tuents at  home ;  and  I  intend  no  reflection 
upon  those  who  entertain  a  different  opinion, 
when  I  say  that  the  results  and  ultimate 
consequences  to  the  Southern  States  of  this 
confederacy,  if  the  Popular  Sovereignty  doc- 
trine be  adopted  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Demo- 
cratic party,  would  be  as  dangerous  and 
subversive  of  their  rights  as  the  adoption  of 
the  principle  of  Congressional  intervention 
or  prohibition.  We  say  that,  in  a  contest  for 
the  occupation  of  the  Territories  of  the 
United  States,  the  Southern  men  encumbered 
with  slaves  cannot  compete  with  the  Emi- 
grant Aid  Society  at  the  North.  "We  say 
that  the  Emigrant  Aid  Society  can  send  a 
voter  to  one  of  the  Territories  of  the  United 
States,  to  determine  a  question  relating  to 
Slavery,  for  the  sum  of  $200  ;  while  it  would 
cost  the  Southern  man  the  sum  of  $1500. 
We  say,  then,  that,  wherever  there  is  compe- 
tition between  the  South  and  the  North,  that 
the  North  can  and  will,  at  less  expense  and 
difficulty,  secure  power,  control,  and  do- 
minion over  the  Territories  of  the  Federal 
Government ;  and  if,  then,  you  establish  the 
doctrine  that  a  Territorial  Legislature  which 
may  be  established  by  Congress  in  any  Ter- 
ritory has  the  right,  directly  or  indirectly,  to 
affect  the  institution  of  Slavery,  then  you  can 
see  that  the  Legislature  by  its  action,  either 
directly  or  indirectly,  may  finally  exclude 
every  man  from  the  slaveholding  States  as 
effectually  as  if  you  had  adopted  the  Wilmot 
Proviso  out  and  out.    *    *  * 

"  But  we  are  told  that,  in  advocating  the 
doctrine  we  now  do,  we  are  violating  the 
principles  of  the  Cincinnati  platform.  They 
say  that  the  Cincinnati  platform  is  a  Popular 
Sovereignty  platform ;  that  it  was  intended 
to  present  and  practically  enforce  that  great 
principle.    Now,  we  who  made  this  report 


deny  that  this  is  the  true  construction  of  the 
Cincinnati  platform.  We  of  the  South  say 
that,  when  we  voted  for  the  Cincinnati  plat- 
form, we  understood,  from  the  fact  that  the 
Territories  stand  in  the  same  position  as  the 
District  of  Columbia,  that  non-interference 
and  non-intervention  in  the  Territories  was 
that  same  sort  of  non-interference  and  non- 
intervention practiced  in  the  District  of  Co- 
lumbia. Now,  we  maintain  that  Congress 
has  no  right  to  prohibit  or  abolish  Slavery 
in  the  District  of  Columbia.  Why?  Be- 
cause it  is  an  existing  institution.  It  be- 
comes the  duty  of  Congress  under  the  Con- 
stitution to  protect  and  cherish  the  right  of 
property  in  slaves  in  that  District,  because 
the  Constitution  does  not  give  them  the 
power  to  prohibit  or  establish  Slavery. 
Every  session  of  Congress,  Northern  men, 
Southern  men,  men  of  all  parties,  are  legis- 
lating to  protect,  cherish  and  uphold,  the  in- 
stitution of  Slavery  in  the  District  of  Colum- 
bia.   *    *  * 

"  It  is  said  that  the  Cincinnati  platform  is 
ambiguous,  and  that  we  must  explain  it.  At 
the  South,  we  have  maintained  that  it  had 
no  ambiguity ;  that  it  did  not  mean  Popular 
Sovereignty ;  but  our  Northern  friends  say 
that  it  does  mean  Popular  Sovereignty. 
Now,  if  we  are  going  to  explain  it  and  to 
declare  its  {jrinciples,  I  say,  let  us  either  de- 
clare them  openly,  boldly,  squarely,  or  let  us 
leave  it  as  it  is  in  the  Cincinnati  Platform. 
I  want,  and  we  of  the  South  want,  no  more 
doubtful  platforms  upon  this  or  any  other 
question.  We  desire  that  this  Convention 
should  take  a  bold,  square  stand.  What  do 
the  minority  of  the  committee  propose? 
Their  solution  is  to  leave  the  question  to  the 
decision  of  the  Supreme  Court,  and  agree  to 
abide  by  any  decision  that  may  be  made  by 
that  tribunal  between  the  citizens  of  a  Ter- 
ritory upon  the  subject.  Why,  gentlemen 
of  the  minority,  you  cannot  help  yourselves ! 
That  is  no  concession  to  us.  There  is  no 
necessity  for  putting  that  in  the  platform, 
because  I  take  it  for  granted  that  you  are  all 
law-abiding  citizens.  Every  gentleman  here 
from  a  non-slaveholding  State  is  a  law- 
abiding  citizen ;  and,  if  he  be  so,  why  we 
know  that,  when  there  is  a  decision  of  the 
Supreme  Court,  even  adverse  to  his  views, 
he  will  submit  to  it.    *    *  * 

"You  say  that  this  is  a  judicial  question. 
We  say  that  it  is  not.  But,  if  it  be  a  judicial 
question,  it  is  immaterial  to  you  how  the 
platform  is  made,  because  all  you  will  have 
to  say  is,  'This  is  a  judicial  question;  the 
majority  of  the  Convention  were  of  one 
opinion ;  I  may  entertain  my  own  opinion 
upon  the  question;  let  the  Supreme  Court 
settle  it.'     *    *  * 

"Let  us  make  a  platform  about  which  there 
can  be  no  doubt,  so  that  every  man,  North 


312  THE  AMERICA 

and  South,  may  stand  side  by  side  on  all 
issues  connected  with  Slavery,  and  advocate 
the  same  principles.  That  is  all  we  ask. 
All  we  demand  at  your  hands  is,  that  there 
shall  be  no  equivocation  and  no  doubt  in  the 
popular  mind  as  to  what  our  principles  are." 

Mr.  Payne,  on  the  other  side,  quo- 
ted at  length  from  the  Cincinnati 
platform,  from  Mr.  Buchanan's  let- 
ter of  acceptance,  and  from  speeches 
of  Howell  Cobb,  John  C.  Breckin- 
ridge, James  L.  Orr,  A.  H.  Ste- 
phens, Judah  P.  Benjamin,  James 
A.  Bayard,  James  M.  Mason,  Robert 
Toombs,  etc.,  to  show  that  'Non- 
Intervention'  with  '  Popular  Sover- 
eignty' was  the  original  and  estab- 
lished Democratic  doctrine  with  re- 
gard to  Slavery  in  the  Territories. 

The  debate  was  continued,  amid 
great  excitement  and  some  disorder, 
until  Monday,  April  30th,  when  the 
question  was  first  taken  on  Gen. 
Butler's  proposition ;  which  was  de- 
feated— Yeas  105  ;  Nays  198  —  as 
follows : 

Yeas — Maine,  3;  Massachusetts,  8;  Con- 
necticut, 2£  ;  New  Jersey,  5  ;  Pennsylvania, 
16?;  Delaware,  3;  Maryland,  5i;  Virginia, 
12£;  North  Carolina,  10  ;  Georgia,  10;  Mis- 
souri, 4i ;  Tennessee,  11;  Kentucky,  9; 
Minnesota,  14;  Oregon,  3 — 105. 

Nays — Maine,  5  ;  New  Hampshire,  5  ; 
Vermont,  5  ;  Massachusetts,  5 ;  Rhode  Is- 
land, 4;  Connecticut,  31;  New  York,  35; 
New  Jersey,  2;  Pennsylvania,  10£;  Mary- 
land, 2i;  Virginia,  21;  South  Carolina,  8; 
Florida,  3 ;  Alabama,  9  ;  Louisiana,  6 ;  Mis- 
sissippi, 7 ;  Texas,  4;  Arkansas,  4;  Missouri, 
4i ;  Tennessee,  1 ;  Kentucky,  3  ;  Ohio,  23  ; 
Indiana,  13  ;  Illinois,  11  ;  Michigan,  G  ;  Wis- 
consin, 5  ;  Iowa,  4;  Minnesota,  21 ;  Califor- 
nia, 4—198. 

The  question  was  next  taken  on 
the  regular  minority  report,  as  pre- 
sented in  a  modified  form  by  Mr. 
Samuels  ;  which  was  adopted,  by  the 
following  vote : 

Yeas — Maine,  8  ;  New  Hampshire,  5  ;  Ver- 
mont, 5 ;  Massachusetts,  7 ;  Rhode  Island, 
4;  Connecticut,  6;  New  York,  35;  New- 
Jersey,  5  ;  Pennsylvania,  12  ;  Maryland,  3|; 


N  CONFLICT. 

Virginia,  1 ;  Missouri,  4 ;  Tennessee,  1 ; 
Kentucky,  21;  Ohio,  23;  Indiana,  13;  Illi- 
nois, 11  ;  Michigan,  G  ;  Wisconsin,  5  ;  Iowa, 
4;  Minnesota,  4 — 165. 

Nats — Massachusetts,  6;  New  Jersey,  2; 
Pennsylvania,  15;  Delaware,  3;  Maryland, 
4^;  Virginia,  14;  North  Carolina,  10 ;  South 
Carolina,  8;  Georgia,  10;  Florida,  3;  Ala- 
bama, 9 ;  Louisiana,  6 ;  Mississippi,  7 ; 
Texas,  4 ;  Arkansas,  4 ;  Missouri.  5  ;  Ten- 
nessee, 11;  Kentucky,  9£;  California,  4; 
Oregon,  3—138. 

Hereupon,  Mr.  L.  P.  Walker,  of 
Alabama,  presented  the  written  pro- 
test of  the  delegates  from  that  State, 
28  in  number,  showing  that  they 
were  expressly  instructed  by  the 
State  Convention  which  elected  them 
not  to  acquiesce  in  or  submit  to  any 
'  Squatter  Sovereignty'  platform,  but 
to  withdraw  from  the  Convention  in 
case  such  a  one  should  be  adopted. 
Among  the  resolves  so  adopted  and 
made  binding  on  their  delegates  by 
the  Alabama  State  Convention,  were 
the  following : 

"  1.  Resolved,  by  the  Democracy  of  the  State 
of  Alabama  in  Convention  assembled,  That, 
holding  all  issues  and  principles  upon  which 
they  have  heretofore  affiliated  and  acted 
with  the  National  Democratic  Party  to  be 
inferior  in  dignity  and  importance  to  the 
great  question  of  Slavery,  they  content 
themselves  with  a  general  reafhrmance  of 
the  Cincinnati  platform  as  to  such  issues, 
and  also  indorse  said  platform  as  to  Slavery, 
together  with  the  following  resolutions : 

"2.  Resolved  further,  That  we  reaffirm  so 
much  of  the  first  resolution  of  the  platform 
adopted  in  the  Convention  by  the  Demo- 
cracy of  this  State,  on  the  8th  of  January, 
1856,  as  relates  to  the  subject  of  Slavery,  to 
wit :  1  The  unqualified  right  of  the  people 
of  the  Slaveholding  States  to  the  protection 
of  their  property  in  the  States,  in  the  Terri-' 
tories,  and  in  the  wilderness  in  which  Ter- 
ritorial Governments  are  as  yet  unorgan- 
ized.' 

"  3.  Resolved further,  That,  in  order  to  meet 
and  clear  away  all  obstacles  to  a  full  enjoy- 
ment of  this  right  in  the  Territories,  we  re- 
affirm the  principle  of  the  9th  resolution  of 
the  Platform  adopted  in  Convention  by  the 
Democracy  of  this  State,  on  the  14th  of 
February,  1848,  to  wit : ,  4  That  it  is  the  duty 
of  the  General  Government,  by  all  proper 
legislation,  to  secure  an  entry  into  those 


ALABAMA    ON  DEMO 


CRATIC  PLATFORMS. 


313 


Territories  to  all  the  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  together  with  their  property  of  every 
description  ;  and  that  the  same  should  be 
protected  by  the  United  States  while  the 
Territories  are  under  its  authority.' 

"  4.  Resolved  farther,  That  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  is  a  compact  between 
sovereign  and  -co-equal  States,  united  upon 
the  basis  of  perfect  equality  of  rights  and 
privileges. 

"  5.  Resolved  further,  That  the  Territories 
of  the  United  States  are  common  property, 
in  which  the  States  have  equal  rights,  and 
to  which  the  citizens  of  every  State  may 
rightfully  emigrate,  with  their  slaves  or 
other  property  recognized  as  such  in  any  of 
the  States  of  the  Union,  or  by  the  Constitu- 
tion of  the  United  States. 

"  6.  Resolved  further,  That  the  Congress  of 
the  United  States  has  no  power  to  abolish 
Slavery  in  the  Territories,  or  to  prohibit  its 
introduction  into  any  of  them. 

"  7.  Resolved  further,  That  the  Territorial 
Legislatures,  created  by  the  legislation  of 
Congress,  have  no  power  to  abolish  Slavery, 
or  to  prohibit  the  introduction  of  the  same, 
or  to  impair  by  unfriendly  legislation  the 
security  and  full  enjoyment  of  the  same 
within  the  Territories;  and  such  constitu- 
tional power  certainly  does  not  belong  to 
the  people  of  the  Territories  in  any  capacity, 
before,  in  the  exercise  of  a  lawful  authority, 
they  form  a  Constitution  preparatory  to  ad- 
mission as  a  State  into  the  Union ;  and  their 
action,  in  the  exercise  of  such  lawful  au- 
thority, certainly  cannot  operate  or  take 
effect  before  their  actual  admission  as  a 
State  into  the  Union. 

"8.  Resolved  further,  That  the  principles 
enunciated  by  Chief  Justice  Taney,  in  his 
opinion  in  the  Bred  Scott  case,  deny  to  the 
Territorial  Legislature  the  power  to  destroy 
or  impair,  by  any  legislation  whatever,  the 
right  of  property  in  slaves,  and  maintain  it 
to  be  the  duty  of  the  Federal  Government, 
in  all  of  its  departments,  to  protect  the 
rights  of  the  owner  of  such  property  in  the 
Territories  ;  and  the  principles  so  declared 
are  hereby  asserted  to  be  the  rights  of  the 
South,  and  the  South  should  maintain  them. 

"  9.  Resolved  further,  That  we  hold  all  of 
the  foregoing  propositions  to  contain  cardi- 
nal principles — true  in  themselves^-and  just 
and  proper  and  necessary  for  the  safety  of 
all  that  is  dear  to  us ;  and  we  do  hereby  in- 
struct our  delegates  to  the  Charleston  Con- 
vention to  present  them  for  the  calm  con- 
sideration and  approval  of  that  body — from 
whose  justice  and  patriotism  we  anticipate 
their  adoption. 

"  10.  Resolved  further,  That  our  delegates 
to  the  Charleston  Convention  are  hereby 
expressly  instructed  to  insist  that  said  Con- 
vention shall  adopt  a  platform  of  principles, 


recognizing  distinctly  the  rights  of  the  South, 
as  asserted  in  the  foregoing  resolutions ;  and 
if  the  said  National  Convention  shall  refuse 
to  adopt,  in  substance,  the  propositions  em- 
braced in  the  preceding  resolutions,  prior  to 
nominating  candidates,  our  delegates  to  said 
Convention  are  hereby  positively  instructed 
to  withdraw  therefrom. 

"  11.  Resolved  further,  That  our  delegates 
to  the  Charleston  Convention  shall  cast  the 
vote  of  Alabama  as  a  unit,  and  a  majority  of 
our  delegates  shall  determine  how  the  vote 
of  this  State  shall  be  given. 

"12.  Resolved  further,  That  an  Executive 
Committee,  to  consist  of  one  from  each  Con- 
gressional District,  be  appointed,  whose  duty 
it  shall  be,  in  the  event  that  our  delegates 
withdraw  from  the  Charleston  Convention, 
in  obedience  to  the  10th  resolution,  to  call 
a  Convention  of  the  Democracy  of  Alabama, 
to  meet  at  an  early  day  to  consider  what  is 
best  to  be  done." 

The  Alabama  delegation  concluded 
with  the  following  statement : 

"  The  points  of  difference  between  the 
Northern  and  the  Southern  Democracy  are : 

"1.  As  regards  the  status  of  Slavery  as  a 
political  institution  in  the  Territories  whilst 
they  remain  Territories,  and  the  power  of 
the  people  of  a  Territory  to  exclude  it  by 
unfriendly  legislation ;  and 

"  2.  As  regards  the  duty  of  the  Federal 
Government  to  protect  the  owner  of  slaves 
in  the  enjoyment  of  his  property  in  the  Ter- 
ritories so  long  as  they  remain  such. 

"  This  Convention  has  refused,  by  the  Plat- 
form adopted,  to  settle  either  of  these  prop- 
ositions in  favor  of  the  South.  "We  deny 
to  the  people  of  a  Territory  any  power  to 
legislate  against  the  institution  of  Slavery ; 
and  we  assert  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Fede- 
ral Government,  in  all  its  departments,  to 
protect  the  owner  of  slaves  in  the  enjoyment 
of  his  property  in  the  Territories.  These 
principles,  as  we  state  them,  are  embodied 
in  the  Alabama  Platform. 

"Here,  then,  is  a  plain,  explicit  and  direct 
issue  between  this  Convention  and  the  con- 
stituency which  we  have  the  honor  to  repre- 
sent in  this  body. 

"  Instructed,  as  we  are,  not  to  waive  this 
issue,  the  contingency,  therefore,  has  arisen, 
when,  in  our  opinion,  it  becomes  our  duty 
to  withdraw  from  this  Convention.  "We  beg, 
Sir,  to  communicate  this  fact  through  you, 
and  to  assure  the  Convention  that  we  do  so 
in  no  spirit  of  anger,  but  under  a  sense  of 
imperative  obligation,  properly  appreciating 
its  responsibilities  and  cheerfully  submitting 
to  its  consequences." 

The  Alabama  delegation,  which 


314 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


included  ex-Gov.  John  A.  Winston, 
Wm.  L.  Yancey,  Reuben  Chapman, 
ex-M.  C,  and  other  prominent  citi- 
zens, thereupon  withdrew  from  the  • 
Convention. 

Mr.  Barry,  of  Mississippi,  next  an- 
nounced the  withdrawal  of  the  entire 
Mississippi  delegation.  Mr.  Glenn, 
of  Mississippi,  stated  the  grounds  of 
such  withdrawal,  as  follows : 

"  Sir,  at  Cincinnati  we  adopted  a  Platform 
on  which  we  all  agreed.  Now  answer  me, 
ye  men  of  the  North,  of  the  East,  of  the 
South,  and  of  the  West,  what  was  the  con- 
struction placed  upon  that  Platform  in  dif- 
ferent sections  of  the  Union?  You  at  the 
West  said  it  meant  one  thing ;  we  of  the 
South  said  it  meant  another.  Either  we 
were  right  or  you  were  right;  we  were* 
wrong  or  you  were  wrong.  We  came  here 
to  ask  you  which  was  right  and  which  was 
wrong.  You  have  maintained  your  position. 
You  say  that  you  cannot  give  us  an  acknowl-  i 
edgment  of  that  right,  which  I  tell  you  here  j 
now,  in  coming  time  will  be  your  only  safety 
in  your  contests  with  the  Black  Republicans 
of  Ohio  and  of  the' North.  (Cheers.) 

44  Why,  sir,  turn  back  to  the  history  of  your 
own  leading  men.  There  sits  a  distinguished 
gentleman,  Hon.  Charles  E.  Stuart,  of  Michi- 
gan, once  a  representative  of  one  of  the 
sovereign  States  of  the  Union  in  the  Senate, 
who  then  voted  that  Congress  had  the  con- 
stitutional power  to  pass  the  Wilmot  Proviso, 
and  to  exclude  Slavery  from  the  Territories ; 
and  now,  when  the  Supreme  Court  has  said 
that  it  has  not  that  power,  he  comes  forward 
and  tells  Mississippians  that  that  same  Con- 
gress is  impotent  to  protect  that  same  spe- 
cies of  property!  There  sits  my  distin- 
guished friend,  the  Senator  from  Ohio  (Mr. 
Pugh),  who,  but  a  few  nights  since,  told  us 
from  that  stand  that,  if  a  Territorial  Govern- 
ment totally  misused  their  powers  or  abused 
them,  Congress  could  wipe  out  that  Territo- 
rial Government  altogether.  And  yet,  when 
we  come  here  and  ask  him  to  give  us  pro- 
tection in  case  that  Territorial  Government 
robs  us  of  our  property  and  strikes  the  star 
which  answers  to  the  name  of  Mississippi 
from  the  flag  of  the  Union,  so  far  as  the 
Constitution  gives  her  protection,  he  tells 
ns,  with  his  hand  upon  his  heart — as  Gov. 
Payne,  of  Ohio,  had  before  done — that  they 
will  part  with  their  lives  before  they  will 
acknowledge  the  principle  which  we  con- 
tend for. 

44  Gentlemen,  in  such  a  situation  of  things 
in  the  Convention  of  our  great  party,  it  is 


right  that  we  should  part.  Go  your  way, 
and  we  will  go  ours.  The  South  leaves  you 
— not  like  Hagar,  driven  into  the  wilderness, 
friendless  and  alone — but  I  tell  Southern 
men  here,  and,  for  them,  I  tell  the  North, 
that,  in  less  than  sixty  days,  you  will  find  a 
united  South  standing  side  by  side  with  us. 
(Prolonged  and  enthusiastic  cheering.)" 

Mr.  Mouton,  of  Louisiana,  briefly 
announced  that  all  the  delegates  from 
his  State  but  two  would  withdraw 
from  the  Convention,  and  protested 
against  the  right  of  the  two  to  act  or 
cast  any  vote  in  behalf  of  the  State. 

Hon.  James  Simons,  of  South  Car- 
olina, announced  the  withdrawal  of 
the  delegation  from  that  State,  in  a 
communication  signed  by  all  the 
thirteen  members  thereof,  in  the 
words  following : 

M  We,  the  undersigned  delegates  appointed 
by  the  Democratic  State  Convention  of 
South  Carolina,  beg  leave  respectfully  to 
state  that,  according  to  the  principles  enun- 
ciated in  their  Platform  at  Columbia,  the 
power,  either  of  the  Federal  Government  or 
of  its  agent,  the  Territorial  Government,  to 
abolish  or  legislate  against  property  in  slaves, 
by  either  direct  or  indirect  legislation,  is  es- 
pecially denied ;  and,  as  the  Platform  adopted 
by  the  Convention  palpably  and  intention- 
ally prevents  any  expression  affirming  the 
incapacity  of  the  Territorial  Government  so 
to  legislate,  that  they  would  not  be  acting 
in  good  faith  to  their  principles,  or  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  wishes  of  their  consti- 
tuents, to  longer  remain  in  this  Convention, 
and  they  hereby  respectfully  announce  their 
withdrawal  therefrom." 

Mr.  John  Milton,  of  Florida,  next 

announced  the  unanimous  withdrawal 

of  the  delegation  from  that  State,  in  a 

protest  signed  by  five  delegates,  which 

was  read  by  Mr.  Eppes,  whereof  the 

essential  portion  is  as  follows : 

44  Florida,  with  her  Southern  sisters,  is 
entitled  to  a  clear  and  unambiguous  recog- 
nition of  her  rights  in  the  Territories ;  and 
this  being  refused,  by  the  rejection  of  the 
majority  report,  we  protest  against  receiving 
the  Cincinnati  Platform  with  the  interpret- 
ation that  it  favors  the  doctrine  of  Squatter 
Sovereignty  in  the  Territories — which  doc- 
trine, in  the  name  of  the  people  represented 
by  us,  we  repudiate." 


SOUTHERN  PROTESTS 


AND  WITHDRAWALS. 


315 


Mr.  Guy  M.  Bryan,  of  Texas,  next 
announced  the  withdrawal  of  the  en- 
tire delegation  from  that  State.  In 
their  protest  against  the  platform 
adopted  by  the  Convention,  they  de- 
clared • 

"That  it  is  the  right  of  every  citizen  to 
take  his  property,  of  any  kind,  including 
slaves,  into  the  common  territory  belonging 
-equally  to  all  the  States  of  the  Confederacy, 
and  to  have  it  protected  there  under  the 
Federal  Constitution.  Neither  Congress 
nor  a  Territorial  Legislature,  nor  any  human 
power,  has  any  authority,  either  directly  or 
indirectly,  to  impair  these  sacred  rights ; 
and,  they  having  been  affirmed  by  the  deci- 
sion of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Dred  Scott 
ca?e,  we  declare  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Federal  Government,  the  common  agent  of 
all  the  States,  to  establish  such  government, 
and  enact  such  laws  for  the  Territories,  and 
so  change  the  same,  from  time  to  time,  as 
may  be  necessary  to  insure  the  protection 
and  preservation  of  these  rights,  and  pre- 
vent every  infringement  of  the  same.  The 
affirmation  of  this  principle  of  the  duty  of 
Congress  to  simply  protect  the  rights  of 
property,  is  nowise  in  conflict  with  the 
heretofore  established  and  well-recognized 
principle  of  the  Democratic  party,  that 
Congress  does  not  possess  the  power  to 
legislate  Slavery  into  the  Territories,  or  to 
exclude  it  therefrom. 

u  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that,  if  the  princi- 
ples of  the  Northern  Democracy  are  pro- 
perly represented  by  the  opinion  and  action 
of  the  majority  of  the  delegates  from  that 
section  on  this  floor,  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
declare  that  their  principles  are  not  only 
not  ours,  but,  if  adhered  to  and  enforced  by 
them,  will  destroy  this  Union." 

Mr.  B.  Burrow,  of  Arkansas,  an- 
nounced the  withdrawal  of  three  del- 
egates from  that  State,  for  these  rea- 
sons : 

"  1st.  Because  the  numerical  majority 
have  usurped  the  prerogatives  of  the  States 
in  setting  aside  the  Platform  made  by  the 
States,  and  have  thus  unsettled  the  basis  of 
this  Convention,  and  thereby  permanently 
disorganized  its  constitution.  Its  decrees, 
therefore,  become  null  and  void. 

"  2d.  Because  we  were  positively  instruct- 
ed by  the  Democracy  of  Arkansas  to  insist  on 
the  recognition  of  the  equal  rights  of  the 
South  in  the  common  Territories,  and  pro- 
tection to  those  rights  by  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment, prior  to  any  nomination  of  a  can- 


didate ;  and,  as  this  Convention  has  refused 
to  recognize  the  principles  required  by  the 
State  of  Arkansas,  in  her  popular  Conven- 
tion first,  and  twice  subsequently  reasserted 
by  Arkansas,  together  with  all  her  Southern 
sisters,  in  the  report  of  a  Platform  in  this 
Convention ;  and,  as  we  cannot  serve  two 
masters,  we  are  determined  first  to  serve  the 
Lord  our  God.  We  cannot  ballot  for  any 
candidate  whatsoever." 

Mr.  J.  P.  Johnson,  on  behalf  of 
that  portion  of  the  Arkansas  delega- 
tion who  had  concluded  not  to  leave 
the  Convention  until  after  time  had 
been  afforded  for  consultation,  said 
he  hesitated,  "because  he  conceived 
that  the  stability  of  the  Union  itself 
was  involved  in  the  action  taken  here 
by  the  Southern  representatives." 

The  Georgia  delegation  here  asked 
leave  to  retire  for  consultation,  which 
was  granted.  Messrs.  Bayard  and 
Whiteley — Senator  and  Representa- 
tive in  Congress  from  Delaware— 
now  retired  from  the  Convention  and 
joined  the  seceders.  Mr.  Saulsbury, 
the  other  Senator,  gave  his  reasons 
for  not  retiring  at  this  time,  and  the 
Convention  adjourned  for  the  night. 

Next  morning,  May  1st,  Mr.  Hen- 
ry L.  Benning  presented  a  notifica- 
tion from  twenty-six  of  the  thirty- 
four  delegates  from  Georgia,  that 
they  had  decided  to  withdraw  from  the 
Convention — four  of  them  in  obe- 
dience to  a  vote  of  the  majority, 
which  they  had  opposed. 

Mr.  Johnson,  of  Arkansas,  now 
announced  the  withdrawal,  after  due 
consideration  and  consultation,  of 
the  remainder  of  the  delegation  from 
his  State ;  but  Mr.  F.  B.  Flournoy 
gave  notice  that  he  did  not  concur  in 
this  action. 

The  formal  protest  and  withdrawal 
of  ten  delegates  from  Louisiana  was 
now  presented.  It  states  that  these 
delegates  act  in  obedience  to  a  reso- 


316 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


lution  passed  by  the  Democracy  of 
Louisiana  in  State  Convention  at 
Baton  Kouge,  March  5,  I860,  in  the 
following  words : 

"Resolved,  That  the  Territories  of  the 
United  States  belong  to  the  several  States  as 
their  common  property,  and  not  to  indivi- 
dual citizens  thereof;  that  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution recognizes  property  in  slaves ;  and, 
as  such,  the  owner  thereof  is  entitled  to 
carry  his  slaves  into  any  Territory  in  the 
United  States ;  to  hold  them  there  as  pro- 
perty ;  and,  in  case  the  people  of  the  Territo- 
ries, by  inaction,  unfriendly  legislation  or 
otherwise,  should  endanger  the  tenure  of 
such  property,  or  discriminate  against  it  by 
withholding  that  protection  given  to  other 
species  of  property  in  the  Territories,  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  General  Government  to  in- 
terpose, by  the  active  exertion  of  its  consti- 
tutional power,  to  secure  the  rights  of  the 
slaveholder." 

The  two  remaining  delegates  from 
Louisiana  gave  notice  that,  though 
they  did  not  personally  desire  to 
withdraw  from  the  Convention,  they 
should  be  governed  by  the  action  of 
the  majority  of  their  delegation. 

Mr.  W.  B.  Gaulden,  of  Georgia, 
made  a  speech  against  the  course 
taken  by  his  colleagues,  on  the  follow- 
ing grounds : 

M I  am  not  in  favor  of  breaking  up  this 
Government  upon  an  impracticable  issue, — 
upon  a  mere  theory.  I  believe  that  this 
doctrine  of  protection  to  Slavery  in  the  Ter- 
ritories is  a  mere  theory,  a  mere  abstraction. 
(Applause.)  Practically,  it  can  be  of  no 
consequence  to  the  South,  for  the  reason 
that  the  infant  has  been  strangled  before  it 
was  born.  (Laughter.)  You  have  cut  off 
the  supply  of  slaves ;  you  have  crippled  the 
institution  of  Slavery  in  the  States  by  your 
unjust  laws  ;  and  it  is  mere  tolly  and  mad- 
ness now  to  ask  for  protection  for  a  nonen- 
tity— for  a  thing  which  is  not  there.  "We 
have  no  slaves  to  carry  to  these  Territories. 
We  can  never  make  another  Slave  State  with 
our  present  supply  of  slaves.  But,  if  we 
could,  it  would  not  be  wise ;  for  the  reason 
that,  if  you  make  another  Slave  State  from 
your  new  Territories  with  the  present  supply 
of  slaves,  you  will  be  obliged  to  give  up 
another  State — either  Maryland,  Delaware, 
or  Virginia — to  Free  Soil  upon  the  North. 
Now,  I  would  deal  with  this  question,  fellow- 
Democrats,  as  a  practical  one.    When  I  can 


see  no  possible  practical  good  to  result  to 
the  country  from  demanding  legislation  upon 
this  theory,  I  am  not  prepared  to  disintegrate 
and  dismember  the  great  Democratic  party 
of  this  Union.    *    *    *  * 

"  I  would  ask  my  friends  of  the  South  to 
come  up  in  a  proper  spirit,  ask  our  Northern 
friends  to  give  us  all  our  rights,  and  take  off 
the  ruthless  restrictions  which  cut  off  the 
supply  of  slaves  from  foreign  lands.  As  a 
matter  of  right  and  justice  to  the  South,  I 
would  ask  the  Democracy  of  the  North  to 
grant  us  this  thing  ;  and  I  believe  they  have 
the  patriotism  and  honesty  to  do  it,  because 
it  is  right  in  itself.  I  tell  you,  fellow-Demo- 
crats, that  the  African  Slave-trader  is  the 
true  Union  man.  (Cheers  and  laughter.)  I 
tell  you  that  the  slave-trading  of  Virginia 
is  more  immoral,  more  unchristian  in  every 
possible  point  of  view,  than  that  African 
Slave-trade  which  goes  to  Africa  and  brings 
a  heathen  and  worthless  man  here,  makes 
him  a  useful  man,  Christianizes  him,  and 
sends  him  and  his  posterity  down  the  stream 
of  time  to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  civilization. 
(Cheers  and  laughter.)  Now,  fellow-Demo- 
crats, so  far  as  any  public  expression  of  the 
State  of  Virginia  — the  great  Slave-trading 
State  of  Virginia — has  been  given,  they  are 
all  opposed  to  the  African  Slave-trade. 

"  Dr.  Reed,  of  Indiana — I  am  from  Indiana, 
and  I  am  in  favor  of  it. 

"Mr.  Gaulden — Now,  gentlemen,  we  are 
told,  upon  high  authority,  that  there  is  a 
certain  class  of  men  who  strain  at  a  gnat 
and  swallow  a  camel.  Now,  Virginia, 
which  authorizes  the  buying  of  Christian 
men,  separating  them  from  their  wives  and 
children,  from  all  the  relations  and  associa- 
tions amid  whom  they  have  lived  for  years, 
rolls  up  her  eyes  in  holy  horror  when  I 
would  go  to  Africa,  buy  a  savage,  and  in- 
troduce him  to  the  blessings  of  civilization 
and  Christianity.    (Cheers  and  laughter.) 

"  Capt.  Pwynders,  of  N.  Y. — You  can  get 
one  or  two  recruits  from  New  York  to  join 
with  you. 

"  The  President. — The  time  of  the  gentle- 
man has  expired.  (Cries  of  "  Go  on !  Go 
on!") 

"  The  President  stated  that,  if  it  was  the 
unanimous  wish  of  the  Convention,  the  gen- 
tleman could  proceed. 

"Mr.  Gaulden. — Now,  fellow-Democrats, 
the  slave-trade  in  Virginia  forms  a  mighty 
and  powerful  reason  for  its  opposition  to 
the  African  slave-trade,  and  in  this  remark 
I  do  not  intend  any  disrespect  to  my  friends 
from  Virginia.  Virginia,  the  Mother  of 
States  and  of  statesmen,  the  Mother  of  Presi- 
dents, I  apprehend  may  err  as  well  as  other 
mortals.  I  am  afraid  that  her  error  in  this 
regard  lies  in  the  promptings  of  the  almighty 
dollar.    It  has  been  my  fortune  to  go  into 


FAILURE    TO   NOMINATE   AT  CHARLESTON. 


317 


that  noble  old  State  to  buy  a  few  darkies ; 
and  I  have  had  to  pay  from  $1,000  to 
$2,000  a  head,  when  I  could  go  to  Africa 
and  buy  better  negroes  for  $50  apiece. 
(Great  laughter.)  Now,  unquestionably,  it 
is  to  the  interest  of  Virginia  to  break  down 
the  African  slave-trade,  when  she  can  sell 
her  negroes  at  $2,000.  She  knows  that  the 
African  slave-trade  would  break  up  her  mo- 
nopoly, and  hence  her  objection  to  it.  If 
any  of  you  Northern  Democrats — for  I  have 
more  faith  in  you  than  I  have  in  the  carpet- 
knight  Democracy  of  the  South — will  go 
home  with  me  to  my  plantation  in  Georgia, 
but  a  little  way  from  here,  I  will  show  you 
some  darkies  that  I  bought  in  Maryland, 
some  that  I  bought  in  Virginia,  some  in 
Delaware,  some  in  Florida,  some  in  North 
Carolina ;  and  I  will  also  show  you  the  pure 
African,  the  noblest  Roman  of  them  all. 
(Great  laughter.)  Now,  fellow-Democrats, 
my  feeble  health  and  failing  voice  admonish 
me  to  bring  the  few  remarks  I  have  to  make 
to  a  close.  (Cries  of  "Go  on,  go  on.")  I 
am  only  sorry  that  I  am  not  in  a  better  con- 
dition than  I  am  to  vindicate  before  you  to- 
day the  words  of  truth,  of  honesty,  and  of 
right,  and  to  show  you  the  gross  inconsis- 
tencies of  the  South  in  this  regard.  I  come 
from  the  First  Congressional  District  of  the 
State  of  Georgia.  I  represent  the  African 
slave-trade  interest  of  that  section.  (Ap- 
plause.) I  am  proud  of  the  position  I  oc- 
cupy in  that  respect.  I  believe  that  the 
African  slave-trader  is  a  true  missionary, 
and  a  true  Christian  (applause) ;  and  I  have 
pleaded  with  my  delegation  from  Georgia  to 
put  this  issue  squarely  to  the  Northern 
Democracy,  and  say  to  them,  Are  you  pre- 
pared to  go  back  to  first  principles,  and  take 
off  your  unconstitutional  restrictions,  and 
leave  this  question  to  be  settled  by  each 
State?  Now,  do  this,  fellow-citizens,  and 
you  will  have  peace  in  the  country.  But,  so 
long  as  your  Federal  Legislature  takes  juris- 
diction of  this  question,  so  long  will  there  be 
war,  so  long  will  there  be  ill-blood,  so  long 
will  there  be  strife,  until  this  glorious  Union 
of  ours  shall  be  disrupted  and  go  out  in  blood 
and  night  forever.  I  advocate  the  repeal  of 
the  laws  prohibiting  the  African  Slave-trade, 
because  I  believe  it  to  be  the  true  Union 
movement.  I  do  not  believe  that  sections 
whose  interests  are  so  different  as  the  South- 
ern and  Northern  States  can  ever  stand  the 
shocks  of  fanaticism,  unless  they  be  equally 
balanced.  I  believe  that,  by  reopening  this 
trade,  and  giving  us  negroes  to  populate  the 
Territories,  the  equilibrium  of  the  two  sec- 
tions will  be  maintained." 

The  Convention  now  proceeded  to 
ballot  for  President,  having  first 


adopted,  by  a  vote  of  141  to  112,  the 
rule  requiring  two-thirds  of  a  full 
Convention  to  nominate.  Candidates 
were  put  in  nomination,  and,  on  the 
first  ballot,  Stephen  A.  Douglas, 
of  Illinois,  received  145-J  votes  ;  Rob- 
ert M.  T.  Hunter,  of  Virginia,  42 
votes ;  James  Guthrie,  of  Kentucky, 
35  votes  ;  Andrew  Johnson,  of  Ten- 
nessee, 12 ;  Daniel  S.  Dickinson,  of 
New  York,  7 ;  Joseph  Lane,  of  Ore- 
gon, 6  ;  Isaac  Toucey,  of  Connecticut, 
2-J;  Jefferson  Davis,  of  Mississippi, 
1-J ;  Franklin  Pierce,  of  New  Hamp- 
shire, 1.  On  the  next  ballot,  Mr. 
Douglas  had  147  ;  and  he  continued 
to  gain  slowly  to  the  thirty-second, 
when  he  received  152^  votes.  He 
fell  off  on  the  thirty-sixth  to  151  J, 
which  vote  he  continued  to  receive 
up  to  the  fifty-seventh  ballot,  on 
which  Guthrie  received  65J,  Hun- 
ter 16,  Lane  14,  Dickinson  4,  and 
Jefferson  Davis  1.  The  Convention 
(May  3d),  on  motion  of  Mr.  Russell, 
of  Virginia,  by  a  vote  of  195  to  55, 
adjourned,  to  reassemble  at  Balti- 
more on  Monday,  the  18th  of  June  ; 
recommending  to  the  Democratic 
party  of  the  several  States  whose 
delegations  had  withdrawn,  to  fill 
their  places  prior  to  that  day. 

The  seceding  delegates  assembled 
at  St.  Andrew's  Hall — Senator  Bay- 
ard, of  Delaware,  in  the  chair — and 
adopted  the  platform  reported  to 
the  Convention  by  Mr.  Avery,  as 
aforesaid;  and,  after  four  days'  de- 
liberations, adjourned  to  meet  at 
Richmond,  Ya.,  on  the  second  Mon- 
day in  June.  The  "Wood  delegates 
from  New  York  attended  this  meet- 
ing, but  were  not  admitted  as  mem- 
bers. 

The  regular  Convention  reassem- 
bled at  the  Front-street  Theater  in 


318 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Baltimore,  pursuant  to  adjournment. 
Some  days  were  spent  in  considering 
the  credentials  of  contesting  dele- 
gates  from  certain  Southern  States. 
The  decisions  of  the  Convention 
were  such  as  to  increase  the  strength 
of  Senator  Douglas.  "Wlien  it  was 
concluded,  Mr.  Bussell,  of  Virginia, 
Mr.  Lander,  of  Xorth  Carolina,  Mr. 
Ewing,  of  Tennessee,  Mr.  Johnson, 
of  Maryland,  Mr.  Smith,  of  Califor- 
nia. Mr.  Salisbury,  of  Delaware,  Mr. 
Caldwell,  of  Kentucky,  and  Mr.  Clark 
of  Missouri,  announced  the  with- 
drawal of  the  whole,  or  of  a  part,  of 
the  delegations  from  their  respective 
States.  Gen.  Gushing  resigned  the 
chair  of  the  Convention,  which  was 
immediately  taken  by  Gov.  David 
Tod,  of  Ohio  (a  Yice -President  at 
Charleston  i,  amid  enthusiastic  cheers. 
Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  of  Massachusetts, 
announced  the  determination  of  a 
majority  of  the  delegates  from  his 
State  not  to  participate  further  in  its 
deliberations.    He  said : 

"  We  have  not  discussed  the  question,  Mr. 
President,  whether  the  action  of  the  Con- 
vention, in  excluding  certain  delegates,  could 
be  any  reason  for  withdrawal.  SVe  now  put 
our  withdrawal  before  you,  upon  the  simple 
ground,  among  others,  that  there  has  been 
a  withdrawal  in  part  of  a  majority  of  the 
States,  and  further  (and  that,  perhaps,  more 
personal  to  myself),  upon  the  ground  that  I 
will  not  sit  in  a  Convention  where  the  Afri- 
can slave-trade — which  is  piracy  by  the  laws 
of  my  country — is  approvingly  advocated. 
(Great  sensation.)" 

The  Convention  now  proceeded  to 
vote  for  President ;  and,  on  the  first 
ballot,  Mr.  Douglas  had  ;  Guth- 
rie 10,  Breckinridge  5,  and  there  were 
3  scattering.  On  the  next  ballot,  Mr. 
Douglas  had  181J,  Breckinridge  7-J, 
Guthrie  5-J;  whereupon,  on  motion 
of  Mr.  Sanford  E.  Church,  of  New 
York,  the  following  resolution  was 
adopted : 


"Resolved  unanimously.  That  Stephen  A. 
Douglas,  of  the  State  of  Illinois,  having  now 
received  two-thirds  of  all  the  votes  given  in 
this  Convention,  is  hereby  declared,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  rules  governing  this  body, 
and  in  accordance  with  the  uniform  customs 
and  rules  of  former  Democratic  National 
Conventions,  the  regular  nominee  of  the 
Democratic  party  of  the  United  States,  for 
the  office  of  President  of  the  United  States." 

Hon.  Benjamin  Fitzpatkick,  of 
Alabama,  was  now  nominated  for 
Yice-President,  receiving  198^  votes 
to  1  scattering.  [He  declined,  two 
days  thereafter,  and  the  National 
Committee  substituted  Hon.  Hes- 
schel  Y.  Johnson,  of  Georgia.] 

Gov.  ^Yickliffe,  of  Louisiana,  now 
offered  the  following  resolve,  as  an 
addition  to  the  platform  adopted  at 
Charleston : 

"Resolved,  That  it  is  in  accordance  with 
the  true  interpretation  of  the  Cincinnati 
Platform,  that,  during  the  existence  of  the 
Territorial  Governments,  the  measure  of  re- 
striction, whatever  it  may  be,  imposed  by  the 
Federal  Constitution  on  the  power  of  the 
Territorial  Legislatures  over  the  subject  of 
the  domestic  relations,  as  the  same  has  been, 
or  shall  hereafter  be,  finally  determined  by 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States, 
should  be  respected  by  all  good  citizens,  and 
enforced  with  promptness  and  fidelity  by 
every  branch  of  the  General  Government." 

Mr.  Payne,  of  Ohio,  moved  the 

previous  question,  and  this  was  also 

adopted,  with  but   two  dissenting 

votes. 

The  Seceders'  Convention,  which 
met,  first  at  Richmond  on  the  11th 
of  June,  adjourned  thence  to  Balti- 
more, and  finally  met  at  the  Mary- 
land Institute  on  the  28th  of  June. 
Twenty-one  States  were  fully  or  par- 
tially represented.  Hon.  Caleb  Cush- 
ing  was  chosen  its  President.  Mr. 
Avery,  of  Xorth  Carolina,  submitted 
his  Charleston  platform,  which  was 
unanimously  adopted.  It  was  re- 
solved that  the  next  Democratic  Na- 
tional Convention  should  be  held  at 
Philadelphia. 


'UNIOX'    AND   1  R  E  PUB 


L I C AN'  PLATFORMS. 


319 


The  Convention  now  proceeded  to 
ballot  for  a  candidate  for  President, 
when  John  C.  Breckinridge,  of  Ken- 
tucky, received  the  nnanimons  vote 
— 105 — of  the  delegates  present ;  and 
Gen.  Joseph  Lane,  of  Oregon,  was 
nominated  for  Yice-President  by  a 
similar  vote.  And  then,  after  a 
speech  from  Mr.  Yancey,  the  Con- 
vention finally  adjourned. 


The  "  Constitutional  Union"  (late 
"American")  party  held  a  Conven- 
tion at  Baltimore  on  the  19th  of 
May ;  and,  on  the  second  ballot,  nom- 
inated John  Bell,  of  Tennessee,  for 
President  ;  he  receiving  13S  votes  to 
114  for  all  others.  Sam  Houston, 
of  Texas,  had  57  votes  on  the  first, 
and  69  on  the  second  ballot.  Ed- 
ward Everett,  of  Massachusetts,  was 
then  unanimously  nominated  for 
Yice-President.  The  Convention, 
without  a  dissenting  voice,  united  on 
the  following 

PLATFORM  : 

"Whereas,  Experience  has  demonstrated 
that  Platforms  adopted  by  the  partisan  Con- 
ventions of  the  country  have  had  the  effect 
to  mislead  and  deceive  the  people,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  widen  the  political  divisions 
of  the  country,  by  the  creation  and  encour- 
agement of  geographical  and  sectional  par- 
ties; therefore, 

"Resolved,  That  it  is  both  the  part  of  pa- 
triotism and  of  duty  to  recognize  no  politi- 
cal principle  other  than  the  Constitution 
of  the  Country,  the  Union  of  the  States, 
and  the  Enforcement  of  the  Laws,  and 
that,  as  representatives  of  the  Constitutional 
Union  men  of  the  country  in  National  Con- 
vention assembled,  we  hereby  pledge  our- 
selves to  maintain,  protect,  and  defend,  sep- 
arately and  unitedly,  these  great  principles 
of  public  liberty  and  national  safety,  against 
all  enemies,  at  home  and  abroad ;  believing 
that  thereby  peace  may  once  more  be  re- 
stored to  the  country,  the  rights  of  the  Peo- 
ple and  of  the  States  reestablished,  and  the 
Government  again  placed  in  that  condition 
of  justice,  fraternity,  and  equality,  which, 
under  the  example  and  Constitution  of  our 
fathers,  has  solemnly  bound  every  citizen  of 


the  United  States  to  maintain  a  more  per- 
fect union,  establish  justice,  insure  domestic 
tranquillity,  provide  for  the  common  defense, 
promote  the  general  welfare,  and  secure  the 
blessings  of  liberty  to  ourselves  and  our 
posterity." 


The  "  Eepublican"  National  Con- 
vention met  at  Chicago,  111.,  on  Wed- 
nesday, May  16th.  All  the  Free 
States  were  strongly  represented, 
with  Delaware,  Maryland,  Virginia, 
Kentucky,  Missouri,  the  District  of 
Columbia,  and  the  Territories  of 
Kansas  and  Nebraska.  There  was  a 
delegation  present  claiming  to  repre- 
sent Texas,  but  it  was  afterward 
found  to  be  fraudulent.  David  Wil- 
mot,  of  Pennsylvania,  was  chosen 
temporary  Chairman,  and  George 
Ashmun,  of  Massachusetts,  Presi- 
dent. A  Platform  Committee  of  one 
from  each  State  and  Territory  was 
appointed  on  the  first  day,  from  which 
Committee  a  report  was  submitted  on 
the  evening  of  the  second,  when  it  was 
immediately  and  unanimously  adopt- 
ed. That  report  or  Platform  is  as 
follows : 

"Resolved,  That  we,  the  delegated  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Republican  electors  of 
the  United  States,  in  Convention  assembled, 
in  discharge  of  the  duty  we  owe  to  our 
constituents  and  our  country,  unite  in  the 
following  declarations: 

"  1.  That  the  history  of  the  nation,  during 
the  last  four  years,  has  fully  established  the 
propriety  and  necessity  of  the  organization 
and  perpetuation  of  the  Republican  party; 
and  that  the  causes  which  called  it  into  ex- 
istence are  permanent  in  their  nature,  and 
now,  more  than  ever  before,  demand  its 
peaceful  and  constitutional  triumph. 

"  2.  That  the  maintenance  of  the  principle 
promulgated  in  the  Declaration  of  Independ- 
ence and  embodied  in  the  Federal  Consti- 
tution, '  That  all  men  are  created  equal ; 
that  they  are  endowed  by  their  Creator  with 
certain  inalienable  rights ;  that  among  these 
are  life,  liberty,  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness ; 
that,  to  secure  these  rights,  governments  are 
instituted  among  men,  deriving  their  just 
powers  from  the  consent  of  the  governed,' 
is  essential  to  the  preservation  of  our  Re- 


320 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


publican  institutions  ;  and  that  the  Federal 
Constitution,  the  Rights  of  the  States,  and 
the  Union  of  the  States,  must  and  shall  be 
preserved. 

"  3.  That  to  the  Union  of  the  States  this 
nation  owes  its  unprecedented  increase  in 
population,  its  surprising  development  of 
material  resources,  its  rapid  augmentation  of 
wealth,  its  happiness  at  home  and  its  honor 
abroad;  and  we  hold  in  abhorrence  all 
schemes  for  Disunion,  come  from  whatever 
source  they  may:  And  we  congratulate  the 
country  that  no  Republican  member  of  Con- 
gress has  uttered  or  countenanced  the 
threats  of  Disunion  so  often  made  by  Dem- 
ocratic members,  without  rebuke  and  with 
applause  from  their  political  associates  ;  and 
we  denounce  those  threats  of  Disunion,  in 
case  of  a  popular  overthrow  of  their  ascend- 
ency, as  denying  the  vital  principles  of  a  free 
government,  and  as  an  avowal  of  contem- 
plated treason,  which  it  is  the  imperative 
duty  of  an  indignant  People  sternly  to  re- 
buke and  forever  silence. 

tk  4.  That  the  maintenance  inviolate  of  the 
rights  of  the  States,  and  especially  the  right 
of  each  State  to  order  and  control  its  own 
domestic  institutions  according  to  its  own 
judgment  exclusively,  is  essential  to  that  bal- 
ance of  powers  on  which  the  perfection  and 
endurance  of  our  political  fabric  depend ; 
and  we  denounce  the  lawless  invasion  by 
armed  force  of  the  soil  of  any  State  or  Terri- 
tory, no  matter  under  what  pretext,  as 
among  the  gravest  of  crimes. 

"  5.  That  the  present  Democratic  Adminis- 
tration has  for  exceeded  our  worst  apprehen- 
sions, in  its  measureless  subserviency  to  the 
exactions  of  a  sectional  interest,  as  especially 
evinced  in  its  desperate  exertions  to  force 
the  infamous  Lecompton  Constitution  upon 
the  protesting  people  of  Kansas ;  in  constru- 
ing the  personal  relation  between  master 
and  servant  to  involve  an  unqualified  prop- 
erty in  persons ;  in  its  attempted  enforce- 
ment, everywhere,  on  land  and  sea,  through 
the  intervention  of  Congress  and  of  the  Fed- 
eral Courts,  of  the  extreme  pretensions  of  a 
purely  local  interest ;  and  in  its  general  and 
unvarying  abuse  of  the  power  intrusted  to  it 
by  a  confiding  people. 

"  6.  That  the  people  justly  view  with  alarm 
the  reckless  extravagance  which  pervades 
every  department  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment ;  that  a  return  to  rigid  economy  and 
accountability  is  indispensable  to  arrest  the 
systematic  plunder  of  the  public  treasury  by 
favored  partisans ;  while  the  recent  startling 
developments  of  frauds  and  corruptions  at 
the  Federal  metropolis,  show  that  an  entire 
change  of  administration  is  imperatively  de- 
manded. 

"  7.  That  the  new  dogma  that  the  Consti- 
tution, of  its  own  force,  carries  Slavery  into 


any  or  all  of  the  Territories  of  the  United 
States,  is  a  dangerous  political  heresy,  at 
variance  with  the  explicit  provisions  of  that 
instrument  itself,  with  contemporaneous  ex- 
position, and  with  legislative  and  judicial 
precedent ;  is  revolutionary  in  its  tendency, 
and  subversive  of  the  peace  and  harmony  of 
the  country. 

"  8.  That  the  normal  condition  of  all  the 
territory  of  the  United  States  is  that  of  Free- 
dom :  That,  as  our  Republican  fathers,  when 
they  had  abolished  Slavery  in  all  our  nation- 
al territory,  ordained  that 1  no  person  should 
be  deprived  of  life,  liberty,  or  property,  with- 
out due  process  of  law,'  it  becomes  our  du- 
ty, by  legislation,  whenever  such  legislation 
is  necessary,  to  maintain  this  provision  of 
the  Constitution  against  all  attempts  to 
violate  it;  and  we  deny  the  authority  of 
Congress,  of  a  territorial  legislature,  or  of 
any  individuals,  to  give  legal  existence  to 
Slavery  in  any  Territory  of  the  United 
States. 

M  9.  That  we  brand  the  recent  reopening  of 
the  African  slave-trade,  under  the  cover  of 
our  national,  fiag,  aided  by  perversions  of 
judicial  power,  as  a  crime  against  humanity 
and  a  burning  shame  to  our  country  and 
age;  and  we  call  upon  Congress  to  take 
prompt  and  efficient  measures  for  the  total 
and  final  suppression  of  that  execrable  traffic. 

"10.  That  in  the  recent  vetoes,  by  their 
Federal  Governors,  of  the  acts  of  the  Legis- 
latures of  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  prohibiting 
Slavery  in  those  Territories,  we  find  a  prac- 
tical illustration  of  the  boasted  Democratic 
principle  of  Non-Intervention  and  Popular 
Sovereignty  embodied  in  the  Kansas-Ne- 
braska bill,  and  a  demonstration  of  the  de- 
ception and  fraud  involved  therein. 

"11.  That  Kansas  should,  of  right,  be  im- 
mediately admitted  as  a  State,  under  the 
Constitution  recently  formed  and  adopted 
by  the  House  of  Representatives. 

"  12.  That,  while  providing  revenue  for  the 
support  of  the  General  Government  by  du- 
ties upon  imports,  sound  policy  requires 
such  an  adjustment  of  these  imposts  as  to 
encoarage  the  development  of  the  industrial 
interests  of  the  whole  country :  and  we  com- 
mend that  policy  of  national  exchanges 
which  secures  to  the  working  men  liberal 
wages,  to  agriculture  remunerating  prices, 
to  mechanics  and  manufacturers  an  adequate 
reward  for  their  skill,  labor,  and  enterprise, 
and  to  the  nation  commercial  prosperity 
and  independence. 

"13.  That  we  protest  against  any  sale  or 
alienation  to  others  of  the  Public  Lands 
held  by  actual  settlers,  and  against  any 
view  of  the  Homestead  policy  which  regards 
the  settlers  as  paupers  or  suppliants  for  pub- 
lic bounty  ;  and  we  demand  the  passage  by 
Congress  of  the  complete  and  satisfactory 


NOMINATION   OF  LI 


NCOLN   AND  HAMLIN. 


321 


Homestead  measure  which  has  already  pass- 
ed the  House, 

"  14.  That  the  Republican  Party  is  opposed 
to  any  change  in  our  Naturalization  Laws, 
or  any  State  legislation  by  which  the  rights 
of  citizenship  hitherto  accorded  to  immi- 
grants from  foreign  lands  shall  be  abridged 
or  impaired ;  and  in  favor  of  giving  a  full 
and  efficient  protection  to  the  rights  of  all 
classes  of  citizens,  whether  native  or  natu- 
ralized, both  at  home  and  abroad. 

"  15.  That  appropriations  by  Congress  for 
River  and  Harbor  improvements  of  a  Na- 
tional character,  required  for  the  accommo- 
dation and  security  of  an  existing  commerce, 
are  authorized  by  the  Constitution,  and  jus- 
tified by  the  obligations  of  Government  to 
protect  the  lives  and  property  of  its  citizens. 

"  16.  That  a  Railroad  to  the  Pacific  Ocean 
is  imperatively  demanded  by  the  interests  of 
the  whole  country;  that  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment ought  to  render  immediate  and 
efficient  aid  in  its  construction  ;  and  that, 
as  preliminary  thereto,  a  daily  Overland 
Mail  should  be  promptly  established. 

"  1 7.  Finally,  having  thus  set  forth  our  dis- 
tinctive principles  and  views,  we  invite  the 
cooperation  of  all  citizens,  however  differing 
on  other  questions,  who  substantially  agree 
with  us  in  their  affirmance  and  support." 

The  Convention,  having  already 
decided,  by  a  vote  of  331  to  130,  that 
a  majority  vote  only  of  the  delegates 
should  be  required  to  nominate,  pro- 
ceeded, on  the  morning  of  the  third 
day  of  its  session,  to  ballot  for  a  can- 
didate for  President  of  the  United 
States,  with  the  following  result : 

1st  Ballot.   2d.  3d. 

William  H.  Seward,  of  New  York  173*. . .  .184*  180 

Abraham  Lincoln,  of  Illinois  102    . .  181   231* 

Simon  Cameron,  of  Pennsylvania.  50*  Withdrawn 

Salmon  P  Chase,  of  Ohio   49           42*   24* 

Edward  Bates,  of  Missouri   48          35   22 

William  L.  Dayton,  of  New  Jersey  14  10  Withdr'n 

John  McLean,  of  Ohio   12  ... .    8   5 

Jacob  Collamer,  of  Vermont   10  Withdrawn 

Scattering   6   4   2 

Abraham  Lincoln  having,  on  the 
third  ballot,  within  two  and  a  half 
votes  of  the  number  necessary  to 
nominate  him,  Mr.  David  K.  Cartter, 
of  Ohio,  before  the  result  was  an- 
nounced, rose  to  change  four  votes 
from  Chase  to  Lincoln,  giving  the 
latter  a  clear  majority.  Mr.  Mc- 
Crillis,  of  Maine,  followed,  changing 

ten  votes  from  Seward  to  Lincoln ; 
21 


Mr.  Andrew,  of  Massachusetts,  also 
changed  a  part  of  the  vote  of  that 
State  from  Seward  to  Lincoln ;  and 
Mr.  B.  Gratz  Brown,  of  Missouri, 
changed  the  eighteen  votes  of  that 
State  from  Bates  to  Lincoln.  Others 
followed,  until  Mr.  Lincoln  had  354 
out  of  466  votes,  and  was  declared 
duly  nominated.  On  motion  of 
Mr.  ¥m.  M.  Evarts,  of  New  York, 
seconded  by  Mr.  John  A.  Andrew, 
of  Massachusetts,  the  nomination 
was  made  unanimous. 

In  the  evening,  the  Convention 
proceeded  to  ballot  for  Vice-Presi- 
dent, when  Hannibal  Hamlin,  of 
Maine,  received,  on  the  first  ballot, 
194  votes ;  Cassius  M.  Clay,  of  Ken- 
tucky, 101-J ;  and  there  were  165|- 
cast  for  other  candidates.  On  the 
second  ballot,  Mr.  Hamlin  received 
367  votes  to  99  for  all  others,  and 
was  declared  duly  nominated.  On 
motion  of  Mr.  George  D.  Blakey,  of 
Kentucky,  the  nomination  was  made 
unanimous. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Joshua  R.  Gid- 
dings,  of  Ohio,  it  was 

"Resolved,  That  we  deeply  sympathize  with 
those  men  who  have  been  driven,  some  from 
their  native  States  and  others  from  the 
States  of  their  adoption,  and  are  now  exiled 
from  their  homes  on  account  of  their  opin- 
ions ;  and  we  hold  the  Democratic  party  re- 
sponsible for  the  gross  violations  of  that 
clause  of  the  Constitution  which  declares 
that  citizens  of  each  State  shall  be  entitled 
to  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  of  citi- 
zens of  the  several  States." 

And  then,  after  a  brief  speech  by 
the  President,  the  Convention  ad- 
journed, with  nine  hearty  cheers  for 
the  ticket. 


The  canvass  for  the  Presidency, 
thus  opened,  was  distinguished  from 
all  that  had  preceded  it,  not  more  by 
the  number  of  formidable  contest- 


322 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ants,  than  by  the  sharpness  with 
which  the  issues  were  defined  by 
three  of  the  contending  parties.  It 
was,  in  effect,  proclaimed  by  three  of 
the  leading  Southern  delegates  in  the 
Charleston  Convention  :  "  The  last 
Presidential  election  was  won  by  am- 
biguity, double-dealing,  deception — 
by  devising  a  platform  that  meant 
one  thing  at  the  North,  and  another 
at  the  South.  But,  we  are  resolved 
to  have  no  more  of  this.  We  shall 
now  succeed  on  a  clear  exhibition  of 
our  principles,  or  not  at  all."  And 
the  champions  of  Popular  Sovereign- 
ty, who  controlled  most  of  the  dele- 
gations from  Free  States,  were  nearly 
as  frank,  and  quite  as  firm.  Said  a 
leading  supporter  of  Senator  Doug- 
las— Mr.  George  E.  Pugh,  of  Ohio16 
— in  the  Charleston  Convention  : 

"  Thank  God  that  a  bold  and  honest 
man  [Mr.  Yancey]  has  at  last  spoken,  and 
told  the  whole  truth  with  regard  to  the  de- 
mands of  the  South.  It  is  now  plainly  be- 
fore the  Convention  and  the  country  that 
the  South  does  demand  an  advanced  step 
from  the  Democratic  party."  [Mr.  Pugh 
here  read  the  resolves  of  the  Alabama  De- 
mocratic State  Convention  of  1856,  to  prove 
that  the  South  was  then  satisfied  with  what 
it  now  rejects.  He  proceeded  to  show  that 
the  Northern  Democrats  had  sacrificed 
themselves  in  battling  for  the  rights  of  the 
South,  and  instanced  one  and  another  of  the 
delegates  there  present,  who  had  been  de- 
feated and  thrown  out  of  public  life  thereby. 
He  concluded :]  "  And  now,  the  very  weak- 
ness thus  produced  is  urged  as  a  reason  why 
the  North  should  have  no  weight  in  forming 
the  platform  !  The  Democracy  of  the  North 
are  willing  to  stand  by  the  old  landmarks — 
to  reaffirm  the  old  faith.  They  will  deeply 
regret  to  part  with  their  Southern  brethren. 
But,  if  the  gentlemen  from  the  South  can 
only  abide  with  us  on  the  terms  they  now 
propound,  they  must  go.  The  North- West 
must  and  will  be  heard  and  felt.  The 
Northern  Democrats  are  not  children,  to  be 
told  to  stand  here — to  stand  there— to  be 
moved  at  the  beck  and  bidding  of  the 
South.    Because  we  are  in  a  minority  on 


account  of  our  fidelity  to  our  constitutional 
obligations,  we  are  told,  in  effect,  that  we 
must  put  our  hands  on  our  mouths,  and 
our  mouths  in  the  dust.  Gentlemen,"  said  Mr. 
Pugh,  " you  mistake  us — we  will  not  do  it" 

The  Southern  leaders  gave  repeated 
and  earnest  warnings  to  this  effect : 

Gentlemen  from  the  North !  look 
well  to  your  doings!  If  you  insist 
on  your  6  Squatter  Sovereignty'  plat- 
form, in  full  view  of  its  condemna- 
tion by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the 
Dred  Scott  case,  you  break  up  the 
Democratic  party — nay,  more  :  you 
break  up  the  Union  !  The  unity  of 
the  Democratic  party  is  the  last  bond 
that  holds  the  Union  together:  that 
snapped,  there  is  no  other  that  can 
be  trusted  for  a  year."  Discarding 
that  of  the  "  Constitutional  Union" 
party  as  meaning  anything  in  gen- 
eral and  nothing  in  particular,  the 
Lincoln,  Douglas,  and  Breckinridge 
parties  had  deliberately  planted  them- 
selves, respectively,  on  the  following 
positions : 

1.  Lincoln. — Slavery  can  only  exist  by 
virtue  of  municipal  law  ;  and  there  is  no  law 
for  it  in  the  Territories,  and  no  power  to  en- 
act one.  Congress  can  establish  or  legalize 
Slavery  nowhere,  but  is  bound  to  prohibit  it 
in  or  exclude  it  from  any  and  every  Federal 
Territory,  whenever  and  wherever  there  shall 
be  necessity  for  such  exclusion  or  prohibition. 

2.  Douglas. — Slavery  or  No  Slavery  in 
any  Territory  is  entirely  the  affair  of  the 
white  inhabitants  of  such  Territory.  If  they 
choose  to  have  it,  it  is  their  right ;  if  they 
choose  not  to  have  it,  they  have  a  right  to 
exclude  or  prohibit  it.  Neither  Congress 
nor  the  people  of  the  Union,  or  of  any  part 
of  it,  outside  of  said  Territory,  have  any 
right  to  meddle  with  or  trouble  themselves 
about  the  matter. 

3.  Breckinridge. — The  citizen  of  any  State 
has  a  right  to  migrate  to  any  Territory,  tak- 
ing with  him  anything  which  is  property  by 
the  law  of  his  own  State,  and  hold,  enjoy, 


16 Recently,  U.  S.  Senator  from  that  State; 
elected  over  Gov.  Chase  in  1853-4;  succeeded  by 


him  in  turn  in  1859-60;  since,  a  candidate  for 
Lieut.  Governor,  under  Vallandigham,  in  1863. 


THE    DOUGLAS   PLATFORM   AND  CANVASS. 


323 


and  be  protected  in,  the  use  of  such  property 
in  said  Territory.  And  Congress  is  bound 
to  render  such  protection  wherever  neces- 
sary, whether  with  or  without  the  coopera- 
tion of  the  Territorial  Legislature. 

"We  have  seen  how  thoroughly  this 
last  doctrine  is  refuted  by  Col.  Ben- 
ton in  his  strictures  on  the  Dred 
Scott  decision.  If  it  were  sound, 
any  blackleg  might,  with  impunity, 
defy  the  laws  of  any  Territory  for- 
bidding the  sale  of  lottery  tickets  or 
other  implements  of  gambling.  Or 
the  Indian  trader  might  say  to  the 
United  States  Agent :  "  Sir,  I  know 
you  have  a  law  authorizing  and  di- 
recting you  to  destroy  every  drop  of 
liquor  you  find  offered  or  kept  for 
sale  on  an  Indian  reservation ;  but 
my  liquor  is  property,  according  to 
the  laws  of  my  State,  and  you  cannot 
touch  it.  I  have  a  .Constitutional 
right  to  take  my  property  into  any 
Territory,  and  there  do  with  it  as 
I  please — so,  Hands  off!"  He  who 
does  not  know  that  this  is  not  law, 
nor  compatible  with  the  most  vital 
functions  of  government,  can  hardly 
have  considered  the  matter  patiently 
or  thoughtfully. 

The  Douglas  platform  was  practi- 
cally eviscerated  by  the  ready  accept- 
ance at  Baltimore  of  Gov.  Wickliffe's 
resolve  making  the  dicta  of  the  Su- 
preme Court  absolute  and  unques- 
tionable with  regard  to  Slavery  in 
the  Territories.  The  Dred  Scott  de- 
cision was  aimed  directly  at  *  Squat- 
ter Sovereignty :'  the  case,  after  be- 
ing once  disposed  of  on  an  entirely 
different  point,  was  restored  to  life 
expressly  to  cover  this  ground.  Am- 
biguous as  was  the  Cincinnati  plat- 
form, the  upholder  of '  Popular  Sove- 
reignty' in  the  Territories,  who,  at 
the  same  time,  regards  the  Dred 


Scott  decision  as  binding  law,  and  its 
authors  as  entitled  to  make  further 
and  kindred  decrees  controlling  his 
vote  and  action  with  regard  to  the 
extension  of  Slavery,  maintains  posi- 
tions so  inconsistent  and  contradic- 
tory as  to  divest  him  of  all  moral 
power  in  the  premises — all  freedom 
of  effective  action. 


The  canvass  was  opened  with  great 
spirit  and  vigor  by  Mr.  Douglas  in 
person  ;  he  speaking  in  nearly  every 
Free,  and  in  many  if  not  most  of  the 
Slave  States,  in  the  course  of  the 
Summer  and  Autumn.  A  ready  and 
able  debater,  he  necessarily  attracted 
large  crowds  to  his  meetings,  and  in- 
fused something  of  his  own  fiery  im- 
petuosity and  tireless  energy  into  the 
breasts  of  his  supporters. 

But  the  odds  were  soon  seen  to  be 
too  great ;  since  the  partisans  of 
Breckinridge,  not  content  with  their 
manifest  preponderance  in  all  the 
Slave  States,  insisted  on  organizing 
in  and  dividing  the  Democratic 
strength  of  the  Free  States  as  well. 
Nay,  more  :  in  several  of  those  States 
— Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Con- 
necticut, California,  and  Oregon — 
the  leaders  of  the  Democracy  in  previ- 
ous contests  were  mainly  found  ranged 
on  the  side  of  Breckinridge;  while, 
in  nearly  or  quite  every  Free  State, 
enough  adherents  of  the  Southern 
platform  were  found  to  organize  a 
party  and  nominate  a  Breckinridge 
ticket,  rendering  the  choice  of  the 
Douglas  Electors  in  most  Free  States 
hardly  possible. 

The  Democrats,  as  we  have  seen, 
had  divided  on  a  question  of  princi- 
ple— one  deemed,  on  either  side,  of 
overwhelming  consequence.  Pathetic 
entreaties  and  fervid  appeals  had  been 


324 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


lavished  at  Charleston  on  futile  at- 
tempts to  bring  them  to  an  agree- 
ment, that  the  party  first  and  the 
Union  next  might  be  saved  from  im- 
minent dissolution.  Personal  aspi- 
rations, doubtless,  had  their  weight ; 
but  the  South  could  have  taken  any 
candidate — perhaps  even  Douglas 
himself — if  he  were  standing  square- 
ly, openly,  on  the  Avery  or  Breckin- 
ridge platform ;  and  so,  probably, 
could  the  Northern  delegates  have 
consented  to  support  Breckinridge  or 
Howell  Cobb  on  the  Payne- Samuels 
or  Douglas  platform.  Never  was  an 
issue  more  broadly  made  or  clearly 
defined  as  one  of  conflicting,  incom- 
patible assumptions.  And  nowhere 
in  the  Slave  States  did  the  Breckin- 
ridge men  consent  to  any  compro- 
mise, partnership,  coalition,  or  ar- 
rangement, with  the  partisans  of 
Douglas,  though  aware  that  their 
antagonism  would  probably  give  sev- 
eral important  States  to  the  Bell- 
Everett  ticket.  But  the  Douglasites 
of  the  Free  States,  on  their  part, 
evinced  a  general  readiness  to  waive 
their  prestige  of  regularity,  and  sup- 
port Electoral  tickets  made  up  from 
the  ranks  of  each  anti-Republican 
party.  Thus,  in  New  York,  the 
"  Fusion"  anti-Lincoln  ticket  was 
made  up  of  ten  supporters  of  Bell 
and  Everett,  seven  of  Breckinridge 
and  Lane,  and  the  residue  friends 
of  Douglas.  No  doubt,  there  was  an 
understanding  among  the  managers 
that,  if  all  these  could  elect  Mr. 
Douglas,  their  votes  should  be  cast 
solid  for  him;  but  the  contingency 
thus  contemplated  was  at  best  a  re- 
mote one,  while  the  fact  that  those 
who  had  the  prestige  of  Democratic 
regularity  consented  to  bargain  and 
combine  with  bolters  and  "Know- 


Nothings,"  tended  to  confuse  and  be- 
wilder those  who  "always  vote  the 
regular  ticket,"  and  were  accustomed 
to  regard  a  Democratic  bolter  with 
more  repugnance  than  a  life-long 
adversary.  The  portents,  from  the 
outset,  were  decidedly  unfavorable 
to  Mr.  Douglas's  election. 

And,  from  the  shape  thus  given  to 
the  canvass,  his  chances  could  not 
fail  to  suffer.  The  basis  of  each  anti- 
Lincoln  coalition  could,  of  course,  be 
nothing  else  than  hostility  to  the  Re- 
publican idea  of  excluding  Slavery 
from  the  territories.  Now,  the  posi- 
tion directly  and  thoroughly  antago- 
nistic to  this  was  that  of  the  Breckin- 
ridge party,  which  denied  the  right 
to  exclude,  and  proclaimed  the  right 
of  each  slaveholder  to  carry  Slavery 
into  any  territory.  The  position  of 
Mr.  Douglas  was  a  mean  between 
these  extremes;  and,  in  an  earnest, 
arduous  struggle,  the  prevailing  ten- 
dency 6teadily  is  away  from  the 
mean,  and  toward  a  positive  and 
decided  position  on  one  side  or  the 
other.  The  great  mercantile  in- 
fluence in  the  seaboard  cities  had  one 
controlling  aim  in  its  political  efforts 
— to  conciliate  and  satisfy  the  South, 
so  as  to  keep  her  loyal  to  the  Union. 
But  Douglasism,  or  "  Squatter  Sover- 
eignty," did  not  satisfy  the  South — 
in  fact,  since  the  failure  to  establish 
Slavery  in  Kansas,  was  regarded 
with  special  loathing  by  many  South- 
rons, as  an  indirect  and  meaner  sort 
of  Wilmot  Proviso.  Wherever  a 
coalition  was  effected,  the  canvass 
was  thenceforth  prosecuted  on  a  basis 
which  was  a  mumbling  compromise 
between  the  Bell  and  the  Breckin- 
ridge platforms,  but  which  was  usual- 
ly reticent  with  regard  to  "  Popular 
Sovereignty." 


THE    BELL-E VERET 


T    PARTY    IN    1  860. 


325 


But  the  salient  feature  of  the  can- 
vass was  the  hearty  accord  of  the 
coalesced  parties  North  of  the  Poto- 
mac, in  attributing  to  the  Republican 
platform  and  to  Mr.  Lincoln  appre- 
hended consequences  that  were,  by 
the  South,  attributed  to  Douglas  and 
"  Squatter  Sovereignty."  The  De- 
mocratic National  Convention  and 
party  had  been  broken  up,  not  be- 
cause of  any  suspicion  of  Republican- 
ism alfecting  either  faction,  but  be- 
cause the  South  would  not  abide  the 
doctrine  of  Mr.  Douglas,  with  regard 
to  Slavery  in  the  Territories.  Yet 
here  were  his  supporters  appealing  to 
the  people  from  every  stump  to  vote 
the  coalition  ticket,  in  order  to  concil- 
iate the  South,  and  save  the  country 
from  the  pangs  of  dissolution !  It 
was  not  easy  to  realize  that  the  Pughs, 
Paynes,  Richardsons,  Churches,  etc., 
who  had  so  determinedly  bearded 
the  South  at  Charleston  and  at  Balti- 
more, defying  threats  of  disruption 
and  disunion,  were  the  very  men  who 
now  exhorted  the  People  to  vote  the 
coalition  Electoral  tickets,  in  order 
to  dispel  the  very  dangers  which  they 
had  persistently  invoked,  by  support- 
ing the  Payne-Samuels  platform,  and 
nominating  Douglas  for  President. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  treat  calmly 
the  conduct  of  the  "American," 
"Conservative,"  "Union,"  or  Bell- 
Everett  party  of  the  South ;  or,  more 
accurately,  to  reconcile  its  chosen 
attitude  and  professions  in  the  canvass 
with  the  course  taken  by  thousands 
of  its  members  immediately  on  the 
announcement  of  the  result,  with  the 
ultimate  concurrence  of  many  more, 
including  even  the  eminent  and 
hitherto  moderate  and  loyal  Tennes- 
sean  whom  it  had  deliberately  pre- 
sented as  an  embodiment  of  its  prin- 


ciples by  nominating  him  for  the 
Presidency.  That  party  was  mainly 
composed  of  admiring  disciples  of 
Clay  and  "Webster,  who  had  sternly 
resisted  Nullification  on  grounds  of 
principle,  and  had  united  in  the 
enthusiastic  acclaim  which  had 
hailed  Webster  as  the  triumph- 
ant champion  of  our  Nationality,  the 
"great  expounder  of  the  Constitu- 
tion," in  his  forensic  struggle  with 
Hayne.  It  had  proudly  pointed  to 
such  men  as  William  Gaston,  of 
North  Carolina,  Sergeant  S.  Pren- 
tiss, of  Mississippi,  Edward  Bates,  of 
Missouri,  George  W.  Summers,  of 
Yirginia,  John  J.  Crittenden,  of  Ken- 
tucky, and  James  L.  Petigru,  of  South 
Carolina,  as  the  exponents  of  its  prin- 
ciples, the  jewels  of  its  crown.  It 
had  nominated  and  supported  Bell 
and  Everett  on  a  platform  which 
meaningly  proclaimed  fidelity  to 
"The  Union,  the  Constitution,  and 
the  Enforcement  of  the  Laws,"  as  its 
distinctive  ground.  To  say  that  it 
meant  by  this  to  stand  by  the  Union 
until  some  other  party  should,  in  its 
judgment,  violate  the  Constitution,  is 
to  set  the  human  understanding  at 
defiance.  It  either  meant  to  cling  to 
the  Constitution  and  Union  at  all 
hazards  and  under  all  circumstances, 
and  to  insist  that  the  laws  should  be 
enforced  throughout  the  country,  or 
it  was  guilty  of  seeking  votes  under 
false  pretenses.  Unlike  the  Douglas 
Democracy,  it  was  a  distinct,  well- 
established  party,  which  had  a  defini- 
tive existence,  and  at  least  a  sem- 
blance of  organization  in  every  Slave 
State  but  South  Carolina.  It  had 
polled  a  majority  of  the  Southern 
vote  for  Harrison  in  1 840,  for  Taylor 
in  1848,  had  just  polled  nearly  forty 
per  cent,  of  that  vote  for  Bell,  and 


326  THE  AMERICA 

might  boast  its  full  share  of  the 
property,  and  more  than  its  share  of 
the  intelligence  and  respectability,  of 
the  South.  This  party  had  but  to  be 
courageously  faithful  to  its  cardinal 
principle  and  to  its  abiding  convic- 
tions to  avert  the  storm  of  civil  war. 
Had  its  leaders,  its  orators,  its  presses, 
spoken  out  promptly,  decidedly,  un- 
conditionally, for  the  Union  at  all 
hazards,  and  for  settling  our  differ- 
ences in  Congress,  in  the  Courts,  and 
at  the  ballot-box,  it  would  have  pre- 
vented the  effusion  of  rivers  of  pre- 
cious blood.  It  was  perfectly  aware 
that  the  Republicans  and  their  Presi- 
dent elect  were  powerless,  even  if 
disposed,  to  do  the  South  any  wrong; 
that  the  result  of  the  elections  already 
held  had  secured17  an  anti-Republi- 
can majority  in  either  branch  of  the 
ensuing  Congress ;  that  the  Supreme 
Court  was  decidedly  and,  for  a  con- 
siderable period,  unchangeably  on 
the  same  side.  In  the  worst  con- 
ceivable event  of  the  elections  yet 
to  come,  no  bill  could  pass  respect- 
ing the  Territories,  or  anything  else, 
which  the  "Conservatives"  should 
see  fit  unitedly  to  oppose.  And  yet, 
South  Carolina  had  scarcely  indica- 
ted unmistakably  her  purpose,  when 
many  Bell-Unionists  of  Georgia,  Ala- 
bama, and  other  Southern  States,  be- 
gan to  clamor  and  shout  for  Secession. 
They  seemed  so  absorbingly  intent 
on  getting,  for  once,  on  the  stronger 
side,  that  they  forgot  the  controlling 
fact  that  the  side  on  which  God  is 
has  always  at  last  the  majority. 

The  early  State  Elections  of  1860 
had  not  been  favorable  to  the  Repub- 

17  New  York  had  chosen  1 0 ;  Penus ylvania  7 ;  I 
New  Jersey  3 ;  Ohio  8  ;  Indiana  4 ;  Illinois  5 ;  j 
and  Missouri  6  anti-Republicans  to  the  House;  [ 


N  CONFLICT. 

licans.  They  had  begun  by  carrying 
New  Hampshire  by  4,443 — a  satisfac- 
tory majority  ;  but  were  next  beaten 
in  Rhode  Island — an  independent 
ticket,  headed  by  William  Sprague  for 
Governor,  carrying  the  State  over 
theirs,  by  1,460  majority.  In  Connec- 
ticut, Gov.  Buckingham  had  been  re- 
elected by  barely  541  majority,  in  near- 
ly 80,000  votes — the  heaviest  poll  ever 
had  there  at  a  State  Election.  It 
was  evident  that  harmony  at  Charles- 
ton would  have  rendered  the  election 
of  a  Democratic  President  morally 
certain.  But,  after  the  disruption 
there,  things  were  bravely  altered. 
Maine,  early  in  September,  elected  a 
Republican  Governor  by  18,091  ma- 
jority; Vermont  directly  followed, 
with  a  Republican  majority  of 
22,370;  but  when  Pennsylvania  and 
Indiana,  early  in  October,  declared 
unmistakably  for  Lincoln — the  for- 
mer choosing  Andrew  G.  Curtin  her 
Governor  by  32,164  majority  over 
Henry  D.  Foster,  who  had  the  hearty 
support  of  all  three  opposing  parties ; 
while  Indiana  chose  Gen.  Henry  S. 
Lane  by  9,757  over  T.  A.  Hendricks, 
his  only  competitor,  with  seven  out 
of  eleven  Representatives  in  Con- 
gress, and  a  Republican  Legislature 
— it  was  manifest  that  only  a  miracle 
could  prevent  the  success  of  Lincoln 
and  Hamlin  the  next  month. 

Yet  the  mercantile  fears  of  con- 
vulsion and  civil  war,  as  results  of  Mr. 
Lincoln's  election,  were  so  vivid  and 
earnest  that  the  contest  at  the  North 
was  still  prosecuted  by  his  combined 
adversaries  with  the  energy  of  des- 
peration. New  York,  especially,  was 
the  arena  of  a  struggle  as  intense,  as 

|  rendering  it  morally  certain  that,  but  for  Seces- 
j  sion,  Mr  Lincoln  would  have  had  to  face  an  Op- 
position Congress  from  the  start. 


GOT.    SEWARD  CLOSING 


THE    CANYASS    OF    1  8  6  0. 


327 


vehement,  and  energetic,  as  had  ever 
been  known.  Her  drawn  battle  of 
the  year  before,  and  the  perfect  ac- 
cord in  this  contest  of  the  anti-Re- 
publican parties,  gave  grounds  for 
hope,  if  not  confidence,  that  she 
might  now  be  carried  against  Lin- 
coln, especially  as  the  City  was  ex- 
pected to  give  a  far  larger  majority 
for  "  Fusion"  than  she  had  ever 
yet  given  for  any  man  or  party. 
Abundance  of  money  for  every  pur- 
pose doubtless  contributed  to  the  ani- 
mation of  the  struggle  on  this  side, 
while  painful  apprehensions  of  South- 
ern revolt,  in  case  Lincoln  should  be 
elected,  rendered  the  "merchant 
princes,"  whose  wealth  was  largely, 
if  not  wholly,  locked  up  in  the  shape 
of  Southern  indebtedness,  ready  to 
bleed  freely  for  even  a  hope  of  pre- 
venting a  result  they  so  dreaded  as 
fatal  to  their  business,  their  prosperi- 
ty, and  their  affluence. 

Gov.  Seward — who  had  made  a  po- 
litical tour  through  the  North-West 
during  the  Autumn,  wherein  his 
speeches  in  behalf  of  the  Republican 
cause  and  candidates  were  of  a  re- 
markably high  order,  alike  in  origin- 
ality, dignity,  and  perspicuity — closed 
the  canvass,  the  night  before  Elec- 
tion, in  an  address  to  his  townsmen  at 
Auburn,  which  concluded  with  these 
truthful  and  memorable  words  : 

"Now  here  is  the  trinity  in  unity  and 
unity  in  trinity  of  the  political  church,  just 
now  come  to  us  by  the  light -of  a  new  reve- 
lation, and  christened  'Fusion.'  And  this 
'Fusion1  party,  what  is  the  motive  to  which 
it  appeals?  You  may  go  with  me  into  the 
streets  to-night,  and  follow  the  'Little 
Giants,'  who  go  with  their  torchlights,  and 
their  flaunting  banners  of  '  Popular  Sover- 
eignty ;'  or  you  may  go  with  the  smaller  and 
more  select  and  modest  band,  who  go  for 
Breckinridge  and  Slavery ;  or  you  may  fol- 


low the  music  of  the  clanging  bells ;  and, 
strange  to  say,  they  will  all  bring  you  into 
one  common  chamber.  When  you  get  there, 
you  will  hear  only  this  emotion  of  the  hu- 
man heart  appealed  to,  Fear, — fear  that,  if 
you  elect  a  President  of  the  United  States 
according  to  the  Constitution  and  the  laws 
to-morrow,  you  will  wake  up  next  day,  and 
find  that  you  have  no  country  for  him  to 
preside  over!  Is  not  that  a  strange  motive 
for  an  American  patriot  to  appeal  to  ?  And, 
in  that  same  hall,  amid  the  jargon  of  three 
discprdant  members  of  the  '  Fusion'  party, 
you  will  hear  one  argument;  and  that  argu- 
ment is,  that,  so  sure  as  you  are  so  perverse 
as  to  cast  your  vote  singly,  lawfully,  honest- 
ly, as  you  ought  to  do,  for  one  candidate 
for  the  Presidency,  instead  of  scattering  it 
among  three  candidates,  so  that  no  Presi- 
dent may  be  elected,  this  Union  shall  come 
down  over  your  heads,  involving  you  and 
us  in  a  common  ruin  ! 

"Fellow-citizens,  it  is  time,  high  time, 
that  we  know  whether  this  is  a  Constitu- 
tional government  under  which  we  live.  It 
is  high  time  that  we  know,  since  the  Union 
is  threatened,  who  are  its  friends,  and  who 
are  its  enemies.  The  Republican  party,  who 
propose,  in  the  old,  appointed,  constitutional 
way,  to  choose  a  President,  are  every  man 
of  them  loyal  to  the  Union.  The  disloyal- 
ists, wherever  they  may  be,  are  those  who 
are  opposed  to  the  Republican  party,  and 
attempt  to  prevent  the  election  of  a  Presi- 
dent. I  know  that  our  good  and  esteemed 
neighbors — (Heaven  knows  I  have  cause  to 
respect,  and  esteem,  and  honor,  and  love 
them,  as  I  do ;  for  such  neighbors  as  even 
my  Democratic  neighbors,  no  other  man 
ever  had) — I  know  that  they  do  not  avow, 
nor  do  they  mean  to  support,  or  think  they 
are  supporting,  disunionists.  But  I  tell  them, 
that  he  who  proposes  to  lay  hold  of  the  pil- 
lars of  the  Union,  and  bring  it  down  into 
ruin,  is  a  disunionist ;  and  that  every  man 
who  quotes  him,  and  uses  his  threats  and 
his  menaces  as  an  argument  against  our  ex- 
ercise of  our  duty,  is  an  abettor,  unconscious 
though  he  may  be,  of  disunion ;  and  that, 
when  to-morrow's  sun  shall  have  set,  and 
the  next  morning's  sun  shall  have  risen  on 
the  American  people,  rejoicing  in  the  elec- 
tion of  Abraham  Lincoln  to  the  Presidency, 
those  men  who  to-day  sympathize  with,  up- 
hold, support,  and  excuse  the  disunionists, 
will  have  to  make  a  sudden  choice,  and 
choose  whether,  in  the  language  of  the 
Senator  from  Georgia,  they  will  go  for  trea- 
son, and  so  make  it  respectable,  or  whether 
they  will  go  with  us  for  Freedom,  for  the 
Constitution,  and  for  eternal  Union." 


328 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


XXII. 


SECE 

The  choice  of  Presidential  Elec- 
tors, which  formerly  took  place  at 
the  discretion  of  the  several  States 
within  a  limited  range,  is  now  re- 
quired, by  act  of  Congress,  to  be 
made  on  the  same  day  throughout — 
namely,  on  the  Tuesday  next  suc- 
ceeding the  first  Monday  in  Novem- 
ber. This  fell,  in  1860,  on  the  6th 
of  the  month ;  and  it  was  known,  be- 
fore that  day  had  fully  expired,  that 
Abraham  Lincoln  had  been  clearly 
designated  by  the  People  for  their 
next  President,  through  the  choice  by 
his  supporters  of  a  majority  of  the 
whole  number  of  Electors.  Every 
Free  State  but  New  Jersey  had  cho- 
sen the  entire  Lincoln  Electoral  tick- 
et ;  and  in  New  Jersey  the  refusal 
of  part  of  the  Douglas  men  to  sup- 
port the  "  Fusion"  ticket  (composed 
of  three  Douglas,  two  Bell,  and  two 
Breckinridge  men),  had  allowed  four 
of  the  Lincoln  Electors  to  slip  in 
over  the  two  Bell  and  the  two  Breck- 
inridge Electors  on  the  regular  Dem- 
ocratic ticket.  The  three  Lincoln 
Electors  who  had  to  confront  the  full 
vote  of  the  coalesced  anti-Republican 
parties  were  defeated  by  about  4,500 
majority.  And,  although  this  was 
not  ascertained  that  night,  nor  yet 
the  fact  that  California  and  Oregon 
had  gone  with  the  other  free  States, 
yet  there  were  169  Lincoln  Electors 
chosen  (out  of  303)  outside  of  these 
three  States ;  with  these,  Mr.  Lincoln 
had  180,  to  123  for  all  others.  Of 
these,  Breckinridge  had  72 ;  Bell  39 
(from  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and  Ten- 
nessee); and  Douglas  barely  12 — 


SSION. 

those  of  Missouri  (9)  and  3,  as  afore- 
said, from  New  Jersey.  But,  though 
nowhere  in  the  Electoral,  Mr.  Doug- 
las was  second  in  the  Popular,  vote, 
as  will  be  seen  by  the  following 
table,  wherein  the  "  Fusion"  vote  is 
divided  between  the  parties  which 
contributed  to  it,  according  to  the 
best  estimate  that  can  now  be  made 
of  their  strength  respectively : 

FEEE  STATES. 


States.  Lincoln.  Douglas.  Breckinridge.  Bell. 

Maine   62,811  26,693  6,368  2,046 

New  Hampshire.  37,519  25,881  2,112  441 

Massachusetts . .  106,353  34.372  5,939  22.331 

Rhode  Island....  12,244  *4,000  *1.000  2,707 

Connecticut.   43,972  15,522  14,641  3,291 

Vermont   33,803  6.S49  218  1,969 

New  York   353.S04  *203.329  *50.000  *50.000 

New  Jersey   58.324  *30,000  *30,000  *2.801 

Pennsylvania....  26S.030  *78,S71  *100,000  12,776 

Ohio   231,610  187,232  11,405  12.194 

Indiana   139,033  115,509  12,295  5,306 

Illinois   172,161  160.215  2,404  4,913 

Michigan   88.480  65,057  805  405 

Wisconsin   86,110  65,021  888  161 

Minnesota   22,069  11,920  748  62 

Iowa   70,409  55,111  1,048  1,748 

California   39,173  88.516  34,334  6,817 

Oregon   5.270  3,951  5,006  183 


Total  Free  States..  1,S31,180   1,123,049   279,211  130,151 

*  M  Fusion"  vote  apportioned  according  to  the  estima- 
ted strength  of  the  several  contributing  parties. 


SLAVE  STATES. 
States.  Lincoln.     Douglas.  Breckinridge.  Bell. 

Delaware                     3,S15        1.023      7,337  3.S64 

Marvland                     2.294        5,966     42,482  41,760 

Virginia                      1,929       16,290     74.323  74,fi8l 

North  Carolina.. .  (no  ticket)  2,701  48,539  44,990 
South  Carolina. . .    [Chosen  by  the  Legislature.] 

Georgia                 (no  ticket)      11,590     51,889  42,SS6 

Alabama                (no  ticket)      13,651     4S,831  27.S75 

Mississippi            (no  ticket)       3,2S3     40,797  25,040 

Kentucky                    1,364       25,651     53,143  06,059 

Tennessee             (no  ticket)      11,350     64,209  69,274 

Missouri                    17,028       58,801     81,317  5S.372 

Arkansas               (no  ticket)       5,227     28,732  20,094 

Louisiana              (no  ticket)       7,625     22.G«>1  20.204 

Florida  (no  ticket)         367      &543  5,437 

Texas                   (no  ticket)  (no  ticket)  47,54S  tl5,433 


Total  Slave  States..     26,430      163,525   570,S71  515,973 
Grand  Total  1,857,610   1,291,574   850,082  646,124 


t  This  anti-Breckinridge  vote  was  cast  for  a  "  Fusion" 
Electoral  ticket,  but  almost  entirely  by  old  'Whigs'  or 
Bell  men. 

Lincoln  over  Douglas,  566,036 ;  Do.  over  Bell,  1,21 1,436 ;  . 
do.  over  Breckinridge.  1,007,528. 

Lincoln  has  less  than  all  his  opponents  combined,  by 
930,170. 

Breckinridge  had  in  the  Slave  States  over  Bell,  54,898 ; 
do.  over  Douglas,  407,346;  do.  over  Douglas  and  Lin- 
coln, 3S0,916. 

Breckinridge  lacks  of  a  majority  in  the  Slave  States, 
135,057. 


THE   SOUTH    ON   LINCOLN'S  ELECTION. 


329 


From  an  early  stage  of  the  can- 
vass, the  Republicans  could  not  help 
seeing  that  they  had  the  potent  aid, 
in  their  efforts,  of  the  good  wishes 
for  their  success  of  at  least  a  large 
proportion  of  the  advocates  of  Breck- 
inridge and  Lane.  The  toasts  drunk 
with  most  enthusiasm  at  the  Fourth- 
of- July  celebrations  throughout  South 
Carolina  pointed  to  the  probable 
election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  as  the  neces- 
sary prelude  to  movements  whereon 
the  hearts  of  all  Carolinians  were  in- 
tent. Southern  "  Fire-Eaters"  can- 
vassed the  Northern  States  in  behalf 
of  Breckinridge  and  Lane,  but  very 
much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  friends 
of  Lincoln  and  Hamlin.  The  "  Fu- 
sion" arrangements,  whereby  it  was 
hoped,  at  all  events,  to  defeat  Lin- 
coln, were  not  generally  favored  by 
the  "  Fire-Eaters"  who  visited  the 
North,  whether  intent  on  politics, 
business,  or  pleasure ;  and,  in  some 
instances,  those  who  sought  to  com- 
mend themselves  to  the  favor  of  their 
Southern  patrons  or  customers,  by 
an  exhibition  of  zeal  in  the  "Fusion" 
cause,  were  quietly  told :  "  What  you 
are  doing  looks  not  to  the  end  we  de- 
sire :  we  want  Lincoln  elected."  In 
no  Slave  State  did  the  supporters  of 
Breckinridge  unite  in  any  "  Fusion" 
movement  whatever;  and  it  was  a 
very  open  secret  that  the  friends 
of  Breckinridge   generally — at  all 

1  The  Washington  Star,  then  a  Breckinridge 
organ,  noticing,  in  September,  1860,  the  conver- 
sion of  Senator  Clingman,  of  North  Carolina, 
from  the  support  of  Douglas  to  that  of  Breckin- 
ridge, said : 

"  While  we  congratulate  him  on  the  fact  that 
his  eyes  are  at  length  open  to  the  (to  the  South) 
dangerous  tendency  of  the  labors  of  Douglas, 
we  hail  his  conversion  as  an  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  our  oft-repeated  declaration,  that,  ere 
the  first  Monday  in  November,  every  honest 
and  unselfish  Democrat  throughout  the  South 
will  be  found  arrayed  against  Douglas-Freesoil- 


events,  throughout  the  Slave  States 
— next  to  the  all  but  impossible  suc- 
cess of  their  own  candidate — prefer- 
red that  of  the  Republicans.1  In 
the  Senate  throughout  the  preceding 
Session,  at  Charleston,  at  Baltimore, 
and  ever  since,  they  had  acted  pre- 
cisely as  they  would  have  done,  had 
they  preeminently  desired  Mr.  Lin- 
coln's success,  and  determined  to  do 
their  best  to  secure  it. 

And  now,  a  large  majority  of  Lin- 
coln Electors  had  been  carried,  ren- 
dering morally  certain  his  choice  by 
the  Electoral  Colleges  next  month, 
and  his  inauguration  on  the  4th  of 
March  ensuing.  So  the  result  con- 
templated and  labored  for  by  at 
least  two  of  the  four  contending  par- 
ties in  the  canvass  had  been  secured. 

What  next? 

In  October,  1856,  a  Convention  of 
Southern  Governors  was  held  at  Ra- 
leigh, N.  C,  at  the  invitation  of  Gov. 
Wise,  of  Yirginia.  This  gathering 
was  kept  secret  at  the  time ;  but  it 
was  afterward  proclaimed  by  Gov. 
Wise  that,  had  Fremont  been  elected, 
he  would  have  marched  at  the  head 
of  twenty  thousand  men  to  Washing- 
ton, and  taken  possession  of  the  Capi- 
tol, preventing  by  force  Fremont's 
inauguration  at  that  place. 

In  the  same  spirit,  a  meeting  of 
the  prominent  politicians  of  South 

ism,  as  being  far  more  dangerous  to  the  South 
than  the  election  of  Lincoln  ;  because  it  seeks  to 
create  a  Free-Soil  party  there;  while,  if  Lin- 
coln triumphs,  the  result  cannot  fail  to  be  a 
South  united  in  her  own  defense — the  only  key 
to  a  full  and — we  sincerely  believe — a  peaceful 
and  happy  solution  of  the  political  problem  of 
the  Slavery  question." 

Columns  like  the  above  might  bo  quoted  from 
the  Breckinridge  journals  of  the  South,  show- 
ing that  they  regarded  the  success  of  Douglas 
as  the  great  peril,  to  be  defeated  at  all  haz- 
ards. 


330  THE  AMERICA 

Carolina  was  held  at  the  residence  of 
Senator  Hammond,  near  Augusta, 
on  the  25th  of  October,  1860.  Gov. 
Gist,  ex-Gov.  Adams,  ex-Speaker 
Orr,  and  the  entire  delegation  to 
Congress,  except  Mr.  Miles,  who  was 
kept  away  by  sickness,  were  present, 
with  many  other  men  of  mark.  By 
this  cabal,  it  was  unanimously  re- 
solved that  South  Carolina  should 
secede  from  the  Union  in  the  event 
of  Lincoln's  then  almost  certain  elec- 
tion. Similar  meetings  of  kindred 
spirits  were  held  simultaneously,  or 
soon  afterward,  in  Georgia,  Alabama, 
Mississippi,  Florida,  and  probably 
other  Slave  States.  By  these  meet- 
ings, and  by  the  incessant  interchange 
of  messages,  letters,  and  visits,  the  en- 
tire slaveholding  region  had  been 
prepared,  so  far  as  possible,  for  dis- 
union in  the  event  of  a  Republican, 
if  not  also  of  a  Douglas,  triumph. 

The  Legislature  of  South  Carolina 
does  not  regularly  meet  until  the 
fourth  Monday  in  November;  but, 
the  recent  act  of  Congress  requiring 
a  choice  of  Presidential  Electors  prior 
to  that  time,  Gov.  Gist  had  good 
reason  for  calling  the  Legislature  of 
1860  to  meet  in  advance  of  the  regu- 
lar day.  It  met,  according  to  his 
summons,  at  Columbia,  on  Monday, 
Nov.  5  (the  day  before  the  choice  of 
Presidential  Electors  throughout  the 
Union),  when  Mr.  W.  D.  Porter,  of 
Charleston,  was  chosen  President  of 
the  Senate.  On  taking  the  Chair, 
he  said : 

"  I  do  not  seek  now  to  lift  the  veil  that 
hides  the  future  from  our  sight ;  but  we 
have  all  an  instinctive  feeling  that  we  are  on 
the  eve  of  great  events.  His  Excellency, 
the  Governor,  in  the  terms  of  his  call,  has 
summoned  us  to  take  action,  if  advisable, 
for  the  safety  and  protection  of  the  State. 
Heretofore,  we  have  consulted  for  its  conve- 
nience and  well-being ;  now,  its  destiny,  its 


N  CONFLICT. 

very  existence,  depends  upon  our  action. 
It  was  the  old  injunction,  in  times  of  great 
peril,  to  the  Roman  consuls,  to  take  care 
that  the  Republic  sustained  no  detriment; 
this  charge  and  injunction  is  now  addressed 
to  us.  All  that  is  dear  and  precious  to  this 
people — life,  fortune,  name,  and  history — all 
is  committed  to  our  keeping  for  weal  or  for 
woe,  for  honor  or  for  shame.  Let  us  do  our 
part,  so  that  those  who  come  after  us  shall 
acknowledge  that  we  were  not  unworthy  of 
the  great  trusts  devolved  upon  us,  and  not 
unequal  to  the  great  exigencies  by  which 
we  were  tried.  Above  all  things,  let  us  be 
of  one  mind.  We  are  all  agreed  as  to  our 
wrongs.  Let  us  sacrifice  all  differences  of 
opinion,  as  to  the  time  and  mode  of  remedy, 
upon  the  altar  of  patriotism,  and  for  the 
sake  of  the  great  cause.  In  our  unanimity 
will  be  our  strength,  physical  and  moral.  No 
human  power  can  withstand  or  break  down 
a  united  people,  standing  upon  their  own 
soil  and  defending  their  homes  and  firesides. 
May  we  be  so  united,  and  may  the  great 
Governor  of  men  and  of  nations  inspire  our 
hearts  with  courage,  and  inform  our  under- 
standings with  wisdom,  and  lead  us  in  the 
way  of  honor  and  of  safety." 

Gov.  Gist  (whose  term  expired 
with  the  current  year)  communicated 
to  both  Houses  his  Annual  Message, 
immediately  on  their  organization. 
It  is  as  follows : 

"ExErrnrn  DEPARTMrorr,  ) 
"Columbia,  8.  C,  Nov.  5,  1860.  \ 
"  Gentlemen  of  the  Senate 

and  Jlouee  of  Representative*: 

"  The  act  of  Congress,  passed  in  the  year 
1846,  enacts  that  the  electors  of  President 
and  Vice-President  shall  be  appointed  on  the 
Tuesday  next  after  the  first  Monday  of  the 
month  of  November,  of  the  year  in  which 
they  are  to  be  appointed.  The  annual 
meeting  of  the  Legislature  of  South  Carolina, 
by  a  constitutional  provision,  will  not  take 
place  until  the  fourth  Monday  in  November 
instant.  I  have  considered  it  my  duty, 
under  the  authority  conferred  upon  me  to 
convene  the  Legislature  on  extraordinary 
occasions,  to  convene  you,  that  you  may,  on 
to-morrow,  appoint  the  number  of  Electors 
of  President  and  Vice-President  to  which 
this  State  is  entitled. 

"Under  ordinary  circumstances,  your 
duty  could  be  soon  discharged  by  the  elec- 
tion of  Electors  representing  the  choice  of 
the  people  of  the  State ;  but,  in  view  of  the 
threatening  aspect  of  affairs,  and  the  strong 
probability  of  the  election  to  the  Presidency 
of  a  sectional  candidate,  by  a  party  commit- 
ted to  the  support  of  measures,  which,  if 
carried   out,  will  inevitably  destroy  our 


GIST   AND    CHESNUT    URGE  SECESSION. 


331 


equality  in  the  Union,  and  ultimately  reduce 
the  Southern  States  to  mere  provinces  of  a 
consolidated  despotism,  to  be  governed  by  a 
fixed  majority  in  Congress  hostile  to  our  in- 
stitutions, and  fatally  bent  upon  our  ruin,  I 
would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  Legisla- 
ture remain  in  session,  and  take  such  action 
as  will  prepare  the  State  for  any  emergency 
that  may  arise. 

"That  an  exposition  of  the  will  of  the 
people  may  be  obtained  on  a  question  in- 
volving such  momentous  consequences,  I 
would  earnestly  recommend  that,  in  the 
event  of  Abraham  Lincoln's  election  to  the 
Presidency,  a  Convention  of  the  people  of 
this  State  be  immediately  called,  to  consider 
and  determine  for  themselves  the  mode  and 
measure  of  redress.  My  own  opinions  of 
what  the  Convention  should  do  are  of  lit- 
tle moment;  but,  believing  that  the  time 
has  arrived  when  every  one,  however  hum- 
ble he  may  be,  should  express  his  opinions 
in  unmistakable  language,  I  am  constrained 
to  say  that  the  only  alternative  left,  in  my 
judgment,  is  the  secession  of  South  Carolina 
from  the  Federal  Union.  The  indications 
from  many  of  the  Southern  States  justify 
the  conclusion  that  the  secession  of  South 
Carolina  will  be  immediately  followed,  if 
not  adopted  simultaneously,  by  them,  and 
ultimately  by  the  entire  South.  The  long- 
desired  cooperation  of  the  other  States  hav- 
ing similar  institutions,  for  which  so  many 
of  our  citizens  have  been  waiting,  seems  to 
be  near  at  hand;  and,  if  we  are  true  to  our- 
selves, will  soon  be  realized.  The  State  has, 
with  great  unanimity  declared  that  she  has 
the  right  peaceably  to  secede,  and  no  power 
on  earth  can  rightfully  prevent  it. 

"  If,  in  the  exercise  of  arbitrary  power, 
and  forgetful  of  the  lessons  of  history,  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  should  at- 
tempt coercion,  it  will  become  our  solemn 
duty  to  meet  force  by  force  ;  and,  whatever 
may  be  the  decision  of  the  Convention,  rep- 
resenting the  Sovereignty  of  the  State,  and 
amenable  to  no  earthly  tribunal,  it  shall, 
during  the  remainder  of  my  administration, 
be  carried  out  to  the  letter,  regardless  of 
any  hazard  that  may  surround  its  execution. 

**  I  would  also  respectfully  recommend  a 
thorough  reorganization  of  the  Militia,  so 
as  to  place  the  whole  military  force  of  the 
State  in  a  position  to  be  used  at  the  shortest 
notice,  and  with  the  greatest  efficiency. 
Every  man  in  the  State,  between  the  ages 
of  eighteen  and  forty-five,  should  be  well 
armed  with  the  most  efficient  weapons  of 
modern  warfare,  and  all  the  available  means 
of  the  State  used  for  that  purpose. 

"  In  addition  to  this  general  preparation, 
I  would  recommend  that  the  services  of  ten 
thousand  volunteers  be  immediately  accept- 
ed ;  that  they  be  organized  and  drilled  by 


officers  chosen  by  themselves,  and  hold 
themselves  in  readiness  to  be  called  on  upon 
the  shortest  notice.  With  this  preparation 
for  defense,  and  with  all  the  hallowed  memo- 
ries of  past  achievements,  with  our  love  of 
liberty,  and  hatred  of  tyranny,  and  with  the 
knowledge  that  we  are  contending  for  the 
safety  of  our  homes  and  firesides,  we  can 
confidently  appeal  to  the  Disposer  of  all 
human  events,  and  safely  trust  our  cause  in 
His  keeping.  ¥m.  H.  Gist." 

Mr.  James  Chesnut,  Jr.,  one  of  the 
United  States  Senators  from  Sonth 
Carolina,  was  among  the  large  num- 
ber of  leading  politicians  in  attend- 
ance at  the  opening  of  the  legislative 
session.  He  was  known  as  a  zealous 
advocate  of  Secession,  and  as  such 
was  serenaded  on  the  evening  of  No- 
vember 5th,  aforesaid.  Being  called 
out  to  speak,  Mr.  Chesnut  (as  report^ 
ed  by  telegraph  to  The  Charleston 
Courier)  said : 

"Before  the  setting  of  to-morrow's  sun, 
in  all  human  probability,  the  destiny  of  this, 
confederated  Republic  would  be  decided. 
He  solemnly  thought,  in  all  human  proba- 
bility, that  the  Republican  party  would 
triumph  in  the  election  of  Lincoln-  as  Presi- 
dent. In  that  event,  the  lines  of  our  ene- 
mies seem  to  be  closing  around  us ;  but 
they  must  be  broken.  They  might  see  in 
the  hurried  paths  of  these  starched  men  of 
livery  the  funeral  cortege  of  the  Constitution 
of  the  country.  Peace,  hope,  independence, 
liberty,  power,  and  the  prosperity  of  Sove- 
reign States,  may  be  draped  as  chief  mourn- 
ers; still,  in  the  rear  of  this  procession, 
there  is  the  light  of  the  glorious  past,  from 
which  they  might  rekindle  the  dying  blaze 
of  their  own  altars.  We  see  it  all — know  it 
all — feel  it  all ;  and,  with  heaven's  help,  we 
will  meet  it  all. 

"  It  was  evident  that  we  had  arrived  at  the 
initial  point  of  a  new  departure.  We  have 
two  ways  before  us,  in  one  of  which,  whe- 
ther we  will  or  not,  we  must  tread  ;  for,  in 
the  event  of  this  issue,  there  w^ould  be  no 
repose.  In  both  lie  dangers,  difficulties,  and 
troubles,  which  no  human  foresight  can 
foreshadow  or  perceive ;  but  they  are  not 
equal  in  magnitude.  One  is  beset  with  hu- 
miliation, dishonor,  ementes,  rebellions — 
with  submission,  in  the  beginning,  to  all, 
and  at  all  times,  and  confiscation  and  slavery 
in  the  end.  The  other,  it  is  true,  has  its 
difficulties  and  trials,  but  no  disgrace.  Hope, 
duty,  and  honor,  shine  along  the  path.  Hope 


332 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


beacons  you  at  the  end.    Before  deciding,  I 
consider  well  the  ancient  and  sacred  maxim 
— '  Stand  upon  the  ancient  way — see  which 
is  the  right,  good  way,  and  walk  in  it.' 

"  But  the  question  now  was,  Would  the 
South  submit  to  a  Black  Republican  Presi- 
dent and  a  Black  Republican  Congress, 
which  will  claim  the  right  to  construe  the 
Constitution  of  the  country  and  administer 
the  Government  in  their  own  hands,  not  by 
the  law  of  the  instrument  itself,  nor  by  that 
of  the  fathers  of  the  country,  nor  by  the 
practices  of  those  who  administered  seventy 
years  ago,  but  by  rules  drawn  from  their 
own  blind  consciences  and  crazy  brains. 
They  call  us  inferiors,  semi-civilized  bar- 
barians, and  claim  the  right  to  possess  our 
lands,  and  give  them  to  the  destitute  of  the 
Old  World  and  the  profligates  of  this.  They 
claim  the  dogmas  of  the  Declaration  of  In- 
dependence as  part  of  the  Constitution,  and 
that  it  is  their  right  and  duty  to  so  adminis- 
ter the  Government  as  to  give  full  etfect  to 
them.  The  people  now  must  choose  whether 
they  would  be  governed  by  enemies,  or 
govern  themselves. 

M  For  himself,  he  would  unfurl  the  Pal- 
metto flag,  fling  it  to  the  breeze,  and,  with 
the  spirit  of  a  brave  man,  determine  to  live 
and  die  as  became  our  glorious  ancestors, 
and  ring  the  clarion  notes  of  defiance  in  the 
ears  of  an  insolent  foe.  He  then  spoke  of 
the  undoubted  right  to  withdraw  their  dele- 
gated powers,  and  it  was  their  duty,  in  the 
event  contemplated,  to  withdraw  them.  It 
Was  their  only  safety. 

"  Mr.  C.  favored  separate  State  action ; 
saying  the  rest  would  flock  to  our  standard." 

Hon.  Wm.  W.  Boyce — then,  and 
for  some  years  previously,  a  leading 
Representative  in  Congress  from 
South  Carolina — was,  in  like  manner, 
serenaded  and  called  out  by  the  enthu- 
siastic crowd  of  Secessionists,  at  Co- 
lumbia, on  the  following  eveninp*. 
He  concluded  a  speech  denunciatory 
of  the  Republicans,  as  follows:8 

"  The  question  then  is,  What  are  we  to 
do  ?  In  my  opinion,  the  South  ought  not  to 
submit.  If  you  intend  to  resist,  the  way  to 
resist  in  earnest  is  to  act ;  the  way  to  enact 

2  This,  and  nearly  all  the  proceedings  at  Co- 
lumbia at  this  crisis,  are  here  copied  directly 
from  the  columns  of  TJie  Charleston  Courier. 

3  Dispatch  to  The  New  York  Herald,  dated 
Washington,  Nov.  8,  1860: 

"A  dispatch,  received  here  to-day  from  a 


revolution  is  to  stare  it  in  the  face.  I  think 
the  only  policy  for  us  is  to  arm  as  soon  as 
we  receive  authentic  intelligence  of  the 
election  of  Lincoln.  It  is  for  South  Carolina, 
in  the  quickest  manner,  and  by  the  most 
direct  means,  to  withdraw  from  the  Union. 
Then  we  will  not  submit,  whether  the  other 
Southern  States  will  act  with  us  or  with  our 
enemies. 

"They  cannot  take  sides  with  our  ene- 
mies ;  they  must  take  sides  with  us.  When 
an  ancient  philosopher  wished  to  inaugurate 
a  great  revolution,  his  motto  was  to  dare ! 
to  dare!" 

u  Mr.  Boyce  was  followed  by  Gen.  M.  E. 
Martin,  Cols.  Cunningham,  Simpson,  Rich- 
ardson, and  others,  who  contended  that  to 
submit  to  the  election  of  Lincoln  is  to  con- 
sent to  a  lingering  death." 

There  was  great  joy  in  Charleston, 
and  wherever  "  Fire-Eaters"  most  did 
congregate,  on  the  morning  of  No- 
vember Tth.  Men  rushed  to  shake 
hands  and  congratulate  each  other  on 
the  glad  tidings  of  Lincoln's  election. 
Now,  it  was  felt,  and  exultingly  pro- 
claimed, the  last  obstacle  to  "  South- 
ern independence"  has  been  removed, 
and  the  great  experiment  need  no 
longer  be  postponed  to  await  the 
pleasure  of  the  weak,  the  faithless, 
the  cowardly.  It  was  clear  that  the 
election  had  resulted  precisely  as  the 
master-spirits  had  wished  and  hoped. 
Now,  the  apathy,  at  least  of  the  other 
Cotton  States,  must  be  overcome ; 
now,  South  Carolina — that  is,  her 
slaveholding  oligarchy — will  be  able 
to  achieve  her  long-cherished  pur- 
pose of  breaking  up  the  Union,  and 
founding  a  new  confederacy  on  her 
own  ideas,  and  on  the  6  peculiar  insti- 
tution' of  the  South.  Men  thronged 
the  streets,  talking,  laughing,  cheer- 
ing, 3  like  mariners  long  becalmed 

leading  and  wealthy  gentleman  in  Charleston, 
states  that  the  news  of  Lincoln's  election  was 
received  there  with  cheers  and  many  manifesta- 
tions of  approbation." 

The  Charleston  Mercury  of  the  7th  or  8th  ex- 
l  ultingly  announced  the  same  fact. 


'COOPERATION'  URGE 

on  a  hateful,  treacherous  sea,  whom 
a  sudden  breeze  had  swiftly  wafted 
within  sight  of  their  longed-for  haven, 
or  like  a  seedy  prodigal,  just  raised 
to  affluence  by  the  death  of  some  far- 
off,  unknown  relative,  and  whose 
sense  of  decency  is  not  strong  enough 
to  repress  his  exultation. 

Thus  stimulated,  the  Legislature 
did  not  hesitate  nor  falter  in  the 
course  marked  out  for  it  by  the  mag- 
nates of  the  State  oligarchy.  Joint 
resolves,  providing  for  the  call  of  a 
Convention  at  some  early  day,  with 
a  view  to  unconditional  secession 
from  the  Union,  were  piled  upon 
each  other  with  great  energy,  as  if 
nearly  every  member  were  anxious 
to  distinguish  himself  by  zeal  in  the 
work.  Among  others,  Mr.  Robert 
Barnwell  Rhett,  on  the  second  day 
of  the  session,  offered  such  resolves, 
calling  for  the  choice  of  a  Conven- 
tion on  the  22d  of  November;  the 
delegates  to  meet  at  Columbia  on  the 
17th  of  December. 

Mr.  Moses  and  others  offered  simi- 
lar resolves  in  the  Senate ;  where  Mr. 
Lesesne,  of  Charleston,  attempted  to 
stem,  or,  rather,  to  moderate,  the 
roaring  tide,  by  inserting  the  thin- 
nest end  of  the  wedge  of  "  Coopera- 
tion." His  resolves  are,  in  terms,  as 
follows : 

"1st.  Resolved,  That  the  ascendency  of 
the  hostile,  sectional,  anti-Slavery  party, 
styling  themselves  the  Republican  party, 
would  be  sufficient  and  proper  cause  for  the 
dissolution  of  the  Union  and  formation  of  a 
Southern  Confederacy. 

"  2d.  Resolved,  That,  in  case  of  the  elec- 
tion of  the  candidates  of  that  party  to  the 
office  of  President  and  Vice-President  of  the 
United  States,  instead  of  providing  uncon- 
ditionally for  a  Convention,  the  better  course 
will  be  to  empower  the  Governor  to  take 
measures  for  assembling  a  Convention  so 
soon  as  any  one  of  the  other  Southern  States 
shall,  in  his  judgment,  give  satisfactory  as- 
surance or  evidence  of  her  determination  to 
withdraw  from  the  Union" 


D   BEFORE    SECESSION.  333 

In  support  of  this  proposition,  Mr. 
Lesesne  spoke  ably  and  earnestly,  but 
without  effect.  "Cooperation"  had 
been  tried  in  1850-1,  and  had  sig- 
nally failed  to  achieve  the  darling 
purpose  of  a  dissolution  of  the  Union ; 
so  the  rulers  of  Carolina  opinion  would 
have  none  of  it  in  1860. 

Still  another  effort  was  made  in 
the  House  (November  7th),  by  Mr. 
Trenholm,  of  Charleston — long  con- 
spicuous in  the  councils  of  the  State 
— who  labored  hard  to  make  "  Coop- 
eration" look  so  much  like  Secession 
that  one  could  with  difficulty  be  distin- 
guished from  the  other.  His  propo- 
sition was  couched  in  the  following 
terms : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Committee  on  the 
Military  of  the  Senate  and  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, be  instructed  to  meet  during 
the  recess,  and  to  prepare  a  plan  for  arm- 
ing the  State,  and  for  organizing  a  per- 
manent Military  Bureau  ;  and  that  the  said 
Committee  be  instructed  to  report  by  bill  to 
their  respective  Houses  on  the  first  day  of 
the  reassembling  of  the  General  Assembly. 

"Resolved,  That  the  Committee  of  Ways 
and  Means  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
be  instructed  to  sit  during  the  recess,  and 
prepare  a  bill  for  raising  supplies  necessary 
to  carry  into  effect  the  measure  recom- 
mended by  the  Military  Committee,  and  to 
report  by  bill  on  the  first  day  of  the  reas- 
sembling of  the  General  Assembly. 

"•Resolved,  That  the  Governor  be  re- 
quested immediately  to  apply  the  one  hun- 
dred thousand  dollars,  appropriated  by  the 
last  General  Assembly,  to  the  purchase  of 
arms. 

"Resolved,  That  immediately  after  the 
election  of  the  Commissioner  to  the  State 
of  Georgia,  this  General  Assembly  do  take  a 
recess  until  the  third  Monday,  being  the 
nineteenth  day,  of  November,  instant,  at  7 
o'clock. 

"Resolved,  As  the  sense  of  this  General 
Assembly,  that  the  election  of  a  Black  Re- 
publican to  the  Presidency  of  the  United 
States,  will  be  the  triumph  and  practical 
application  of  principles  incompatible  with 
the  peace  and  safety  of  the  Southern  States. 

"  Resolved,  That  a  Commissioner  be  elect- 
ed, by  joint  ballot  of  the  Senate  and  House 
of  Representatives,  whose  duty  it  shall  be, 
in  the  event  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  election,  to 
proceed  immediately  to  Milledgeville,  the 


334 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


seat  of  government  of  the  State  of  Georgia, 
whose  legislature  will  then  be  in  session,  to 
announce  to  the  government  of  that  State 
that  South  Carolina,  in  view  of  the  impend- 
ing danger,  will  immediately  put  herself -in 
a  state  of  efficient  military  defense,  and  will 
cordially  cooperate  with  the  State  of  Geor- 
gia in  measures  for  the  protection  of  South- 
ern interests ;  and  to  express  the  readiness 
of  this  State  to  cooperate  with  the  State  of 
Georgia,  in  the  event  of  Mr.  Lincpln's  elec- 
tion, in  withdrawing  at  once  from  the  con- 
federacy; and  to  recommend  the  calling  of 
a  Convention  simultaneously  in  both  States, 
to  carry  this  measure  into  effect ;  and  to  in- 
vite the  cooperation  of  all  the  Southern 
States  in  withdrawing  from  the  present 
Union,  and  forming  a  separate  Southern 
Confederacy." 

These  resolves  coming  up  for  con- 
sideration on  the  9th,  Mr.  McGowan, 
of  Abbeville,  made  a  zealous  effort  to 
stem  the  furious  current;  pleading 
earnestly  and  plausibly  for  Coopera- 
tion— that  is,  for  consultation  with 
other  Slave  States,  and  for  action  in 
obedience  to  their  mutual  determi- 
nation.   He  said : 

"  Cooperation  with  our  Southern  sisters 
has  been  the  settled  policy  of  South  Caro- 
lina for  at  least  ten  years  past.  We  have 
long  been  satisfied  with  the  causes  for  a  dis- 
solution of  this  Union.  "We  thought  we  saw 
long  ago  what  was  coming,  and  only  await- 
ed the  action  of  our  Southern  sisters.  This 
being  the  case,  it  would  seem  strange,  now 
that  the  issue  is  upon  us — when  our  need  is 
the  sorest — that  we  should  ignore  our  past 
policy,  and,  in  the  very  crisis  of  the  con- 
flict, cease  to  ask  for  Cooperation. 

"  Lincoln^  election  is  taken  as  an  occasion 
for  action,  but  with  us  it  is  not  the  only 
came  for  action.  We  have  delayed  for  the 
last  ten  years  for  nothing  but  Cooperation. 
He  thought  it  the  best  and  wisest  policy  to 
remain  in  the  Union,  with  our  Southern 
sisters,  in  order  to  arrange  the  time  when, 
and  the  manner  how,  of  going  out,  and 
nothing  else. 

u  It  is  perfectly  manifest  that  the  record- 
ed policy  of  this  State  for  the  last  ten  years 
has  been  the  policy  of  Secession  in  coopera- 
tion with  other  Southern  States. 

"  But  is  that  not  fortified  by  both  history 
and  philosophy? — by  the  nature  of  the 
thing  itself,  and  the  fate  of  other  nations  ? 
The  Southern  States  of  this  Union  have 
more  motives,  more  inducements,  and  more 
necessities,  for  concert  and  Union,  than  any 


people  that  has  lived  in  the  tide  of  time. 
They  are  one  in  soil  and  climate;  one  in 
productions,  having  a  monopoly  of  the  Cot- 
ton region  ;  one  in  institutions ;  and,  more 
than  all,  one  in  their  wrongs  under  the  Con- 
stitution. Add  to  all  this  that  they  alone, 
of  all  the  earth,  have  a  peculiar  institution 
— African  Slavery — which  is  absolutely  ne- 
cessary for  them ;  without  which  they 
would  cease  to  exist,  and  against  which, 
under  the  influence  of  a  fanatical  sentiment, 
the  world  is  banded.  Upon  the  subject  of 
this  institution,  we  are  isolated  from  the 
whole  world,  who  are  not  only  indifferent, 
but  inimical  to  it;  and  it  would  seem  that 
the  very  weight  of  this  outside  pressure 
would  compel  us  to  unite. 

M  Besides,  the  history  of  the  world  is 
pregnant  with  admonition  as  to  the  necessi- 
ty of  union.  The  history  of  classic  Greece, 
and  especially  that  awful  chapter  upon  the 
Peloponnesian  war,  appeals  to  us.  The  his- 
tory of  poor,  dismembered  Poland  cries  to 
us.  The  history  of  the  Dutch  Republic 
claims  to  be  heard.  Modern  Italy  and  the 
States  of  Central  America  are  now,  at  this 
moment,  crying  to  us  to  unite.  All  history 
teaches  us  that  4  United  we  stand,  divided 
we  fall.'  All  the  Southern  States  would  not 
be  too  many  for  our  confederacy,  whose 
flag  would  float,  honored  upon  every  sea, 
and  under  whose  folds  every  citizen  would 
be  sure  of  protection  and  security.  My 
God  !  what  is  the  reason  we  cannot  unite  ? 
It  seems  to  me  that  we  might  with  proprie- 
ty address  to  the  whole  South  the  pregnant 
words  of  Milton : 

4 Awake!  arise!  or  bo  forever  fallen!1 

"  South  Carolina  has  sometimes  been  ac- 
cused of  a  paramount  desire  to  lead  or  to 
disturb  the  councils  of  the  South.  Let  us 
make  one  last  effort  for  Cooperation,  and, 
in  doing  so,  repel  the  false  and  unfounded 
imputation. 

"  Mr.  Speaker,  I  think  all  of  us  desire  to 
consolidate  the  sentiment  of  the  South.  All 
of  us  prefer  Cooperation.  It  is,  therefore, 
immensely  important  that  we  should  take 
no  false  step,  and  omit  nothing  that  might 
tend  to  that  end.  I  am  utterly  opposed, 
now  and  forever,  to  taking  any  step  back- 
ward in  this  matter,  and  therefore  it  is  that 
I  am  anxious  that  we  should  take  no  false 
step.  It  is  better  to  consider  in  advance  of 
action  than  after  action.  Wh«n  we  act,  we 
must  stand  upon  that  action  against  the 
world  in  arms.  It  will  strengthen  our  arms 
and  nerve  our  hearts  in  doing  that,  if  we 
shall  be  able  to  say  that  this  course  was  not 
taken  hastily  or  from  impulse,  but  after  ma- 
ture deliberation,  and  a  last  effort  for  that 
which  we  all  desire  so  much — Cooperation. 


SOUTH   CAROLINA  WILL  NOT    AWAIT    COOPERATION.  335 


Then,  if  we  fail,  and  a  Convention  is  called  I 
under  these  circumstances,  I  and  all  of  us 
will  stand  by  the  action  of  that  Convention. 
"Whatever  may  be  our  individual  opinions, 
we  will  obey  the  mandate  of  the  State  thus 
pronounced. 

"  Whenever  she,  after  exhausting  all  pro- 
per and  becoming  efforts  for  union,  resolves 
upon  her  course,  we  will  have  no  option,  as 
we  will  have  no  desire,  to  do  otherwise  than 
rally  under  her  banner.  If  the  State,  in  her 
sovereign  capacity,  determines  that  her  se- 
cession will  produce  the  cooperation  which 
we  have  so  earnestly  sought,  then  it  shall 
have  my  hearty  approbation.  And  if,  in 
the  alternative,  she  determines  to  let  us 
forego  the  honor  of  being  first,  for  the  sake 
of  promoting  the  common  cause,  let  us  de- 
clare to  Georgia,  the  Empire  State  of  the 
South — the  Keystone  of  the  Southern  Arch, 
which  is  our  nearest  neighbor  westward, 
and  lying  for  a  great  distance  alongside  of 
our  own  territory — that  we  are  willing  to 
follow  in  her  lead,  and  together  take  our  I 
place  among  the  nations  of  the*  earth. 

"  If  South  Carolina,  in  Convention  as- 
sembled, deliberately  secedes — separate  and 
alone,  and,  without  any  hope  of  cooperation, 
decides  to  cut  loose  from  her  moorings,  sur- 
rounded as  she  is  by  Southern  sisters  in  like 
circumstances — I  will  be  one  of  her  crew, 
and,  in  common  with  every  true  son  of 
hers,  will  endeavor,  with  all  the  power  that 
God  has  given  me,  to 

'Spread  all  her  canvas  to  the  breeze, 

Set  every  threadbare  sail, 
And  give  her  to  the  God  of  storms, 

The  lightning  and  the  gale.' " 

Mr.  Mullins,  of  Marion,  followed ; 
and  his  reply  to  McGowan's  speech 
is  worthy  of  record  here,  since  it 
clearly  betrays  the  consciousness  of 
the  disunionists  that  they  were  a  lean 
minority  of  the  Southern  people,  who 
might  be  precipitated,  bullied,  or 
dragged  into  treason,  but  whom  there 
was  no  rational  hope  of  reasoning  or 
even  seducing  into  it.    He  said : 

"South  Carolina  had  tried  Cooperation, 
but  had  exhausted  that  policy.  The  State 
of  Virginia  had  discredited  the  cause  which 
our  Commissioner  went  there  to  advocate, 
although  she  treated  him,  personally,  with 
respect ;  but  she  had  as  much  as  said  there 
were  no  indignities  which  could  drive  her  to 
take  the  leadership  for  Southern  rights.  If 
we  wait  for  Cooperation,  Slavery  and  State 
Rights  would  be  abandoned,  State  Sovereignty 
and  the  cause  of  the  South  lost  forever,  and 


we  would  be  subjected  to  a  dominion  the 
parallel  to  which  was  that  of  the  poor  Indian 
under  the  British  East  India  Company. 
When  they  had  pledged  themselves  to  take 
the  State  out  of  the  Union,  and  placed  it  on 
record,  then  he  was  willing  to  send  a  Com- 
missioner to  Georgia,  or  any  other  Southern 
State,  to  announce  our  determination,  and 
to  submit  the  question  whether  they  would 
join  us  or  not.  We  have  it  from  high  au- 
thority, that  the  representative  of  one  of  the 
Imperial  Powers  of  Europe,  in  view  of  the 
prospective  separation  of  one  .or  more  of  the 
Southern  States  from  the jiresent  confederacy, 
has  made  propositions  in  advance  for  the 
establishment  of  such  relations  between  it 
and  the  Government  about  to  be  established 
in  this  State,  as  will  insure  to  that  power  such 
a  supply  of  Cotton  for  the  future  as  their  in- 
creasing demand  for  that  article  will  require  : 
this  information  is  perfectly  authentic." 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  foreign 
intrigue  was  already  hand-and-glove 
with  domestic  treason  in  sapping  the 
foundations  of  our  Union  and  seeking 
peculiar  advantages  from  its  over- 
throw. 

Mr.  Edmund  Kuffin,  of  Virginia, 
had  for  many  years  been  the  editor 
of  a  leading  Agricultural  monthly, 
and  had  thus  acquired  a  very  decided 
influence  over  the  planters  of  the 
South.  A  devotee  of  Slavery,  he  had 
hastened  to  Columbia,  on  the  call  of 
the  Legislature,  to  do  his  utmost  for 
Secession.  He  was,  of  course,  sere- 
naded in  his  turn  by  the  congregated 
Union-breakers,  on  the  evening  of 
the  7th,  and  addressed  them  from  the 
balcony  of  the  Congaree  House. 
The  following  is  a  synopsis  of  his 
response : 

"He  said  the  question  now  before  the 
country  he  had  studied  for  years.  It  had 
been  the  one  great  idea  of  his  life.  The  de- 
fense of  the  South,  he  verily  believed,  was 
only  to  be  secured  through  the  lead  of  South 
Carolina.  As  old  as  he  was,  he  had  come 
here  to  join  them  in  that  lead.  He  wished 
Virginia  was  as  ready  as  South  Carolina, 
but,  unfortunately,  she  was  not;  but,  cir- 
cumstances being  different,  it  was  perhaps 
better  that  Virginia  and  all  other  border 
States  remain  quiescent  for  a  time,  to  serve 


336 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


as  guard  against  the  North.  The  first  drop 
of  blood  spilled  on  the  soil  of  South  Carolina, 
would  bring  Virginia  and  every  Southern 
State  with  them.  By  remaining  in  the 
Union  for  a  time,  she  would  not  only  prevent 
coercive  legislation  in  Congress,  but  any  at- 
tempt for  our  subjugation.  No  argument  in 
favor  of  resistance  was  wanted  now.  As 
soon  as  lie  had  performed  his  duty  in  Vir- 
ginia as  a  citizen,  he  came  as  fast  as  steam 
could  bring  him  to  South  Carolina.  He  was 
satisfied  if  anything  was  to  be  done,  it  was 
to  be  done  here.  He  had  no  doubt  it  would 
be  done,  and  the  sooner  the  better.  Every 
day  delayed  was  a  day  lost  to  the  cause. 
They  should  encourage  and  sustain  their 
friends,  and  they  would  frighten  their  ene- 
mies. 

"  There  was  no  fear  of  Carolina  remaining 
alone.  She  would  soon  be  followed  by 
other  States.  Virginia  and  half  a  dozen 
more  were  just  as  good  and  strong,  and  able 
to  repel  the  enemy,  as  if  they  had  the  whole 
of  the  slaveholding  States  to  act  with  them. 
Even  if  Carolina  remained  alone — not  that 
he  thought  it  probable,  but  supposing  so — 
it  was  his  conviction  that  she  would  be  able 
to  defend  herself  against  any  power  brought 
against  her.  Multitudes  spoke  and  said  the 
issue  was  one  of  courage  and  honor,  or  of 
cowardice,  desertion,  and  degradation." 

A  number  of  second  and  third-rate 
traitors  followed  this  Euffin  in  a 
similar  vein,  but  their  remarks  were 
not  deemed  worth  reporting. 

But,  that  evening,  the  busy  tele- 
graph reported  from  Charleston  the 
more  important  resignation  of  the 
leading  Federal  officers  for  South 
Carolina,  in  anticipation  of  her  se- 
ceding. The  U.  S.  District  Court 
had  met  there  in  the  morning,  Dis- 
trict Judge  Magrath  presiding.  The 
Grand  Jury — of  course,  by  precon- 
cert— formally  declined  to  make  any 
presentments,  because  of 

"  The  verdict  of  the  Northern  section  of 
the  confederacy,  solemnly  announced  to  the 
country,  through  tne  ballot-box,  on  yester- 
day, having  swep';  away  the  last  hope  for 
the  permanence,  1'or  the  stability  of  the 
Federal  Government  of  these  sovereign 
States;  and  the  public  mind  is  constrained 
to  lift  itself  above  the  consideration  of  de- 
tails in  the  administration  of  Law  and  Justice, 
up  to  the  vast  and  solemn  issues  which  have 
been  forced  upon  us.    These  issues  involve 


the  existence  of  the  Government  of  which 
this  Court  is  the  organ  and  minister.  In 
these  extraordinary  circumstances,  the  Grand 
Jury  respectfully  decline  to  proceed  with 
their  presentments.  They  deem  this  expla- 
nation due. to  the  Court  and  to  themselves." 

Judo-e  Mao-rath  received  this  com- 
munication  with  complaisance,  and 
thereupon  resigned  his  office ;  saying : 

"  The  business  of  the  term  has  been  dis- 
posed of,  and,  under  ordinary  circumstances, 
it  would  be  my  duty  to  dismiss  you  to  your 
several  avocations,  with  my  tlianks  for  your 
presence  and  aid.  But  now  I  have  some- 
thing more  to  do,  the  omission  of  which 
would  not  be  consistent  with  propriety.  In 
the  political  history  of  the  United  States,  an 
event  has  happened  of  ominous  import  to 
fifteen  slaveholding  States.  The  State  of 
which  we  are  citizens  has  been  always  un- 
derstood to  have  deliberately  fixed  its  pur- 
pose whenever  that  event  should  happen. 
Feeling  an  assurance  of  what  will  be  the 
action  of  the  State,  I  consider  it  my  duty, 
without  delay,  to  prepare  to  obey  its  wishes. 
That  preparation  is  made  by  the  resignation 
of  the  office  I  have  held.  For  the  last  time, 
1  have,  as  a  Judge  of  the  United  States,  ad- 
ministered the  laws  of  the  United  States 
within  the  limits  of  the  State  of  South 
Carolina. 

"  "While  thus  acting  in  obedience  to  a  sense 
of  duty,  I  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  emo- 
tions it  must  produce.  That  department 
which,  I  believe,  has  best  maintained  its 
integrity  and  preserved  its  purity,  has  been 
suspended.  So  far  as  I  am  concerned,  the 
Temple  of  Justice,  raised  under  the  Consti- 
tution of  the  United  States,  is  now  closed. 
If  it  shall  never  be  again  opened,  I  thank 
God  that  its  doors  have  been  closed  before 
its  altar  has  been  desecrated  with  sacrifices 
to  tyranny." 

C.  J.  Colcock,  Collector  at  Charles- 
ton, and  James  Conner,  U.  S.  District 
Attorney,  likewise  resigned ;  and  it 
was  announced  that  B.  C.  Pressley, 
Sub-Treasurer,  would  follow,  "  so  soon 
as  was  consistent  with  due  respect 
and  regard  for  our  present  excellent 
Chief  Magistrate  [Buchanan],  by 
whose  appointment  he  holds  the 
office." 

In  the  face  of  such  multiform  and 
high-seasoned  incitements  to  go  ahead, 
the  efforts  of  those  members  of  the 


WHY    SECESSION    WAS  PRECIPITATED. 


337 


Legislature  who  would  gladly  have 
held  back  were  paralyzed  and  their 
remonstrances  silenced.  They  dared 
neither  to  speak  nor  to  vote  as  their 
convictions  impelled. 

All  pleadings  and  efforts  for  delay, 
for  reflection,  for  calm  consideration, 
were  stifled  or  fruitless.  A  bill  call- 
ing a  Convention,  with  the  distinct 
purpose  of  secession,  passed  the  Senate 
on  the  9th  and  the  House  on  the  12th. 
December  6th  was  the  day  appointed 
for  the  election  of  delegates;  the 
Convention  to  meet  on  the  17th  of 
that  month.  Whereupon,  Gov.  Ham- 
mond resigned  his  seat  in  the  TJ.  S. 
Senate,  as  his  colleague,  Mr.  Chesnut, 
had  already  done. 

On  the  same  day  (Nov.  12),  a  Mili- 
tary Convention  of  Georgians  was 
held  at  Milledgeville,  which  was  at- 
tended and  addressed  by  Gov.  Joseph 
E.  Brown  of  that  State.  He  affirmed 
the  right  of  secession,  and  the  duty 
of  other  Southern  States  to  sustain 
South  Carolina  in  the  step  she  was 
then  taking.  '  He  would  like  to  see 
Federal  troops  dare  attempt  the 
coercion  of  a  seceding  Southern 
State  !  For  every  Georgian  who  fell 
in  a  conflict  thus  incited,  the  lives  of 
two  Federal  soldiers  should  expiate 
the  outrage  on  State  Sovereignty.' 
The  Convention,  thus  harangued, 
voted,  about  two  to  one,  for  secession ; 
and  though  it  had,  of  course,  no  legal 
or  official  authority,  its  action  was 
doubtless  potent  in  precipitating  the 
*  Empire  State  of  the  South'  into  the 
abyss  of  Disunion. 

4  On  the  first  day  of  the  South  Carolina  Seces- 
sion Convention,  at  Columbia,  December  17, 
]  860,  Hon.  William  Porcher  Miles,  M.  C.  from 
the  Charleston  District,  one  of  the  delegates, 
made  a  short  speech  against  adjournment  to 
Charleston,  on  account  of  the  epidemic  (small- 
pox) at  Columbia ;  saying  that  he  was  just  from 
22 


The  foregoing  detailed,  methodical 
statement  of  the  process  whereby 
Secession  was  inaugurated  in  South 
Carolina,  and  of  the  conceptions  and 
purposes  developed  by  that  process, 
seems  to  render  needless  a  like  par- 
ticularity with  regard  to  the  subse- 
quent proceedings  in  that  and  other 
States.  The  germ  of  the  entire 
movement,  with  the  ideas  whereon  it 
was  based,  is  clearly  exhibited  in  the 
doings  at  Columbia  and  Charleston, 
during  those  memorable  early  days 
of  November,  1860.  And,  though 
South  Carolina  ostentatiously  precip- 
itated the  catastrophe  by  her  single, 
sovereign  flat,  it  is  not  doubted  that 
she  did  so  upon  full  understanding 
with  the  "  Chivalry"  of  nearly,  or 
quite  every  Slave  State.  These  had, 
of  course,  apprised  her  own  master- 
spirits, in  their  conferences  at  water- 
ing-places and  other  fashionable  re- 
sorts during  the  preceding  Summer 
and  Autumn,  that,  though  they 
could  not  bring  their  several  States 
to  march  abreast  with  her  in  the  en- 
terprise of  National  disruption  and 
dissolution,  they  should  have  little 
difficulty  in  inducing  them  to  fly  to 
her  rescue  in  case  she  went  boldly 
forward  in  the  predetermined  course,, 
and  thus  exposed  herself  to  imminent 
peril  on  behalf  of  their  common  and 
most  cherished  interest,  Slavery. 4 
Theirs  was  the  strategy  of  the  leader 
of  a  forlorn  hope,  who,  seeing  his 
storming  party  hesitate  and  waver  in 
the  breach,  or  under  the  wall  of  the 
hostile  fortress,  throws  his  flag  for- 

Washington,  where  he  had  been  in  consultation 
with  Southern  friends  representing  every  other- 
Southern  State,  who  had  unanimously  urged  the 
utmost  haste  in  the  consummation  of  South  Caro- 
lina's secession.  He  would  adjourn  to  no  other 
place  until  the  Ordinance  of  Secession  had  pass- 
ed.—See  Charleston  Courier,  December  18,  I860.. 


338  THE  AMERICA 

ward  among  the  enemy,  and  rushes, 
sword  in  hand,  to  its  recovery,  calcu- 
lating that  his  soldiers  will  thereupon 
instinctively  spring  to  his  and  its  res- 
cue at  all  hazards.  The  event  proved 
the  efficiency  of  the  method,  if  not 
the  perfect  accuracy  of  the  calculation. 

But  the  long-standing  conspiracy 
for  Disunion  was  favored,  at  this 
crisis,  by  very  powerful  incidental  in- 
fluences, whereof  the  principal  were 
as  follows : 

1.  No  public  opposition  to  Slavery 
having,  for  many  years,  been  permit- 
ted in  the  slave-holding  region,  save 
at  a  very  few  points  like  St.  Louis, 
where  the  Free-Labor  interest  had, 
from  the  force  of  circumstances, 
silently  and  suddenly  achieved  a 
practical  preponderance,  the  journals, 
the  religious  organizations,  and  the 
political  parties,  were  all  immeasura- 
bly subservient  to  the  Slave  Power. 
In  fact,  the  chief  topic  of  political 
contention,  whether  in  the  press  or 
on  the  stump,  had  for  twenty  years 
been  the  relative  soundness  and 
thoroughness  of  the  rival  parties  in 
their  devotion  to  Slavery.  On  this 
ground,  Gen.  Jackson  had  immensely 
the  advantage  of  J.  Q.  Adams,  so  far 
as  the  South  was  concerned,  when 
they  were  rival  candidates  for  the 
Presidency ;  as  Gen.  Harrison  had 
some  advantage  of  Mr.  Yan  Buren ; 
Mr.  Polk  of  Mr.  Clay ;  Gen.  Taylor 
of  Gen.  Cass;  Gen.  Pierce  of  Gen. 
Scott;  and,  lastly,  Major  Breckin- 
ridge of  John  Bell.  In  Kentucky, 
in  the  State  canvass  of  1859,  Mr. 
Joshua  F.  Bell,  "American"  candi- 
date for  Governor,  had  tried  hard  to 

5  Howell  Cobb,  of  Georgia,  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury ;  John  B.  Floyd,  of  Virginia,  Secretary 
of  War ;  Jacob  Thompson,  of  Mississippi,  Secre- 
tary of  the  Interior.  Aaron  V.  Brown,  of  Ten- 
nessee, Mr.  Buchanan's  first  Postmaster-Gen- 


N  CONFLICT. 

"  cut  under"  his  Democratic  antago- 
nist, Beriah  Magoffin,  but  had  failed, 
and  been  signally  defeated.  His 
more  spotless  record  as  a  Slavery 
propagandist  had  enabled  the  sup- 
porters of  Breckinridge  to  carry  even 
Maryland  for  him  against  Bell,  in 
1860.  And  now,  the  readiness  to 
back  South  Carolina,  or,  at  least,  to 
shield  her  from  harm,  was  presented 
as  a  touchstone  of  earnestness,  to 
those  of  all  parties,  who  had  for  years 
so  loudly  vaunted  their  own  and 
their  party's  matchless  devotion  to 
"  Southern  rights." 

2.  The  patronage  of  the  Federal 
Government  throughout  the  fifteen 
Slave  States,  being  wielded  and  be- 
stowed by  the  Southern  members5  of 
Mr.  Buchanan's  Cabinet,  was  almost 
entirely  monopolized  by  their  fellow- 
conspirators.  The  Collectors  of  Cus- 
toms, Postmasters,  Marshals,  etc., 
who  had  good  reason  to  apprehend 
the  loss  of  their  comfortable  places 
on  Mr.  Lincoln's  accession  to  power, 
were  generally  "  ripe  for  treasons, 
stratagems,  and  spoils."  Many,  if 
not  most  of  them,  were  early  and  ac- 
tive promoters  of  the  Slaveholders' 
Rebellion,  even  while  easily  deriving 
large  emoluments  from  the  Govern- 
ment they  were  plotting  to  destroy. 

3.  The  Legislatures  and  party  Con- 
ventions of  all  the  Slave  States  had 
long  been  in  the  habit 6  of  unanimous- 
ly resolving  that  they  would  never 
submit  to  exclusion  from  the  Terri- 
tories, "  Black-Republican  domina- 
tion," etc.,  etc.  Those  who  were 
really  Unionists  were  apt  to  let  these 
resolves  pass  as  a  matter  of  course, 

eral,  died,  and  was  succeeded,  in  1859,  by 
Joseph  Holt,  of  Kentucky,  who  stood  by  the 
Union. 

6  See,  as  a  specimen,  the  Alabama  resolves— on 
pages  312-13. 


THE    DISUNION  CON 


SPIRACY   IN  TEXAS. 


339 


regarding  them  as  a  sort  of  theatrical, 
sheet-iron  thunder,  which  might  scare 
the  North  into  greater  subserviency 
to  the  Slave  Power,  and,  at  the 
worst,  could  do  no  harm.  And  now, 
these  resolves  were  triumphantly 
quoted  by  the  conspirators,  and  the 
people  asked  whether  they  meant 
any  thing  by  passing  them,  or  were 
only  uttering  threats  which  they 
never  intended  to  make  good. 

4.  The  Governors  of  nearly  all  the 
Slave  States,  including  even  Dela- 
ware, had  actively  and  zealously  sup- 
ported Breckinridge,  and  had  thus 
justified  the  withdrawal  of  a  major- 
ity of  the  Southern  delegates  from  the 
Charleston  Convention,  on  grounds 
not  essentially  differing  from  those 
whereon  Disunion  was  now  urged. 
The  action  now  taken  by  South  Car- 
olina was  very  fairly  claimed  to  be  a 
direct  and  necessary  sequence  of  that 
bolt.  The  Governors  and  other  lead- 
ing politicians  who  had  supported 
Breckinridge  and  Lane  in  the  recent 
canvass,  were  held  to  have  thereby 
pledged  themselves  to  prosecute  that 
policy  to  its  legitimate  results.  And 
most  of  them  were  fully  aware  of 
and  ready  to  meet  this  expectation. 
Hence,  South  Carolina  had  scarcely 
thrown  up  her  signal  rocket,  an- 
nouncing the  outbreak  of  the  long 
meditated  revolution,  when  it  was 
responded  to  by  proclamations  and 
calls  of  Legislatures  in  most  of  the 
Slave  States. 

Texas  was  not  originally  of  the 
number.  Her  leading  politicians  had 
shown  the  cloven  foot  a  year  too 
soon,  by  nominating,  early  in  1859,  a 
State  ticket  pledged  to  favor  the  re- 

7  Houston,  36,170;  Runnells,  27,500. 

8  Hamilton,  16,409;  Waul,  15,961. 

D  Since,  Confederate  Postmaster-General.  Rea- 
gan was  elected  to  Congress  from  Eastern  Texas 


opening  of  the  African  Slave-Trade, 
which  was*  a  well-understood  Shib- 
boleth of  the  South- Western  plotters 
of  Disunion.  Hardin  R.  Runnells,  a 
Mississippian,  who  was  the  incum- 
bent, was  placed  at  its  head  as  a 
candidate  for  Governor.  The  peo- 
ple were  alarmed  by  this  bold  step  ; 
Gen.  Sam  Houston  took  the  field  in 
opposition  to  it  as  an  independent 
Union  candidate  for  Governor ;  and, 
though  there  was  no  political  organi- 
zation in  the  State  but  that  which  he 
confronted,  while  Texas  had  gone 
overwhelmingly  for  Pierce  against 
Scott,  and  for  Buchanan  against 
Fillmore,  Gen.  Houston  carried  it 
with  all  ease,  beating  Runnells  by 
8,670  majority,7  in  by  far  the  largest 
vote  ever  yet  polled  in  the  State. 
Andrew  J.  Hamilton,  running  as  a 
Unionist  for  Congress,  in  the  Western 
District,  in  like  manner  beat  T.  N. 
Waul,  the  regular  Democratic  candi- 
date, by  448 8  majority.  In  the  East- 
ern District,  John  H.  Reagan,9  Dem- 
ocrat, had  no  serious  opposition. 

Gen.  Houston  was  thus  in  a  posi- 
tion to  thwart  the  Texan  conspira- 
tors, had  he  evinced  either  principle 
or  courage,  when  they  commenced 
operating  to  take  their  State  out  of 
the  Union  at  the  close  of  1860.  He 
did  refuse  to  call  the  Legislature,  or 
a  Convention;  whereupon  the  con- 
spirators called  the  Legislature  them- 
selves, by  a  document  signed  by  sixty 
of  their  number,  having  just  as  much 
legal  validity  and  force  as  a  harangue 
at  a  negro  camp-meeting.  But  the 
Disunionists  were  thoroughly  united, 
determined,  and  ready ;  while  their 
adversaries,  owing  to  Houston's  pu- 

in  1859,  by  20,565  votes  to  3,541  for  Judge  W. 
B.  Ochiltree;  but  Houston  for  Governor  had 
4,183  majority  in  the  District  at  that  election ; 
showing  that  Reagan  had  no  serious  opposition. 


340 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


sillanimity,  were  as  slieep  without  a 
shepherd,  in  a  fair  way  to  be  trans- 
formed into  mutton.  Had  there  been 
a  loyal  soldier  in  command  of  that 
large  portion  of  our  small  regular 
army  stationed  in  Texas,  ostensibly 
for  the  defense  of  her  exposed  North- 
ern and  Western  frontier,  he  might 
have  formed  a  nucleus  for  an  effec- 
tive rally  for  the  Union.  But  Mr. 
John  B.  Floyd  was  at  the  head  of 
the  War  Department,  and  had  taken 
care  that  this  force  should  be  wield- 
ed by  a  thorough-going  traitor,  who 
would  paralyze,  and,  in  due  time,  be- 
tray it  into  the  hands  of  his  fellows. 
Houston  was  allowed  to  remain  in 
office,  despised  by  the  implacable  en- 
emies to  whom  he  truckled,  and  de- 
spising himself,  until  they  were  ready 
to  dispense  with  him  ;  when  he  obse- 
quiously resigned,  enduring  an  igno- 
minious existence  in  their  midst  un- 
til he  found  relief  from  it  in  death, 
some  two  years  thereafter. 

Yirginia  had  recently  chosen  for 
her  Governor  Mr.  John  Letcher, 
whose  position  was  nearly  as  peculiar 
as  Houston's.  The  genuine  South- 
rons had  long  professed  to  be  Demo- 
crats for  Slavery's  sake ;  Letcher,  at 
heart,  and  formerly  by  open  avowal, 
regarding  human  bondage  as  a  blun- 
der if  not  a  crime,  was  pro-Slavery  for 
the  sake  of  the  Democratic  party, 
whereof  he  had  ever  been  a  bigoted 
devotee,  and  which  had  promoted 
and  honored  him  beyond  any  other 
estimate  of  his  merits  but  his  own. 
Transferred  from  the  House  of  Kep- 
resentatives  to  the  Governorship 10 
by  the  election  of  1859,  he,  as  a 
life-long  champion  of  regular  nom- 
inations and  strict  party  discipline, 

10  Vote  for  Governor:  Letcher,  Dem.,  77,112; 
Goggin,  Am.,  71,543. 


|  had  supported  Douglas  for  President 
in  1860,  and  thereby  thrown  himself 
into  a  very  lean  minority11  of  his 
party.  He  had,  of  course,  much  lee- 
way to  make  up  to  reinstate  himself 
in  that  party's  good  graces,  and  hence 
early  and  zealously  lent  himself  to 
the  work  of  the  conspirators. 

The  course  of  Gov.  Beriah  Magof- 
fin, of  Kentucky,  was  in  striking  con- 
trast with  that  of  his  Southern  peers. 
He,  too,  had  supported  Breckinridge ; 
while  his  party  owed  its  recently 
acquired  ascendency  in  his  State,  and 
he  his  election,  to  the  deepening  con- 
viction of  the  slaveholding  interest 
that  no  other  party  than  the  Demo- 
cratic possessed  at  once  the  power  and 
the  will  to  rule  the  country  in  con- 
formity to  its  wishes  and  presumed 
interests.  But  Kentucky  had  already 
repeatedly  declared  for  the  Union — 
conspicuously  in  her  August  State 
Election  of  1860,  and  again  in 
choosing  Bell  Electors,  and  giving 
the  rival  candidates  for  President 
some  Forty  Thousand  more  votes  than 
she  gave  her  own  Breckinridge,  who, 
but  for  her  apprehensions  and  dread 
of  disunion,  would  probably  have  re- 
ceived her  vote.  Gov.  Magoffin  now 
issued  an  address  to  the  people  of 
Kentucky,  wherein  he  wisely  and 
forcibly  said : 

"  To  South  Carolina,  and  such  other  States 
as  may  wish  to  secede  from  the  Union,  I 
would  say :  The  geography  of  this  country 
will  not  admit  of  a  division;  the  mouth  and 
sources  of  the  Mississippi  river  cannot  be 
separated  without  the  horrors  of  civil  war. 
We  cannot  sustain  you  in  this  movement 
merely  on  account  of  the  election  of  Lincoln. 
Do  not  precipitate  us,  by  premature  action, 
into  a  revolution  or  civil  war,  the  conse- 
quences of  which  will  be  most  frightful  to 
all  of  us.  It  may  yet  be  avoided.  There  is 
still  hope,  faint  though  it  be.  Kentucky  is 
a  border  State,  and  has  suffered  more  than 


11  Democratic  vote  of  Yirginia:  Breckinridge, 
74,323;  Douglas,  16,290. 


SECESSION    HALTS   IN  AR 


KANSAS   AND  MISSOURI. 


341 


all  of  you.  She  claims  that,  standing  upon 
the  same  sound  platform,  you  will  sympa- 
thize with  her,  and  stand  by  her,  and  not 
desert  her  in  her  exposed,  perilous  border 
position.  She  has  a  right  to  claim  that  her 
voice,  and  the  voice  of  reason,  and  modera- 
tion, and  patriotism,  shall  be  heard  and 
heeded  by  you.  If  you  secede,  your  repre- 
sentatives will  go  out  of  Congress,  and  leave 
us  at  the  mercy  of  a  Black  Republican 
Government.  Mr.  Lincoln  will  have  no 
check.  He  can  appoint  his  Cabinet,  and 
have  it  confirmed.  The  Congress  will  then 
be  Republican,  and  he  will  be  able  to  pass 
such  laws  as  he  may  suggest.  The  Supreme 
Court  will  be  powerless  to  protect  us.  We 
implore  you  to  stand  by  us,  and  by  our 
friends  in  the  Free  States ;  and  let  us  all,  the 
bold,  the  true  and  just  men  in  the  Free  and 
the  Slave  States,  with  a  united  front,  stand 
by  each  other,  by  our  principles,  by  our 
rights,  our  equality,  our  honor,  and  by  the 
Union  under  the  Constitution.  I  believe  this 
is  the  only  way  to  save  it ;  and  we  can  do  it." 

Gov.  Elias  Conway,  of  Arkansas, 
transmitted  his  Annual  Message  to 
the  new  Legislature  of  that  State  on 
the  19th  of  November,  1860,  when 
nearly  all  the  Slave  States  were  alive 
with  drumming  and  drilling, 12  and 
frantic  with  telegraphing  and  haran- 
guing in  behalf  of  Secession ;  yet 
he  said  nothing  on  the  subject.  It  is 
a  fair  presumption  that  he  disapproved 
of  the  entire  business.    But  his  suc- 

12  Extract  from  a  letter  in  The  New  York  Herald 
of  Nov.  9,  dated 

Charleston-,  Nov.  5,  1860. 

"  As  a  mark  of  the  popular  inclination  toward 
resistance,  it  is  a  fact  of  some  significance  that 
the  echoes  of  the  word  'coercion'  had  hardly 
reached  our  borders  before  the  whole  State  was 
bristling  with  spontaneous  organizations  of 
Minute-Men — irregular  forces,  it  is  true,  but, 
nevertheless,  formidable,  because  armed  to  the 
teeth  with  weapons  to  which  they  have  been  ac- 
customed from  early  youth,  and  animated  with 
the  idea  that  they  are  defending  all  that  is  near 
and  dear  to  them.  The  elaborate  disclaimers,  on 
the  part  of  some  of  the  Lincoln  papers,  of  any 
design  to  molest  the  State,  even  if  she  secedes, 
have  no  weight  whatever  here.  People  very 
justly  argue  that,  if  coercion  should  be  attempted, 
the  Minute-Men  will  be  wanted ;  and,  if  the  State 
should  not  be  molested  in  her  independence,  it 
will  be  a  great  advantage  to  have  such  a  body  of 
men  always  at  command. 

"  At  this  time,  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the 
extent  of  the  Minute-Men  movement.  There  is 
not  a  hamlet  in  the  State  that  has  not  its  squad, 


cessor,  Henry  M.  Hector,  had  been 
chosen 13  the  preceding  August,  and 
he  made  haste  to  do  the  bidding  of 
the  conspirators. 

In  all  the  other  Slave  States  south 
of  Maryland,  the  Governors  were 
heart  and  soul  in  the  Disunion  con- 
spiracy, and  called  Legislatures  to 
meet  in  extra  session,  issued  vehement 
Proclamations,  concocted  and  put 
forth  incendiary  Messages,  or  did 
whatever  else  the  master-spirits  of 
the  conspiracy  required.  Their  asso- 
ciates and  subordinates  in  office  were 
of  like  faith  and  purpose  ;  and  it  may 
fairly  be  assumed  that  at  least  four- 
fifths  of  all  those  in  office  in  the  Slave 
States,  whether  under  the  National 
or  any  State  Government,  on  the  6th 
of  November,  1860,  were  ardent  ad- 
vocates of  Secession. 

In  Missouri,  Mr.  Claiborne  F.  Jack- 
son had  been  chosen  Governor  u  as  a 
Douglas  Democrat;  but  that  desig- 
nation was  entirely  delusive.  Having 
achieved  what  he  considered  the  re- 
gular Democratic  nomination  for 
Governor,  he  thought  he  could  not 

either  of  mounted  men  or  infantry.  They  are 
drilling  every  night,  and  have  generally  adopted 
Hardee's  Tactics,  which,  because  less  monoto- 
nous, are  preferred  by  our  impetuous  young  men 
to  the  old,  heavy  infantry  drill.  Not  a  night 
passes  that  we  do  not  hear  in  the  streets  of 
Charleston  the  tramp  of  large  bodies  of  armed 
men,  moving  with  the  quick  Zouave  step,  and 
with  admirable  discipline  and  precision." 

This,  it  will  be  seen,  was  before  Lincoln's  elec- 
tion; and,  of  course,  before  any  public  steps  had 
been  taken  toward  Secession.  As  the  movement 
extended  to  other  States,  its  military  manifesta- 
tions were  nearly  everywhere  such  as  are  por- 
trayed above. 

13 As  a  stump  candidate;  by  30,577  votes  to 
28,618  forR.  H.  Johnson,  regular  Democrat. 

14  Election  of  August,  1860 :  C.  F.  Jackson 
(Douglas)  74,446;  Sam.  Orr  (Bell)  66.583; 
Hancock  Jackson  (Breck.)  11,416;  Gardenhire 
(Lincoln)  6,135. 


342 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


afford  to  bolt  the  regular  Democratic 
nomination  for  President,  and  so  gave 
at  least  a  nominal  support  to  Douglas, 
who  thus  obtained  the  vote  of  Mis- 
souri in  November,  when  Gov.  J.  and 
a  large  proportion  of  his  supporters 
were  in  feeling  and  purpose  with  the 
backers  of  Breckinridge.  He  was 
fully  in  the  hands  of  the  conspirators 
from  the  start,  and  in  due  time  united 
openly  in  the  Rebellion.  Outside  of 
Missouri,  the  Douglas  Democracy 
had  been  so  thoroughly,  overwhelm- 
ingly beaten  in  the  vote  of  the  Slave 
States  for  President — as  thoroughly 
in  Delaware  or  Maryland  as  in 
Georgia  or  Arkansas — that  they 
seemed  to  be  crushed  out  of  life,  or 
anxious  to  merge  their  distinctive 
character  by  a  plunge  into  the  com- 
mon abyss  of  Rebellion.  Mr.  Doug- 
las himself,  being  catechised  on  the 
subject,15  frankly  declared  that,  should 
Lincoln  be  chosen  President,  he  would 
not  consider  that  a  cause  for  resist- 
ance, but  should  adhere  to  and  up- 
hold the  Union.  Yet  the  result  of 
the  election  had  hardly  transpired 
when  his  friend  Gov.  Letcher  of  Vir- 
ginia, Mr.  George  Sanders,  of 
Kentucky,  who  had  been  one  of  his 
busiest  and  noisiest  champions,  and 
many  more  such,  made  haste  to  swell 
the  gathering  cohorts  of  Secession. 
The  ablest  and  most  respectable  of 
their  number  was  Mr.  Alex.  H. 
Stephens,  of  Georgia,  whose  courage 
and  loyalty  endured  at  least  a  week 
after  those  of  his  late  compatriots  had 
bidden  them  a  final  adieu.  The  Legis- 
lature of  Georgia  having  assembled,16 
Mr.  Stephens  presented  himself  and 
spoke  17  boldly  as  well  as  ably  against 
the  meditated  treason ;  saying : 


"  The  first  question  that  presents  itself  is, 
Shall  the  people  of  the  South  secede  from 
the  Union  in  consequence  of  the  election  of 
Mr.  Lincoln  to  the  Presidency  of  the  United 
States  ?  My  countrymen,  I  tell  you  frankly, 
candidly,  and  earnestly,  that  I  do  not  think 
that  they  ought.  In  my  judgment,  the  elec- 
tion of  no  man,  constitutionally  chosen  to 
that  high  office,  is  sufficient  cause  for  any 
State  to  separate  from  the  Union.  It  ought 
to  stand  by  and  aid  still  in  maintaining  the 
Constitution  of  the  country.  To  make  a 
point  of  resistance  to  the  Government — to 
withdraw  from  it,  because  a  man  has  been 
constitutionally  elected — puts  us  in  the 
wrong.  We  are  pledged  to  maintain  the 
Constitution.  Many  of  us  have  sworn  to 
support  it.  Can  we,  therefore,  for  the 
mere  election  of  a  man  to  the  Presidency — 
and  that,  too,  in  accordance  with  the  pre- 
scribed forms  of  the  Constitution — make  a 
point  of  resistance  to  the  Government,  and, 
without  becoming  the  breakers  of  that  sa- 
cred instrument  ourselves,  withdraw  our- 
selves from  it?  Would  we  not  be  in  the 
wrong?  Whatever  fate  is  to  befall  this 
country,  let  it  never  be  laid  to  the  charge 
of  the  people  of  the  South,  and  especially  of 
the  people  of  Georgia,  that  we  were  untrue 
to  our  National  engagements.  Let  the 
fault  and  the  wrong  rest  upon  others.  If 
all  our  hopes  are  to  be  blasted,  if  the  Re- 
public is  to  go  down,  let  us  be  found  to  the 
last  moment  standing  on  the  deck,  with  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  waving 
over  our  heads.  (Applause.)  Let  the  fa- 
natics of  the  North  break  the  Constitution,  if 
such  is  their  fell  purpose.  Let  the  responsi- 
bility be  upon  them.  I  shall  speak  present- 
ly more  of  their  acts ;  but  let  not  the  South, 
let  us  not  be  the  ones  to  commit  the  aggres- 
sion. We  went  into  the  election  with  this 
people ;  the  result  was  different  from  what 
we  wished ;  but  the  election  has  been  con- 
stitutionally held.  Were  we  to  make  a 
point  of  resistance  to  the  Government,  and 
go  out  of  the  Union  on  that  account,  the  re- 
cord would  be  made  up  hereafter  against  us. 

"  But,  it  is  said,  Mr.  Lincoln's  policy  and 
principles  are  against  the  Constitution,  and 
that,  if  he  carries  them  out,  it  will  be  de- 
structive of  our  rights.  Let  us  not  anticipate 
a  threatened  evil.  If  he  violates  the  Consti- 
tution, then  will  come  our  time  to  act.  Do 
not  let  us  break  it,  because,  forsooth,  he 
may.  If  he  does,  that  is  the  time  for  us  to 
strike.  (Applause.)  I  think  it  would  be 
injudicious  and  unwise  to  do  this  sooner.  I 
do  not  anticipate  that  Mr.  Lincoln  will  do 
anything  to  jeopardize  our  safety  or  securi- 
ty, whatever  may  be  his  spirit  to  do  it ;  for 


15  While  speaking  at  Norfolk,  Ya.,  during  the 
canvass  of  1860. 


16  At  Milledgeville,  Nov.  8,  1860. 

17  At  the  State  House,  Nov.  14, 1860. 


A.   H.  STEPHENS  AND  HENRY  CLAY   ON  DISUNION. 


343 


he  is  bound  by  the  constitutional  checks 
which  are  thrown  around  him,  which,  at 
this  time,  render  hira  powerless  to  do  any 
great  mischief.  This  shows  the  wisdom  of 
our  system.  The  President  of  the  United 
States  is  no  Emperor,  no  Dictator — he  is 
clothed  with  no  absolute  power.  He  can  do 
nothing  unless  he  is  backed  by  power  in 
Congress.  The  House  of  Representatives  is 
largely  in  the  majority  against  him.  In  the 
Senate,  he  will  also  be  powerless.  There 
will  be  a  majority  of  four  against  him :  This, 
after  the  loss  of  Bigler,  Fitch,  and  others,  by 
the  unfortunate  dissensions  of  the  Demo- 
cratic party  in  their  States.  Mr.  Lincoln 
cannot  appoint  an  officer  without  the  con- 
sent of  the  Senate — he  cannot  form  a  Cabi- 
net without  the  same  consent.  He  will  be 
in  the  condition  of  George  III.  (the  embodi- 
ment of  Toryism),  who  had  to  ask  the 
Whigs  to  appoint  his  Ministers,  and  was 
compelled  to  receive  a  Cabinet  utterly  op- 
posed to  his  views ;  and  so  Mr.  Lincoln  will 
be  compelled  to  ask  of  the  Senate  to  choose 
for  him  a  Cabinet,  if  the  Democracy  of  that 
body  choose  to  put  him  on  such  terms.  He 
will  be  compelled  to  do  this,  or  let  the  Gov- 
ernment stop,  if  the  National  Democratic 
men — for  that  is  their  name  at  the  North — 
the  conservative  men  in  the  Senate — should 
so  determine.  Then,  how  can  Mr.  Lincoln 
obtain  a  Cabinet  which  would  aid  him,  or 
allow  him,  to  violate  the  Constitution? 

"  Why,  then,  I  say,  should  we  disrupt  the 
bonds  of  this  Union,  when  his  hands  are  tied 
— when  he  can  do  nothing  against  us  ?" 

Warming  with,  his  argument,  Mr. 
Stephens  did  not  hesitate,  before  con- 
cluding his  speech,  to  say : 

"  I  believe  in  the  power  of  the  people  to 
govern  themselves  when  wisdom  prevails, 
and  passion  is  silent.  Look  at  what  has  al- 
ready been  done  by  them  for  their  advance- 
ment in  all  that  ennobles  man.  There  is 
nothing  like  it  in  the  history  of  the  world. 
Look  abroad,  from  one  extent  of  the  coun- 
try to  the  other;  contemplate  our  great- 

18  Mr.  Clay,  at  another  time,  at  a  caucus  of 
Southern  members  of  Congress,  was  asked 
whether,  in  a  certain  contingency,  Kentuckians 
would  go  for  Disunion.  He  promptly  replied : 
"No,  Sir:  Kentuckians  view  Disunion  as  itself 
the  greatest  of  evils,  and  as  a  remedy  for  noth- 
ing." 

The  following  letter  likewise  embodies  the 
ruling  conviction  of  his  life,  which  under  no  cir- 
cumstances could  he  be  induced  to  depart  from : 
"Washington,  Dec.  22,  1849. 

"  My  Dear  Sir: — My  object  in  writing  to  you 


ness :  we  are  now  among  the  first  nations 
of  the  earth.  Shall  it,  then,  be  said  that  our 
institutions,  founded  upon  principles  of  self- 
government,  are  a  failure  ? 

"  Thus  far  it  is  a  noble  example,  worthy 
of  imitation.  The  gentleman  (Mr.  Cobb), 
the  other  night,  said  it  had  proven  a  failure. 
A  failure  in  what  ?  In  growth  ?  Look  at 
our  expanse  in  National  power !  Look  at 
our  population  and  increase  in  all  that 
makes  a  people  great !  A  failure  ?  Why, 
we  are  the  admiration  of  the  civilized  world, 
and  present  the  brightest  hopes  of  mankind. 

"Some  of  our  public  men  have  failed  in 
their  aspirations ;  that  is  true ;  and  from 
that  comes  a  great  part  of  our  troubles. 
(Prolonged  applause.) 

"  No !  there  is  no  failure  of  this  Govern- 
ment yet.  We  have  made  great  advance- 
ment under  the  Constitution ;  and  I  cannot 
but  hope  that  we  shall  advance  still  higher. 
Let  us  be  true  to  our  cause." 

This  was  frank  and  noble ;  yet 
there  was  a  dead  fly  in  the  ointment, 
which  sadly  marred  its  perfume. 
That  was  a  distinct  avowal  of  the 
right  of  the  State  to  overrule  his  per- 
sonal convictions,  and  plunge  him 
into  treason  to  the  Nation.  Years 
before,  Henry  Clay,  when  catechised 
by  Jefferson  Davis  in  the  Senate,  set 
forth  the  true  American  doctrine  on 
this  point,  as  follows : 

"Mr.  President,  I  have  heard  with  pain 
and  regret  a  confirmation  of  the  remark  I 
made,  that  the  sentiment  of  Disunion  has  be- 
come familiar.  I  hope  it  is  confined  to 
South  Carolina.  I  do  not  regard  as  my 
duty  what  the  honorable  Senator  seems  to 
regard  as  his.  If  Kentucky  to-morrow  un- 
furls the  banner  of  resistance,  I  never  will 
fight  under  that  banner.  I  owe  a  para- 
mount allegiance  to  the  whole  Union — a 
subordinate  one  to  my  own  State."  18 


now  is  one  of  great  importance,  and  I  wish  you 
to  lead  off  in  it. 

"  The  feeling  for  Disunion  among  some  of  the 
intemperate  Southern  politicians  is  stronger  than 
I  supposed  it  could  be.  The  masses  generally, 
even  at  the  South,  are,  I  believe,  yet  sound ;  but 
they  may  become  inflamed  and  perverted.  The 
best  counteraction  of  that  feeling  is  to  be  derived 
from  popular  expressions  at  public  meetings  of 
the  people.  Now,  what  I  would  be  glad  to  see,  is 
such  meetings  held  throughout  Kentucky.  For, 
you  must  know,  that  the  Disunionists  count  up- 
on the  cooperation  of  our  patriotic  State.  Can- 
not you  get  up  a  large,  powerful  meeting  of  both 


314 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Mr.  Stephens  was,  in  his  earlier 

years,  an  admirer  and  follower  of 

Mr.  Clay;  but,  since  1850,  he  had 

gone  a  roving  after  strange  gods. 

He  now  said : 

"  Should  Georgia  determine  to  go  out  of 
the  Union,  I  speak  for  one,  though  my  views 
may  not  agree  with  them,  whatever  the  re- 
sult may  be,  I  shall  bow  to  the  will  of  her 
people.  Their  cause  is  my  cause,  and  their 
destiny  is  my  destiny;  and  I  trust  this  will 
be  the  ultimate  course  of  all.  The  greatest 
curse  that  can  befall  a  free  people  is  civil 
war.  But,  as  I  said,  let  us  call  a  Conven- 
tion of  the  people ;  let  all  these  matters  be 
submitted  to  it;  and,  when  the  will  of  a 
majority  of  the  people  has  thus  been  ex- 
pressed, the  whole  State  will  present  one 
unanimous  voice  in  favor  of  whatever  may 
be  demanded." 

Of  course,  Mr.  Stephens  was  taken 
at  his  word.  A  Convention  was 
called ;  a  majority  of  delegates  se- 
cured for  Disunion ;  an  Ordinance  of 
Secession  passed;  and  Mr.  Stephens 
sank  from  the  proud  position  of  a  citi- 
zen of  the  American  Republic  into 
that  of  Yice-President  of  the  Confed- 
eracy of  slaveholding  traitors  and 
their  benighted,  misguided  satellites 
and  dupes. 

The  South  Carolina  Convention 
met  at  Columbia  on  the  appointed 
day — December  17th.  Gen.  D.  F. 
Jamison,  its  temporary  Chairman,  on 
being  called  to  preside,  paraded  the 
wrongs  of  the  South  in  the  admission 

parties,  if  possible,  at  Lexington,  at  Louisville, 
etc.,  etc.,  to  express  in  strong  language  their  de- 
termination to  stand  by  the  Union  ?  Now  is  the 
time  for  salutary  action,  and  you  are  the  man  to 
act.  I  inclose  some  resolutions,  which,  or  some 
similar  to  them,  I  should  be  happy  to  see 
adopted.  H.  Clay." 

"To  Gen.  Leslie  Combs." 

19  Early  in  18G0,  an  eminent  New  York  law- 
yer visited  Charleston  professionally,  and  was 
detained  in  that  city  several  weeks,  mingling 
freely  with  her  citizens  and  the  guests  at  her 
principal  hotel.  Though  never  a  candidate  for 
office,  he  took  a  warm  interest  in  public  affairs, 
and  had  always  acted  with  the  'Whig.'  'Ameri- 


of  California,  organization  and  settle- 
ment of  Kansas,  etc.,  etc.,  and  trust- 
ed that  "  the  door  is  now  closed  for- 
ever against  any  further  connection 19 
with  the  Northern  confederacy,"  etc., 
etc.,  etc.  He  further  trusted  that 
"  we  shall  not  be  diverted  from  our 
purpose  by  any  dictates  f  rom  with- 
out /"  and  that  the  Convention,  in 
inaugurating  such  a  movement,  would 
heed  the  counsels  of  a  master-spirit 
of  the  French  Revolution,  whose 
maxim  was,  to  "  dare,  and  again  to 
dare,  and  without  end  to  dare? 

Mr.  Chas.  G.  Memminger20  having 
suggested  that  the  members,  on  the 
roll  being  called,  advance  and  be 
sworn,  a  delegate  responded  :  "  Oh 
no !  that  is  not  required ;  we  came 
not  to  make,  but  to  unmake,  a  gov- 
ernment." 

Gen.  Jamison  was,  on  the  fifth 
ballot,  chosen  President.  At  the 
evening  session  of  the  first  day,  Hon. 
John  A.  Elmore,  a  Commissioner 
from  Alabama,  aifd  Hon.  Charles 
Hooker,  a  Commissioner  from  Mis- 
sissippi, were  introduced  by  the  Pres- 
ident, and  successively  addressed  the 
Convention — of  course,  in  favor  of 
prompt  and  unconditional  Secession, 
Mr.  Elmore  said : 

"  I  am  instructed  by  the  Governor  of  Ala- 
bama to  say  that  he  desires,  and,  he  be- 

can,'  or  '  Conservative'  party.  Soon  after  his  re- 
turn to  New  York,  some  old  associates  called  to 
consult  him  on  political  affairs,  and  were  as- 
tounded to  hear  that  his  views  had  undergone  a 
complete  change.  "What  can  that  mean?" 
"It  means  this,"  was  his  well-considered  reply; 
"  that  I  have  spent  the  past  month  in  the  South ; 
that  I  find  the  Union  a  sham ;  that  we  are,  in 
effect,  two  peoples,  between  whom  an  early  war 
is  inevitable;  and  that,  in  that  war,  I  mean  to 
stand  by  my  own  hearth  and  kindred.  Good 
morning,  gentlemen!" 

20  Since,  Confederate  Secretary  of  the  Treasury. 


SOUTH  CAROLI 


NA  SECEDING. 


345 


lieves,  onr  State  desires  (and  I  unite  my 
voice  with  him  in  that  opinion),  that  the  ac- 
tion of  the  Convention  be  immediate  and 
prompt.  [Applause.]  It  will  give  the  cause 
strength,  not  only  in  Alabama,  as  we  be- 
lieve, and  of  which  I  have  a  right  to  speak, 
but  I  believe  it  will  give  the  cause  strength 
in  the  other  States,  which  are  united  with 
you  in  sentiment." 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Inglis,  it  was 
unanimously,  and  amid  tremendous 
cheering, 

"  Resolved,  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  the 
Convention  that  the  State  of  South  Carolina 
should  forthwith  secede  from  the  Federal 
Union,  known  as  the  United  States  of 
America." 

The  small-pox  then  raging  in  Co- 
lumbia, the  Convention  adjourned  to 
*  Secession  Hall'  in  Charleston,  where 
it  met  next  day.  Mr.  Buchanan's 
last  Annual  Message  having  been  re- 
ceived, Judge  Magrath,  of  Charleston, 
offered  the  following,  which  was 
debated  next  day,  but  does  not  seem 
to  have  passed : 

"  Resolved,  That  so  much  of  the  Message 
of  the  President  of  the  United  States  as  re- 
lates to  what  he  designates  the  property  of 
the  United  States  in  South  Carolina,  be  re- 
ferred to  a  Committee  to  report  of  what  such 
property  consists,  how  the  same  was  ac- 
quired, or,  whether  the  purposes  for  which 
it  was  so  acquired  can  be  enjoyed  by  the 
United  States  after  the  State  of  South  Caro- 
lina shall  have  seceded,  consistently  with  the 
dignity  and  safety  of  the  State;  and  that 
said  Committee  further  report  the  value  of 
the  property  of  the  United  States  not  in 
South  Carolina,  and  the  value  of  the  share 
thereof  to  which  South  Carolina  may  be  en- 
titled upon  an  equal  division  thereof  among 
the  States.  [Great  applause  in  the  galleries."] 

The  President  announced  an  ad- 
dress from  a  portion  of  the  Legisla- 
ture of  Georgia,  which  he  thought 
Should  not  be  made  public ;  so  it  was 
not.  It  was  afterward  understood  to 
be  an  appeal  from  fifty-two  members 
of  said  Legislature  for  delay  and  con- 
sultation among  the  Slave  States. 

The  next  day,  Hon.  J.  A.  Elmore 


communicated  a  dispatch  from  the 
Governor  of  Alabama,  in  these  words : 

"Montgomery,  Ala.,  Dec.  17,  I860. 
"  Tell  the  Convention  to  listen  to  no  prop- 
osition of  compromise  or  delay. 

"A.  B.  Moore." 

Among  the  utterances  of  this  Con- 
vention, the  following  seem  especially 
significant  and  memorable  : 

Mr.  Parker  said : 

"Mr.  President,  it  appears  to  me,  with 
great  deference  to  the  opinions  that  have 
been  expressed,  that  the  public  mind  is  fully 
made  up  to  the  great  occasion  that  now 
awaits  us.  It  is  no  spasmodic  effort  that  has 
come  suddenly  upon  us  ;  it  has  oeen  gradually 
culminating  for  a  long  period  of  thirty  years, 
At  last,  it  has  come  to  that  point  where  we 
may  say,  the  matter  is  entirely  right" 

Mr.  Inglis  said : 

"Mr.  President,  if  there  is  any  gentleman 
present  who  wishes  to  debate  this  matter,  of 
course  this  body  will  hear  him.  But,  as  to 
delay  for  the  purpose  of  discussion,  I,  for 
one,  am  opposed  to  it.  As  my  friend  (Mr. 
Parker)  has  said,  most  of  us  have  had  this 
matter  under  consideration  for  the  last 
twenty  years ;  and  I  presume  that  we  have, 
by  this  time,  arrived  at  a  decision  upon  the 
subject." 

And  Hon.  Lawrence  M.  Keitt — 

"I  have  oeen  engaged  in  this  movement 
ever  since  I  entered  political  life.  I  am  con- 
tent with  what  has  been  done  to-day,  and 
with  what  will  take  place  to-morrow.  We 
have  carried  the  body  of  this  Union  to  its 
last  resting-place,  and  now  we  will  drop  the 
flag  over  its  grave.  After  that  is  done,  I 
am  ready  to  adjourn,  and  leave  the  remain- 
ing ceremonies  for  to-morrow." 

And  Mr.  Robert  Barnwell  Rhett — 

"  The  Secession  of  South  Carolina  is  not 
an  event  of  a  day.  It  is  not  anything  pro- 
duced by  Mr.  Lincoln's  election,  or  by  the 
non-execution  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law. 
It  has  been  a  matter  which  has  been  gather- 
ing head  for  thirty  years.  *  *  *  The 
point  in  which  I  differ  from  my  friend  is 
this :  He  says  he  thought  it  expedient  to 
put  this  great  question  before  the  world  upon 
this  simple  matter  of  wrongs — on  the  ques- 
tion of  Slavery ;  and  that  question  turned 
upon  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law.  Now,  in  re- 
gard to  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law, .  I  myself 
doubted  its  constitutionality,  and  doubted  it 
on  the  floor  of  the  Senate,  when  I  was  a 
member  of  that  body.    The  States,  acting 


346 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


in  their  sovereign  capacity,  should  be  re- 
sponsible for  the  rendition  of  fugitive  slaves. 
That  was  our  best  security." 

It  was,  on  motion  of  Mr.  Hayne, 
resolved  that  a  Commissioner  be  sent 
to  each  Slave  State,  with  a  copy  of 
the  Secession  Ordinance,  with  a  view 
to  hasten  cooperation  on  the  part  of 
those  States;  also,  th#t  three  Com- 
missioners be  sent  to  Washington, 
with  a  copy  of  the  same,  to  be  laid 
before  the  President,  to  treat  for  the 
delivery  of  the  United  St  ates  property 
in  South  Carolina  over  to  the  State, 
on  the  subject  of  the  Public  Debt, 
etc. 

The  Ordinance  of  Secession  was 
reported  from  a  Committee  of  seven 
on  the  fourth  day  (Dec.  20th),  and 
immediately  passed,  without  dissent. 
(Yeas  169.)  It  is  in  the  following 
words :. 

11  An  Ordinance  to  dissolve  the  Union  be- 
tween the  State  of  South  Carolina,  and  other 
States  united  with  her  under  the  compact  en- 
titled the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 
of  America : 

"  We,  the  people  of  the  State  of  South  Caro- 
lina, in  Convention  assembled,  do  declare  and 
ordain,  and  it  is  hereby  declared  and  ordained, 
that  the  Ordinance  adopted  by  us  in  Con- 
vention, on  the  23d  day  of  May,  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  1788,  whereby  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  of  America  was  ratified, 
and  also  all  Acts  and  parts  of  Acts  of  the 
General  Assembly  of  this  State  ratifying  the 
amendments  of  the  said  Constitution,  are 
hereby  repealed ;  and  that  the  Union  now 
subsisting  between  South  Carolina  and  other 
States,  under  the  name  of  the  United  States 
of  America,  is  hereby  dissolved." 

A  formal  "  Declaration  of  Causes, 
which  induced  the  Secession  of  South 
Carolina,"  was  in  like  manner  report- 
ed and  adopted.  Its  substance  and 
force  are  entirely  derived  from  and 
grounded  on  the  alleged  infidelity  of 
the  Free  States  to  their  constitutional 
obligations  with  respect  to  Slavery, 
but  more  especially  in  the  non-rendi- 
tion of  fugitive  slaves.    New  York, 


among  other  States,  is  herein  charged 
(of  course  by  mistake)  with  having 
passed  acts  to  obstruct  the  return  of 
such  fugitives.  Indiana  and  Illinois 
are  likewise  among  the  States  thus 
erroneously  accused.  The  Constitu- 
tion is  pronounced  a  compact  between 
sovereign  States,  and  the  Convention 
proceeds : 

"  TVe  maintain  that,  in  every  compact  be- 
tween two  or  more  parties,  the  obligation  is 
mutual ;  that  the  failure  of  one  of  the  con- 
tracting parties  to  perform  a  material  part  of 
the  agreement,  entirely  releases  the  obliga- 
tion of  the  other ;  and  that,  where  no  arbi- 
ter is  provided,  each  party  is  remitted  to  his 
own  judgment  to  determine  the  fact  of  fail- 
ure, with  all  its  consequences." 

No  grievance  of  any  name  or  na- 
ture is  alleged  or  insinuated,  but  such 
as  flow  from  anti-Slavery  feeling  and 
action  in  the  Free  States,  culmina- 
ting in  the  election  of  Lincoln.  The 
Declaration  concludes  as  follows : 

"  We,  therefore,  the  people  of  South  Caro- 
lina, by  our  delegates  in  Convention  assem- 
bled, appealing  to  the  Supreme  Judge  of  the 
world  for  the  rectitude  of  our  intentions, 
have  solemnly  declared  that  the  Union  here- 
tofore existing  between  this  State  and  the 
other  States  of  North  America  is  dissolved, 
and  that  the  State  of  South  Carolina  has  re- 
sumed her  position  among  the  nations  of 
the  world,  as  a  separate  and  independent 
State,  with  full  power  to  levy  war,  conclude 
peace,  contract  alliances,  establish  com- 
merce, and  to  do  all  other  acts  and  things 
which  independent  States  may  of  right  do." 

On  motion  of  Mr.  W.  F.  De  Saus- 
sure,  it  was  further 

"  Resolved,  That  the  passage  of  the  Ordi- 
nance be  proclaimed  by  the  firing  of  artil- 
lery and  the  ringing  of  the  bells  of  the  city, 
and  such  other  demonstrations  as  the  people 
may  deem  appropriate  on  the  passage  of  the 
great  act  of  deliverance  and  liberty." 

The  President,  at  a  quarter  past 
1,  announced  that  the  Ordinance 
had  unanimously  passed  ;  whereupon 
there  burst  forth  a  pent-up  flood  of 
congratulatory  and  jubilant  speeches, 
and  then  the  Convention  adjourned, 
to  meet  again  in  the  evening  for  a 


GEORGIA,  ALABAMA 


ETC.,  SECEDING. 


347 


more  formal  ratification,  at  which 
the  Governor 21  and  Legislature  were 
invited  to  attend.  Then  and  there, 
the  Ordinance,  having  been  duly  en- 
grossed, was  read  by  the  President, 
then  signed  by  all  the  delegates  in 
alphabetical  order,  and  thereupon 
displayed  by  the  President  to  the  en- 
thusiastic crowd,  with  a  declaration 
that  "  the  State  of  South  Carolina  is 
now  and  henceforth  a  free  and  in- 
dependent commonwealth."  And 
then,  with  wild,  prolonged,  exulting 
huzzas,  the  assemblage  dispersed; 
and  the  Charleston  papers  began  to 
print  thenceforth  their  daily  quantum 
of  intelligence  from  the  non-seceding 
States  as  "  Foreign  News." 

Georgia,  as  was  arranged  and  ex- 
pected, was  the  first  State  to  follow 
South  Carolina  in  her  fatal  plunge. 
Her  new  Legislature,  moved  by  an 
impassioned  Message  from  her  Gover- 
nor, Joseph  E.  Brown,  passed22  a  bill 
appropriating  $1,000,000  to  arm  and 
equip  the  State  ;  and,  on  the  18th,  a 
bill  calling  a  Convention  of  delegates, 
to  be  chosen  in  the  several  counties 
on  the  2d  of  January  ensuing,  and  to 
meet  one  week  thereafter.  The  Con- 
vention bill  passed  by  a  unanimous 
vote ;  the  Convention  thus  chosen 
and  convened  finally  passed23  an  Ordi- 
nance of  Secession :  Yeas  208  ;  Nays 
89.    The  names  of  A.  H.  Stephens 

21  Francis  W.  Pickens,  newly  chosen  by  the 
Legislature ;  an  original  Nullifier  and  life-long 
Disunionist,  "born  insensible  to  fear."  He  was 
in  Congress  (House)  from  1835  to  1843;  sent  as 
Minister  to  Russia  by  Buchanan  in  1858. 

"November  13,  1860.      "January  18,  1861. 

24  "A  sad  thing  to  observe  is,  that  those  who 
are  determined  on  immediate  secession  have  not 
the  coolness,  the  capacity,  or  the  nerve,  to  pro- 
pose something  after  that.  We  must  secede,  it 
is  said ;  but,  what  then  we  are  to  do,  nobody 
knows,  or,  at  least,  nobody  says.  This  is  ex- 
tremely foolish,  and  more  wicked  than  foolish. 


and  Herschel  Y.  Johnson,  late  Doug- 
las leaders  in  the  South,  were  recorded 
among  the  Nays.24 

Alabama  was  held  back  by  a  scru- 
ple on  the  part  of  her  Governor, 
Andrew  B.  Moore,  who  declined  to 
act  decisively  until  the  Presidential 
Electors  in  the  several  States  had 
met,  and  a  majority  cast  their  votes 
for  Lincoln.  He  issued  his  call  on 
the  6th,  and  the  election  of  delegates 
was  held  on  the  24th  of  December. 
The  Secessionists  claimed  a  popular 
majority  of  50,000  in  the  votes  of  the 
several  counties ;  but  when  the  Con- 
vention 25  passed  an  Ordinance  of  Se- 
cession,39 by  a  vote  of  61  to  39,  it  was 
claimed  that  the  minority,  being 
mainly  from  the  Northern  counties, 
where  the  free  population  is  propor- 
tionally far  more  numerous  than 
among  the  great  plantations  of  the 
South,  represented  more  freemen  than 
did  the  majority. 

Florida,  through  her  Legislature, 
voted 27  to  call  a  Convention.  That 
Convention  met  at  Tallahassee,28  and 
passed 29  an  Ordinance  of  Secession : 
Yeas  62 ;  Nays  7.  Several  delegates 
elected  expressly  as  Unionists  voted 
for  Secession. 

Mississippi  assembled  her  Legisla- 
ture, on  the  call  of  Gov.  John  J.  Pet- 
tus,  at  Jackson;  and  a  Convention 
was  thereby  called  to  meet  at  the 
same  place,  January  7th ;  and  a  Se- 

All  sorts  of  business  are  going  to  wreck  and 
ruin,  because  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  future. 
No  statesmanship  has  ever  been  exhibited  yet, 
so  far  as  we  know,  by  those  who  will  dissolve 
the  Union.  South  Carolina  considers  it  her  poli- 
cy to  create  a  collision  with  the  Federal  authori- 
ties for  the  purpose  of  arousing  the  South  from  her 
slumber.  Never  was  there  a  greater  mistake.*' 
— Augusta  (Ga.)  Chronicle  and  Sentinel,  January 
1,  1861. 

25  Assembled  at  Montgomery,  January  Tth. 

26  January  11,  1861.       "December  1,  1860. 
28  January  3,  1861.        29  January  10th. 


348 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


cession  Ordinance  was  passed  by  it 
two  days  thereafter :  Yeas  84  ;  Nays 
15.  Mississippi  having,  next  to 
South  Carolina,  the  largest  propor- 
tional Slave  population  of  any  State 
in  the  Union,  it  is  probable  that  this 
action  more  nearly  conformed  to  the 
real  sentiment  of  her  reading,  govern- 
ing class,  than  that  of  any  other  State 
which  is  claimed  as  having  seceded. 

In  Louisiana,  Gov.  Thomas  O. 
Moore,  an  extensive  planter  and  slave- 
holder, cherishing  the  prejudices  of 
his  class,  called 30  her  new  Legislature 
to  meet  at  Baton  Kouge,  December 
10th.  This  lost  no  time  in  calling31  a 
Convention,  by  which  an  Ordinance  of 
Secession  was  passed  :32  Yeas  103 ; 
Nays  1 7.  But  a  New  Orleans  j  ournal, 
which  had  not  yet  fallen  into  treason, 
confidently  asserted  that  a  majority 
of  the  people  who  voted  for  delegates 
to  that  Convention  had  voted  for 
Union  delegates,  and  challenged  the 
Secessionists  to  publish  and  scrutinize 
the  popular  vote.  This  they  were 
finally  impelled  to  do,  figuring  out  a 
small  majority  for  their  own  side.  It 
was  plain  that,  while  every  Secession- 
ist voted  and  many  Unionists  ab- 
stained, the  vote  for  Union  and  that 
for  Secession  delegates  were  just 
about  equal.  As  made  up  by  the  Se- 
cessionists, they  stood :  For  Secession, 
20,448;  Against  it,  17,296.  The 
vote  for  Secession  is  only  two-fifths 
of  the  vote  cast  for  President  just 
before.  The  Convention  refused — 
84  to  45 — to  submit  their  act  to  a 
vote  of  the  people. 

In  Texas,  a  Convention — called,  as 
we  have  seen — assembled  at  Austin, 
January  28th,  passed33  an  Ordinance 
of  Secession  :  Yeas  166  ;  Nays  7.  This 

30  November  26,  1860.  31  December  17,  1860. 
82  January  26,  1860. 


ordinance  was  submitted  to  a  popular 
vote,  and  ratified  by  a  considerable 
majority ;  it  being  very  much  safer, 
in  most  districts,  to  vote  Secession 
than  not  at  all,  and  not  to  vote  at  all 
than  to  vote  Union. 

Arkansas,  in  spite  of  her  Govern- 
or's reticence,  was  blest  with  a  Con- 
vention;34 her  Legislature  voting  a 
call  for  one;  but  her  popular  vote 
showed  a  Union  majority,  and  the 
conspirators  were  baffled  for  the  time. 

North  Carolina  was  under  the  rule, 
but  not  at  first  under  the  control,  of 
the  conspirators.  Among  the  dis- 
patches flying,  thick  as  hail,  over  the 
South  the  day  after  Lincoln's  election, 
was  the  following: 

"Raleigh,  K  C,  Not.  7,  1860. 
"  The  Governor  and  Council  are  in  session. 
The  people  are  very  much  excited.  North 

Carolina  is  ready  to  secede" 

The  Governor  (John  W.  Ellis)  and 
Legislature  being  of  the  Breckinridge 
school  of  Democracy,  it  was  easy  to 
call  a  Convention,  but  difficult  to 
assemble  one  without  giving  the  Peo- 
ple some  voice  in  the  premises.  And 
they,  upon  the  appointed  day  of  elec- 
tion, not  only  chose  a  strong  majority 
of  Union  delegates,  but  voted  further 
(for  fear  of  what  might  happen)  that 
the  Convention  should  not  meet  at 
all.  Yet  that  same  Convention  was, 
directly  after  the  reduction  of  Sum- 
ter, called  together,  and  voted  the 
State  out  of  the  Union ! 

So,  in  Virginia,  where  Gov.  Letcher 
had  early  and  heartily  entered  into 
the  counsels  of  the  Disunionists,  the 
Legislature  was  called  by  him  to  meet 
in  extra  session  at  Richmond  on  the 
7 th  of  January,  which  it  did,  and u 
passed  a  bill  calling  a  Convention; 

33  February  1,  1861.  34  November  16,  I860. 
35  January  13, 1861. 


MISSOURI,    KENTUCKY,  E 


TO.,    REFUSE    TO   SECEDE.  349 


but  the  people  returned  an  over- 
whelming Union  majority;  which, 
so  late  as  April  4th,  .by  89  to  45, 
decided  not  to  pass  an  Ordinance  of 
Secession. 

Missouri,  under  Gov.  C.  F.  J ack- 
son's  rule,  had  a  Democratic  Legisla- 
ture, which  voted36  to  call  a  Conven- 
tion ;  but  that  body,  when  convened, 
was  found  to  be  decidedly  and  in- 
flexibly Union.  The  pretended  Se- 
cession of  the  State,  some  time  after- 
ward, was  the  work  of  unauthorized 
persons,  and  had  not  a  shadow  of 
legal  validity. 

So,  Tennessee,  whose  Legislature 
met  January  7th,  though  her  Govern- 
or, Isham  G.  Harris,  was  thoroughly 
with  the  Disunionists,  could  riot  be 
induced  to  take  the  first  step  in  their 
company.37 

In  Kentucky,  the  open  Secession- 
ists were  but  a  handful,  and  were  un- 
able to  make  any  show  of  strength  in 
the  Legislature.  The  few  slave- 
traders,  some  scions  of  the  planting 
aristocracy,  with  quite  a  number  of 
politicians  of  bygone  eminence  and 
power  (many,  if  not  most,  of  them 
6  "Whigs'  of  other  days),  were  early  en- 
listed in  the  movement,  and  sought 
to  counterbalance,  if  not  conceal, 
their  paucity  of  numbers  by  intense 
bitterness  and  preternatural  activity. 
They  were  enabled,  through  the 
timidity  and  twaddling  of  the  leading 
politicians  who  had  supplanted  them  in 

*«  January  16,  1861. 

87  The  Nashville  Banner,  a  leading  journal  of 
the  old  Whig  school,  contained  late  in  January, 
1860,  the  following  warning  of  the  treacherous 
schemes  that  were  then  culminating  in  Ten- 
nessee : 

"Let  every  true,  honest  citizen  of  the  South 
beware.  The  vilest,  most  damnable,  deep-laid 
and  treacherous  conspiracy  that  was  ever  con- 
cocted in  the  busy  brain  of  the  most  designing 
knave,  is  being  hatched  to  destroy  his  liberties 


place  and  power,  to  exert  a  baleful 
influence  over  the  course  of  their 
State  throughout  the  ensuing  year, 
but  never  to  drive  or  lure  her  to  the 
brink  of  Secession. 

So,  in  Maryland,  which  was  early 
visited  by  emissaries  from  the  seceded 
States,  who  exerted  every  art  to  drag 
her  after  them  into  the  abyss.  They 
were  patiently,  respectfully  treated ; 
feasted  and  toasted  by  the  aristocratic 
few,  but  nowise  encouraged  or  sym- 
pathized with  by  the  great  body  of 
the  industrious  classes.  Gov.  Thomas 
H.  Hicks,  though  a  slaveholder,  and 
not  very  determined  nor  consistent 
in  his  course  at  the  outset  of  the  Re- 
bellion, met  the  original  appeal  for 
Secession  with  a  decided  rebuff. 
Being  strongly  memorialized  to  con- 
vene the  Legislature  in  extra  session, 
he  responded 38  as  follows : 

"Identified,  as  I  am,  by  birth,  and  every 
other  tie,  with  the  South — a  slaveholder,  and 
feeling  as  warmly  for  my  native  State  as  any 
man  can  do — I  am  yet  compelled  by  my  sense 
of  fair  dealing,  and  my  respect  for  the  Con- 
stitution of  our  country,  to  declare  that  I  see 
nothing  in  the  bare  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln 
which  would  justify  the  South  in  taking  any 
steps  tending  toward  a  separation  of  these 
States.  Mr.  Lincoln  being  elected,  I  am 
willing  to  await  further  results.  If  he  will 
administer  the  Government  in  a  proper  and 
patriotic  manner,  we  are  all  bound  to  sub- 
mit to  his  Administration,  much  as  we  may 
have  opposed  his  election. 

"As  an  individual,  I  will  very  cheerfully 
sustain  him  in  well-doing,  because  my  suf- 
fering country  will  be  benefited  by  a  consti- 
tutional administration  of  the  Government. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  he  shall  abuse  the  trust 


by  breaking  up  this  Government.  If  the  people 
do  not  rise  in  their  strength  and  put  back  these 
meddling  politicians,  the  latter  will  chloroform 
them  with  sectional  prejudice,  and  then  ride  over 
them  rough-shod  before  they  can  recover  from 
the  narcotic.  The  political  tricksters,  who  see 
their  power  slipping  from  their  grasp,  are  play- 
ing a  desperate  game,  and  will  not  '  lose  a  trick' 
if  they  can  help  it.  Let  honest  men  see  that  the 
double-dealers  do  not  1  stock  the  cards.' " 

88  November  27,  1861. 


350 


THE  AMERICAN"  CONFLICT. 


confided  to  him,  I  shall  be  found  as  ready 
and  determined  as  any  other  man  to  arrest 
him  in  his  Avrong  courses,  and  to  seek  re- 
dress of  our  grievances  by  any  and  all 
proper  means." 

Delaware  had,  in  1858,  chosen 
"William  Burton  (Democrat)  for  Gov- 
ernor by  7,758  votes  to  7,544  for  his 
Opposition  rival ;  Democracy  in  Del- 
aware being  almost  exclusively  based 
on  Slavery,  and  having  at  length  car- 
ried the  State  by  its  aid.  The  great 
body  of  the  party,  under  the  lead  of 
Senator  James  A.  Bayard,  had  sup- 
ported Breckinridge,  and  were  still 
in  sympathy  with  his  friends'  view  of 
6  Southern  Rights,'  but  not  to  the 
extent  of  approving  South  Carolina 
remedies.  Their  Legislature  met  at 
Dover,  January  2,  1861.  Gov.  Bur- 
ton, in  his  Message,  said : 

u  The  cause  of  all  the  trouble  is  the  per- 
sistent war  of  the  Abolitionists  upon  more 
than  two  billions  of  property ;  a  war  waged 
from  pulpits,  rostrums,  and  schools,  by  press 
and  people — all  teaching  that  Slavery  is  a 
crime  and  a  sin,  until  it  has  become  the 
opinion  of  a  portion  of  one  section  of  the 
country.  The  only  remedy  for  the  evils 
now  threatening  is  a  radical  chancre  of  pub- 
lic sentiment  in  regard  to  the  wrhole  ques- 
tion. The  North  should  retire  from  its  un- 
tenable position  immediately." 

Mr.  Dickenson,  Commissioner  from 
Mississippi,  having  addressed  the  two 
Houses  jointly  in  advocacy  of  Seces- 
sion, they  passed,  directly  thereafter, 
separately  and  unanimously,  the  fol- 
lowing : 

"  Resolved,  That>  having  extended  to  the 
Hon.  H.  Dickenson,  Commissioner  from 
Mississippi,  the  courtesy  due  him  as  the 
representative  of  a  sovereign  State  of  the 
confederacy,  as  well  as  to  the  State  he 
represents,  we  deem  it  proper,  and  due  to 
ourselves  and  the  people  of  Delaware,  to 
express  our  unqualified  disapproval  of  the 
remedy  for  the  existing  difficulties  suggested 
by  the  resolutions  of  the  Legislature  of  Mis- 
sissippi." 

39  To  Mr.  0.  J.  Victor,  author  of  '  The  History 
of  the  Southern  Rebellion?  who  knew  him  well, 
and  vouches  for  his  integrity.    (See  his  vol.  i., 


Before  the  opening  of  1861,  a  per- 
fect reign  of  terror  had  been  estab- 
lished throughout  the  Gulf  States. 
A  secret  order,  known  as  "  Knights 
of  the  Golden  Circle,"  or  as  "  Knights 
of  the  Columbian  Star,"  succeeding 
that  known,  six  or  seven  years  ear- 
lier, as  the  '  Order  of  the  Lone  Star,' 
having  for  its  ostensible  object  the 
acquisition  of  Cuba,  Mexico,  and  Cen- 
tral America,  and  the  establishment 
of  Slavery  in  the  two  latter,  but  really 
operating  in  the  interest  of  Disunion, 
had  spread  its  network  of  lodges, 
grips,  passwords,  and  alluring  myste- 
ry, all  over  the  South,  and  had  rami- 
fications even  in  some  of  the  cities  of 
the  adjoining  Free  States.  Other 
clubs,  more  or  less  secret,  were  known 
as  1  The  Precipitators,'  '  Vigilance 
Committee,'  '  Minute  Men,'  and  by 
kindred  designations ;  but  all  of 
them  were  sworn  to  fidelity  to 
'  Southern  Bights  ;'  while  their  mem- 
bers were  gradually  prepared  and 
ripened,  wherever  any  ripening  was 
needed,  for  the  task  of  treason.  Who- 
ever ventured  to  condemn  and  repu- 
diate Secession  as  the  true  and  sover- 
eign remedy  for  Southern  wrongs,  in 
any  neighborhood  where  Slavery  was 
dominant,  was  thenceforth  a  marked 
man,  to  be  stigmatized  and  hunted 
down  as  a  6  Lincoln ite,'  '  Submission- 
ist,'  or  'Abolitionist.'  One  refugee 
planter  from  Southern  Alabama,  him- 
self a  slaveholder,  but  of  northern 
birth,  who  barely  escaped  a  violent 
death,  because  of  an  intercepted  let- 
ter from  a  relative  in  Connecticut, 
urging  him  to  free  his  slaves  and 
return  to  the  North,  as  he  had  prom- 
ised, stated 39  that  he  had  himself  been 

p.  134.)  See  to  the  same  effect  the  testimony  of 
Hon.  A.  J.  Hamilton,  of  Texas,  Rev.  Mr.  Aughey, 
of  Mississippi,  and  hundreds  of  others.  South- 


THE   SLAVE    STATES   ON  SECESSION. 


351 


obliged  to  join  the  £  Minute  Men'  of 
bis  neighborhood  for  safety,  and  had 
thus  been  compelled  to  assist  in 
hanging  six  men  of  Northern  birth 
because  of  their  Union  sentiments; 
and  he  personally  knew  that  not  less 
than  one  hundred  men  had  been  hung 
in  his  section  of  the  State  and  in  the 
adjoining  section  of  Georgia,  during 
the  six  weeks  which  preceded  his  es- 
cape in  December,  1860. 

When,  therefore,  the  time  at  length 
arrived,40  in  pursuance  of  a  formal  in- 
vitation from  South  Carolina,  for  the 
assembling  at  Montgomery  of  a  Con- 
vention of  delegates  from  all  the 
States  which  should,  by  that  time, 
have  seceded  from  the  Union,  with  a 
view  to  the  formation  of  a  new  Con- 
federacy, the  States  which  had  united 
in  the  movement  were  as  follows : 

Free  Population 

States.  in  1860.  Slaves.  Total. 

South  Carolina   301,271  402,541  703.812 

Georgia   595,097  462,232  1,057,329 

Alabama   529,164  435,132  964,296 

Mississippi   354.700  436,696  791,396 

Louisiana   376,280  333,010  709,290 

Florida                               78,6S6        61.753  140,489 

Texas*   421,750  1S0,6S2  602,432 

Total  Seceded   2,656,948    2,312,046  4,96S,994 

Non-Seceded  Slave  States  5,633,005    1,638,297  7,271,302 

Total  Slave  States          8,289,953    3,950,343  12,240,296 

*  Texas  had  seceded;  but  her  delegates  had  not  reached 
Montgomery  when  the  time  arrived  for  organizing  the 
Convention. 


The  Slave  States  and  District  which 
had  not  united  in  the  movement,  were 
as  follows : 

Free  Population 

States.                             in  1860.  Slaves.  Total. 

Arkansas                        324,323  111,104  435,427 

Delaware                        110,420  1,798  112,218 

Kentuckv                       930,223  225,490  1,155,713 

Maryland                        599,846  87,188  687,034 

Missouri                       1,067,352  114,965  1,182,317 

North  Carolina                 661,586  331.081  992,667 

Tennessee                       834,063  275,784  1,109,847 

Virginia.                       1,105.192  490.8S7  1,596.079 

Dist.  Columbia                 71,S95  3,1S1  75,076 

Total                   5,704,900  1,641,478**  7,346,373 


So  that,  after  the  conspiracy  had 
had  complete  possession  of  the  South- 
ern mind  for  three  months,  with  the 
Southern  members  of  the  Cabinet, 
^aarly  all  the  Federal  officers,  most  of 
the  Governors  and  other  State  func- 
tionaries, and  seven-eighths  of  the 
prominent  and  active  politicians, 
pushing  it  on,  and  no  force  exerted 
against  nor  in  any  manner  threaten- 
ing to  resist  it,  a  majority  of  the 
Slave  States,  with  two-thirds  of  the 
free  population  of  the  entire  slave- 
holding  region,  was  openly  and  posi- 
tively adverse  to  it;  either  because 
they  regarded  the  alleged  grievances 
of  the  South  as  exaggerated  if  not 
unreal,  or  because  they  believed  that 
those  wrongs  would  rather  be  aggra- 
vated than  cured  by  Disunion. 


XXIII. 

"PEACE"  EFFOETS  AT  THE  NORTH. 


In  one  of  Beaumarchais's  come- 
dies, a  green  reveler  in  every  advan- 
tage and  luxury  that  noble  birth  and 
boundless  wealth  can  secure,  asks  an 

6rn  unanimity  (in  certain  localities)  for  Seces- 
sion, was  such  as  violence  and  terror  have  often 
produced  in  favor  of  the  most  universally  de- 
tested men  and  measures  all  over  the  world. 
Such  an  apparent  unanimity  was  doubtless  se- 


attendant  the  odd  question,  "What 
have  I  done  that  I  should  enjoy  all 
these  blessings?" — and  is  answered, 
with  courtly  deference  and  suavity, 

cured,  but  at  the  expense  of  not  less  than  ten 
thousand  precious  lives,  taken  because  the  vic- 
tims would  not  conceal  and  deny  their  invincible 
affection  for  their  whole  country. 
40  February  4,  1861. 


352 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"  Your  Highness  condescended  to  be 
born." 

The  people  of  the  United  States 
had,  in  an  unexceptionably  legal  and 
constitutional  manner,  chosen  for 
their  President  an  eminently  conser- 
vative, cautions,  moderate  citizen,  of 
blameless  life  and  unambitious  spirit, 
born  in  slaveholding  Kentucky,  but 
now  resident  in  free  Illinois,  who 
held,  with  Jefferson  and  nearly  all 
our  Revolutionary  sages  and  patriots, 
that  Human  Slavery  is  an  evil  which 
ought  not  to  be  diffused  and  strength- 
ened in  this  Nineteenth  Century  of 
Christian  light  and  love.  Hereupon, 
the  ruling  oligarchy  in  certain  States, 
who  had  done  nothing  to  prevent, 
but  much,  indirectly  yet  purposely, 
to  secure  this  result,  resolved  to  rend 
the  Republic  into  fragments,  tearing 
their  own  fragment  away  from  the  re- 
sidue. What  should  be  done  about  it  ? 

The  natural,  obvious  answer  springs 
at  once  to  every  unquivering  lip — 
"  Convince  the  disturbers  that  their 
only  safe  course  is  to  desist  and  behave 
themselves.  They  might  have  had  a 
President  who  is  not  a  Republican, 
had  they  chosen  :  having  done  their 
best  to  elect  one  who  is,  they  must 
now  accept  the  result  they  have  con- 
tributed to  insure,  until  the  evolu- 
tions of  four  years  shall  bring  around 
the  opportunity  for  another,  and,  if 
they  will,  a  more  acceptable  choice." 

Far  otherwise  was  the  actual  re- 
sponse of  the  Republic  to  her  spoiled 
children,  and  their  most  unreasonably 
factious  demonstration.  Instead  of 
treating  their  outbreak  as  culpable 
and  flagrant  disloyalty,  to  be  rebuk- 
ed, abandoned,  repented,  and  desist- 
ed from,  the  first  impulse  from  almost 
every  side  was  to  inquire  on  what 
taerms  and  by  what  means  they  could 


be  mollified,  bribed,  beseeched,  into 
remaining  peaceably  in  the  Union. 

This  was  but  following  in  the  beat- 
en track.  Vehement  threats  of  se- 
cession and  dissolution  were  among 
the  established  means  whereby  an 
aristocracy  of  less  than  one-tenth  of 
the  American  people  had  for  sixty 
years  swayed,  almost  uninterruptedly, 
the  destinies  of  the  Nation.  Why 
should  they  not  again  resort  to  the 
expedient  which  had  so  often  proved 
effectual  ?  Why  should  not  the  re- 
sponse be  substantially  the  same  now 
as  it  had  hitherto  been  ?  And  why 
should  not  those  whose  success  fur- 
nished the  pretext  for  this  treason 
be  charged  with  the  evil,  and  incul- 
pated as  themselves  the  traitors  ? 

Had  not,  for  a  generation,  the  up- 
holding of  a  rule  based  on  caste, 
and  a  denial  to  the  humblest  class 
of  all  political  rights  in  half  the 
Union,  and  of  all  social  and  civil,  as 
well  as  political,  rights  in  another 
third  of  it,  been  commended  and  glo- 
rified as  Democracy  f 

Had  not  every  assertion,  however 
broad  and  general,  of  the  right  of 
each  rational  being  to  "  life,  liberty, 
and  the  pursuit  of  happiness,"  been 
stigmatized  as  Sectionalism  ? 

Had  not  a  simple  adhesion  to  the 
policy  of  Jefferson  and  the  fathers, 
as  to  Slavery  in  the  Territories,  been 
denounced  as  Radicalism,  and  as 
"  making  war  on  fifteen  States  ?" 

Had  not  ravaging  and  subjugating 
foreign  lands,  with  intent  to  curse  them 
with  human  bondage,  been  glorified 
as  "  extending  the  area  of  Freedom  I" 

Had  not  the  maintenance  of  the 
rights  of  constitutional  majorities,  and 
of  the  duty  of  universal  submission  to 
the  popular  will,  constitutionally  as- 
certained and  declared,  been  stigma- 


DR.    CHANNIN6    SEEKS  TO 


DISABUSE    THE  SOUTH. 


353 


tized  as  inciting  to  disunion  and 
anarchy? 

And  who  could  expect  that  half 
a  century  of  such  utter  perversion  of 
the  plainest,  least  equivocal,  most  ob- 
vious terms,  should  not  bear  bitter 
fruit?  The  inebriate,  who  fancies 
the  square  in  which  he  lives  revolving 
about  him,  and  gravely  holds  his 
latch-key  in  hand,  waiting  till  his 
door  shall  in  due  order  present  itself, 
labors  under  substantially  the  same 
hallucination,  and  is  usually  certain 
to  cherish  it  until  he  awakes  to  pro- 
saic realities — to  bruises,  self-reproach, 
headache,  and  remorse.1 

Nearly  forty  years  ago,  the  great 
and  good  Charming,  after  listening  to 
Benjamin  Lundy,  wrote  to  Mr.  Web- 
ster in  apprehension  that  the  South 
would  regard  and  resent  any  attempt 
at  the  North  to  promote  or  hasten 

1  Von  Muller,  one  of  the  present  King  of 
Prussia's  grave  and  reverend  councilors  of 
state,  in  his  younger  and  wittier  days,  celebra- 
ted this  inversion  of  the  perceptive  faculties,  in 
verses  still  popular  in  Germany,  and  which  have 
been  rendered  into  English,  as  follows : 

"OUT  OP  THE  TAVERN". 
"  Out  of  the  tavern  I  've  just  stepped  to-night : 
Street !  you  are  caught  in  a  very  bad  plight ; 
Right  hand  and  left  are  both  out  of  place — 
Street !  you  are  drunk  ! — 't  is  a  very  clear  case  1 

"  Moon  !  't  is  a  very  queer  figure  you  cut — 
One  eye  is  staring,  whilst  t1  other  is  shut; 
Tipsy,  I  see;  and  you're  greatly  to  blame: 
Old  as  you  are,  ;t  is  a  terrible  shame. 

"  Then  the  street  lamps — what  a  scandalous  sight! 
None  of  them  soberly  standing  upright ; 
Rocking  and  swaggering — why,  on  my  word, 
Each  of  the  lamps  is  as  drunk  as  a  lord ! 

"All  is  confusion — now  isn't  it  odd, 
/am  the  only  thing  sober  abroad? 
Sure  it  were  rash  with  this  crew  to  remain ; 
Better  go  into  the  tavern  again." 

!  The  following  is  a  portion  of  Dr.  Channing's 
letter : 

"Boston,  May  14,  1848. 
"My  Dear  Sir: — I  wish  to  call  your  attention 
to  a  subject  of  general  interest. 

"A  little  while  ago,  Mr.  Lundy,  of  Baltimore, 

23 


the  removal  of  her  giant  curse  as  im- 
pelled by  hostility  or  ill-will,  though 
nothing  was  further  from  our  inten- 
tion.2 The  good  Doctor  can  scarcely 
have  read  with  adequate  attention, 
or  at  least  not  with  the  utmost  profit, 
the  urgent,  impassioned  adjurations 
of  the  demoniacs  to  the  Saviour  of 
mankind,  for  forbearance  and  'non- 
intervention.' "Let  us  alone,"  was 
their  habitual  entreaty :  "  What  have 
we  to  do  with  thee  ?"  "  Art  thou  come 
to  torment  us  before  the  time  ?"  ~No 
delicacy  of  handling,  no  gentleness 
of  treatment,  could  have  pacified 
them  :  they  must  be  left  undisturbed 
and  unobserved,  or  irritation  and  ex- 
citement were  unavoidable. 

Twenty  or  thirty  years  ago,  there 
existed  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  an  asso- 
ciation for  social  and  intellectual  en- 
joyment, known   as   4  The  Wistar 

the  editor  of  a  paper  called  '  The  Genius  of  Uni- 
versal Emancipation,'  visited  this  part  of  the 
country  to  stir  us  up  to  the  work  of  abolishing 
Slavery  at  the  South ;  and  the  intention  is  to  or- 
ganize societies  for  this  purpose.  I  know  of  few 
objects  into  which  I  should  enter  with  more  zeal; 
but  I  am  aware  how  cautiously  exertions  are  to 
be  made  for  it  in  this  part  of  the  country.  I 
know  that  our  Southern  brethren  interpret  every 
word  from  this  region  on  the  subject  of  Slavery 
as  an  expression  of  hostility.  I  would  ask  if 
they  cannot  be  brought  to  understand  us  better, 
and  if  we  can  do  any  good  till  we  remove  their 
misapprehensions.  It  seems  to  me  that,  before 
moving  in  this  matter,  we  ought  to  say  to  them 
distinctly:  '  We  consider  Slavery  as  your  calami- 
ty, not  your  crime ;  and  we  will  share  with  you 
the  burden  of  putting  an  end  to  it.  We  will  con- 
sent that  the  public  lands  shall  bo  appropriated 
to  this  object;  or  that  the  General  Government 
shall  be  clothed  with  power  to  apply  a  portion 
of  revenue  to  it.' 

"I  throw  out  these  suggestions  merely  to 
illustrate  my  views.  We  must  first  let  the 
Southern  States  see  that  we  are  their  friends  in 
this  affair;  that  we  sympathize  with  them,  and, 
from  principles  of  patriotism  and  philanthropy, 
are  wining  to  share  the  toil  and  expense  of  abol- 
ishing Slavery;  or  I  fear  our  interference  will 
avail  nothing.  I  am  the  more  sensitive  on  this 
subject,  from  my  increased  solicitude  for  the  pres- 
ervation of  the  Union.  I  know  no  public  inter- 
est so  important  as  this." —  Webster's  Works,  yoL 
v.,  p.  366. 


354 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Club.'  Many,  if  not  most,  of  the 
more  intelligent  and  cultivated  class 
belonged  to  it,  and  strangers  of  like 
breeding  were  freely  invited  to  its 
weekly  or  bi-weekly  meetings.  It 
was  its  rule  to  select,  at  each  gather- 
ing, some  subject  for  conversational 
discussion  at  the  next.  At  one  of 
these  meetings,  the  economic  results 
of  Slavery  were  incidentally  brought 
into  view;  when  the  few  remarks 
dropped  from  one  and  another  devel- 
oped a  decided  difference  of  opinion 
— the  native  Carolinians  expressing  a 
conviction  that  '  the  institution'  was 
profitable ;  while  two  or  three  mem- 
bers or  guests  of  Northern  birth  indi- 
cated a  contrary  impression.  Here- 
upon, some  one  asked,  '  Why  not 
select  this  as  the  topic  for  our  next 
meeting?'  'Agreed  !'  was  the  unbro- 
ken response  ;  and  the  point  was  set- 
tled. It  was  distinctly  stipulated  that 
no  ethical,  ethnological,  religious,  or 
other  aspect  of  the  main  problem, 
should  be  considered — nothing  but 
the  simple,  naked  question  — 4  Is  it 
economically  advantageous  to  a  com- 
munity to  hold  slaves?'  Hereupon, 
the  assemblage  quietly  dissolved. 

At  the  evening  designated  for  the 
next  regular  meeting,  the  '  Yankee' 
members  of  the  club  were  duly  on 
hand,  prepared  and  eager  for  the  ex- 
pected discussion ;  but  not  a  Carolin- 
ian was  present !  Some  old  head  had 
determined  that  no  such  discussion 
should  take  place  —  at  least,  in 
Charleston — and  had  given  a  hint 
which  had  operated  as  a  command. 
Though  the  interest  in  the  subject 
had  seemed  general  at  the  last  meet- 
ing, and  the  disposition  to  discuss  it 
mutual  and  cordial,  not  a  man  now 
appeared  to  speak  for  Slavery.  The 
6  Yankees'  enjoyed  or  endured  each 


other's  society  throughout  the  even- 
ing, sipped  their  coffee  with  due  de- 
corum, and  dispersed  at  the  proper 
hour,  without  an  opportunity  for  dis- 
cussion, leaving  the  proposed  debate 
to  stand  adjourned  over  to  the  open- 
ing of  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter, in  the  year  of  grace  1861. 

"Why  can't  you  let  Slavery 
alone  ?"  was  imperiously  or  queru- 
lously demanded  at  the  North, 
throughout  the  long  struggle  prece- 
ding that  bombardment,  by  men  who 
should  have  seen,  but  would  not,  that 
Slavery  never  let  the  North  alone, 
nor  thought  of  so  doing.  "Buy 
:  Louisiana  for  us !"  said  the  slave- 
holders. "With  pleasure."  "Now 
Florida!"  "Certainly."  Next:  "Vio- 
late your  treaties  with  the  Creeks  and 
Cherokees;  expel  those  tribes  from 
the  lands  they  have  held  from  time 
immemorial,  so  as  to  let  us  expand 
our  plantations."  "  So  said,  so  done." 
"  Now  for  Texas !"  "  You  have  it." 
"  Next,  a  third  more  of  Mexico !" 
"  Yours  it  is."  "  Now,  break  the 
Missouri  Compact,  and  let  Slavery 
wrestle  with  Free  Labor  for  the  vast 
region  consecrated  by  that  Compact 
to  Freedom  !"  "  Very  good.  What 
next?"  "Buy  us  Cuba,  for  One 
Hundred  to  One  Hundred  and  Fifty 
Millions."  "  We  have  tried  ;  but 
Spain  refuses  to  sell  it."  "  Then 
wrest  it  from  her  at  all  hazards!" 
And  all  this  time,  while  Slavery  was 
using  the  Union  as  her  catspaw — 
dragging  the  Republic  into  iniqui- 
tous wars  and  enormous  expendi- 
tures, and  grasping  empire  after 
empire  thereby — Northern  men  (or, 
more  accurately,  men  at  the  North) 
were  constantly  asking  why  people 
living  in  the  Free  States  could  not 
let  Slavery  alone,  mind  their  own 


HOW   SHOULD    SECESSION   BE  MET? 


355 


business,  and  expend  their  surplus 
philanthropy  on  the  poor  at  their 
own  doors,  rather  than  on  the  happy 
and  contented  slaves ! 


The  Slave  Power,  having  resolved 
to  destroy  the  Union — having  taken 
decided  steps  to  that  end — several 
States  having  definitively  seceded,  or 
prepared  to  secede,  from  the  Union, 
without  giving  the  least  intimation 
that  they  could  be  swerved  from  this 
purpose  by  any  pledge  or  act  what- 
ever, on  the  part  of  the  Free  States — 
what  was  the  North  to  do  ? 

"  Let  us  try  the  virtue  of  new  pro- 
testations, new  prostrations,  more 
groveling  abasements,"  was  the  in- 
stinctive, urgent,  unanimous  response 
of  that  large  portion  of  the  politicians 
and  traders  of  the  Free  States  who 
had  already  reduced  servility  to  a 
science.  Without  the  least  warrant, 
in  defiance  of  the  most  explicit  dec- 
larations, it  was  assumed  that  Seces- 
sion was  but  a  "  strike"  of  the  Slave 
Power  for  more  complete,  unresisted 
sway  over  the  Union,  rather  than  for 
utter  and  final  escape  from  it. 

Whoever  has  carefully  considered 
the  platforms  and  the  action  of  the 

3  At  a  great  public  meeting  held  at  Mobile, 
Alabama,  November  15,  1860,  a  "Declaration  of 
Causes,"  twenty -two  in  number,  was  put  forth ; 
from  which  we  select  the  following : 

"  The  following  brief,  but  truthful  history  of 
the  Republican  party,  its  acts  and  purposes,  af- 
fords an  answer  to  these  questions : 

"  It  claims  to  abolish  Slavery  in  the  districts, 
forts,  arsenals,  dockyards,  and  other  places  ced- 
ed to  the  United  States.  To  abolish  the  inter- 
State  Slave-Trade,  and  thus  cut  off  the  Northern 
Slave  States  from  their  profits  of  production,  and 
deprive  the  Southern  of  their  sources  of  supply 
of  labor.     *     *  * 

"  It  has  denied  the  extradition  of  murderers, 
marauders,  and  other  felons. 

"It  has  concealed  and  shielded  the  murderer 
of  masters  or  owners,  in  pursuit  of  fugitive 
slaves.     *     *  * 

*  It  has  advocated  negro  equality,  and  made  it 


respective  parties  which  confronted 
each  other  during  the  canvass  and  in 
the  election  of  1860,  must  realize 
that  Secession  could  be  met  in  but 
one  of  four  ways  : 

1.  By  substantial  acquiescence  in 
the  movement,  and  in  its  proposed 
result. 

2.  By  proffering  such  new  conces- 
sions and  guarantees  to  Slavery  as 
should  induce  the  conspirators  to  de- 
sist from  their  purpose,  and  return  to 
loyalty  and  the  Union. 

3.  By  treating  it  as  Rebellion  and 
Treason,  and  putting  it  down,  if  need 
be,  by  the  strong  arm. 

4.  By  so  acting  and  speaking  as  to 
induce  a  pause  in  the  movement,  and 
permit  an  appeal  u  to  Philip  sober" — 
from  the  South  inflamed  by  passion- 
ate appeals  and  frenzied  accusations,3 
to  the  South,  enlightened,  calmed, 
and  undeceived,  by  a  few  months  of 
friendly,  familiar  discussion,  and  ear- 
nest expostulation. 

The  first  of  these  alternatives  had 
few  open  advocates  in  the  Free  States ; 
but  there  were  some  who  even  went 
the  length  of  declaring  Secession  a 
constitutional  right,4  to  be  exercised 
by  any  State  whenever  her  own  con- 

the  ground  of  positive  legislation,  hostile  to  the 
Southern  States. 

"  It  opposes  protection  to  Slave  property  on 
the  high  seas,  and  has  justified  piracy  itself  in 
the  case  of  the  Creole.     *     *  * 

"  It  has  invaded  Virginia,  and  shed  the  blood 
of  her  citizens  on  her  own  soil.     *     *  * 

"It  has  announced  its  purpose  of  total  aboli- 
tion in  the  States  and  everywhere,  as  well  as  in 
the  territories,  and  districts,  and  other  places 
ceded." 

*  The  New  York  Herald,  of  November  11,  1860, 
closes  a  glowing  picture  of  the  growth,  condi- 
tion, and  prospects  of  the  city  of  New  York,  as 
follows  : 

"  If,  however,  Northern  fanaticism  should  tri- 
umph over  us,  and  the  Souttiern  States  should  ex- 
ercise their  undeniable  right  to  secede  from  the 
Union,  then  the  city  of  New  York,  the  river 
counties,  the  State  of  New  Jersey,  and,  very 


356 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


victions  of  safety  and  interest  should 
prompt  her  to  that  resort — or,  if  not 
exactly  a  right,  then  a  heroic  remedy 
for  grievous  wrongs,  which  could  not 
be  practically  resisted.5 

The  second  was  urgently  advoca- 
ted by  the  entire  "  Democratic"  and 
"  Conservative"  strength  of  the 
Free  States,  and  by  nearly  all  that 
still  openly  clung  to  the  Union  in 
the  Slave  States. 

The  third  was  the  natural,  sponta- 
neous impulse  of  the  great  mass  of 
Republicans,  who  could  not  see  why 
their  adversaries  should  not  submit 
unqualifiedly  to  the  result  of  a  fair 
and  honest  election,  as  th#y  had  uni- 
formly done,  constitutionally  resisting 
any  unwarranted  act  or  attempt  of 
the  President  elect  or  his  supporters, 
whenever  the  occasion  should  arise. 
But  they  found  it  difficult  to  realize 
that  those  who  still  retained  predomi- 
nance in  both  branches  of  Congress, 
and  in  the  Supreme  Court  —  who 
might  have  had,  moreover,  a  Demo- 
cratic President,  had  they  chosen  to 
support  the  candidate  of  a  majority 
of  that  party — and  who  had  still  the 
active  and  earnest  sympathy  of  a 
large  majority  of  the  American  Peo- 


ple— could  cherish  any  real  fears  of 
usurpation  and  aggression  from  the 
numerical  minority,  or  the  President 
they  had  been  permitted  to  choose. 
It  was  with  little  patience  that  the 
great  body  of  the  Republicans  heard 
suggestions  from  any  of  their  lead- 
ers or  oracles  of  overtures  looking  to 
"conciliation"  and  " peace"  through 
new  concessions,  in  the  face  of  the 
now  chronic  menace  of  Disunion. 

The  asserted  right  of  Secession  is 
one  which  no  government  or  nation 
ever  did  or  can  concede  without  sign- 
ing its  own  death-warrant.  When 
the  Federal  Constitution  was  before 
the  States  for  ratification,  vehemently 
and  formidably  opposed,  and  its  adop- 
tion, in  several  States,  for  a  time  suc- 
cessfully resisted,  there  was  manifest 
danger  of  its  failure  in  New  York,  as 
well  as  in  two  other  great  leading 
States,  Virginia  and  Massachusetts. 
To  the  New  York  Convention,  sit- 
ting at  Poughkeepsie,  the  people  had 
returned  a  majority  of  delegates  hos- 
tile to  ratification.  The  friends  of 
the  Constitution  were  constrained  to 
resort  to  delay,  to  policy,  and  to  prop- 
ositions of  amendment,  to  overcome 
or  wear  out  the  resistance  they  had 


likely,  Connecticut,  would  separate  from  those 
New  England  and  Western  States,  where  the 
black  man  is  put  upon  a  pinnacle  above  the  white. 
New  York  City  is  for  the  Union  first,  and  the 
gallant  and  chivalrous  South  afterward." 

5  A  correspondent  of  the  Boston  Courier,  of 
November,  1860,  after  contending  that  the 
South  has  ample  cause  for  seceding,  says: 

"It  is  perfectly  competent  for  South  Carolina 
to  notify  the  President  officially,  that  she  no 
longer  belongs  to  the  confederacy.  This  she 
can  do  at  any  moment.  The  Federal  officers, 
from  the  district  judge,  collector,  and  marshal, 
to  the  humblest  postmaster,  can  resign  their 
places.  Everybody  agrees  that  this  can  readily 
be  done  at  once,  and  without  difficulty  or  any 
quarrel.  Suppose  so  much  to  be  done,  and  that 
President  Buchanan  should  appoint  a  new 
Judge  and  a  new  Collector,  who  should  repair 


to  Charleston  and  demand  the  payment  of  duties 
upon  any  imported  goods.  Suppose,  upon  a  re- 
fusal to  pay  the  duties  exacted,  the  Collector 
should  do  what  all  the  Collectors  are  bound  to 
do — seize  the  goods.  The  owner  would  have 
to  furnish  a  bond  to  the  government  for  their 
value.  The  owner  would  protest  against  giving 
one,  and  only  give  it,  as  the  lawyers  say,  when 
in  duress.  In  any  suit  upon  such  a  bond,  when 
the  question  of  coercion  in  making  it  was  tried, 
who  would  compose  the  jury  ?  They  must  be- 
long to  South  Carolina.  We  have  made  these 
suggestions  simply  to  satisfy  any  reader  how 
very  easily  the  mere  matter  of  peaceable  secession 
can  be  accomplished,  and  how  futile  would  be  all 
attempts  to  enforce  Federal  laws  in  any  State 
by  the  aid  of  officers  appointed  from  abroad. 

"Practically,  therefore,  a  peaceable  secession 
will  be  very  apt  to  work  a  final  separation  of  tho 
State  which  desires  it,  and,  ultimately,  a  general 
dissolution  of  the  confederacy." 


SECESSION  NOT 


A    STATE  RIGHT. 


357 


encountered.  In  this  dilemma,  Al- 
exander Hamilton  wrote  to  James 
Madison  to  ask  if  the  Constitution 
might  not  be  accepted  provisionally, 
with  liberty  to  recede  from  the 
Union  formed  by  it,  if  experience 
should  justify  the  apprehensions  of 
its  adversaries.  Mr.  Madison  prompt- 
ly and  wisely  responded 6  in  the  nega- 
tive, stating  that  such  conditional  ac- 
ceptance had  been  agitated  at  Rich- 
mond, and  rejected  as,  in  fact,  no 
ratification  at  all.  In  the  same  spir- 
it, Mr.  Clay  likened  our  Constitu- 
tional Union  to  a  marriage,  which  is 
either  indissoluble  at  the  pleasure  of 
one  or  both  parties,  or  else  no  mar- 
riage at  all. 

The  Virginia  Convention  which 
ratified  the  Federal  Constitution,  in 
the  preamble  to  its  Ordinance  of 
Ratification,  declared  that  it  was  the 
"  impression"  of  the  People  of  their 
State  that  the  powers  granted  by  said 
Constitution,  being  derived  from  the 
People  of  the  United  States,  may 
rightfully  be  resumed  by  them,  when- 
ever those  powers  shall  be  perverted 
to  their  injury  or  oppression.  But 

6  Col.  Hamilton,  having  first  set  before  Mr. 
Madison  the  formidable  obstacles  to  ratification, 
proceeded  as  follows : 

"  You  will  understand  that  the  only  qualifica- 
tion will  be  the  reservation  of  the  right  to  recede, 
in  case  our  amendments  have  not  been  decided 
upon  in  one  of  the  modes  pointed  out  by  the  Con- 
stitution within  a  certain  number  of  years — per- 
haps five  or  seven.  If  this  can,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, be  admitted  as  a  ratification,  I  do  not 
fear  any  further  consequences." 

But  Madison  knew  no  i/s  in  the  ratification 
of  our  federal  pact.  His  reply,  in  full,  is  as  fol- 
lows: 

"New  York,  Sunday  Evening. 

"My  Dear  Sir: — Yours  of  yesterday  is  this 
instant  come  to  hand,  and  I  have  but  a  few  min- 
utes to  answer  it. 

"I  am  sorry  that  your  situation  obliges  you  to 
listen  to  propositions  of  the  nature  you  describe. 
My  opinion  is,  that  a  reservation  of  a  right  to 
withdraw,  if  amendments  be  not  decided  on  un- 
der the  form  of  the  Constitution  within  a  certain 


this  is  nothing  else  than  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  the  republican 
system — that  governments  are  made 
for  the  People,  not  the  People  for 
governments ;  and  that  the  People, 
consequently,  may,  from  time  to  time, 
modify  their  forms  of  government  in 
accordance  with  their  riper  experi- 
ence and  their  enlightened  convic- 
tions— respecting,  of  course,  the  lim- 
itations and  safeguards  they  may 
have  seen  fit  to  establish.  This  right 
had  been  set  forth,  with  remarkable 
clearness  and  force,  in  the  preamble 
to  the  Declaration  of  Independence, 
and  by  many  of  our  patriot  sages  in 
later  days.  John  Quincy  Adams — * 
never  remarkably  inclined  to  pop- 
ularize forms  of  government  —  had 
distinctly  affirmed  it  in  a  speech  in 
Congress ;  so  had  Abraham  Lincoln, 
in  one  of  his  debates  with  Senator 
Douglas.  But  the  right  of  a  people 
to  modify  their  institutions  is  one 
thing,  and  the  right  of  a  small  frac- 
tion or  segment  of  a  people  to  break 
up  and  destroy  a  Nation,  is  quite  an- 
other. The  former  is  Reform;  the 
latter  is  Revolution.7 

time,  is  a  conditional  ratification ;  that  it  does  not 
make  New  York  a  member  of  the  new  Union; 
and,  consequently,  that  she  could  not  be  received 
on  that  plan.  Compacts  must  be  reciprocal — 
this  principle  would  not,  in  such  a  case,  be  pre- 
served. The  Constitution  requires  an  adoption, 
in  toto  and  forever.  It  has  been  so  adopted  by 
the  other  States.  An  adoption  for  a  limited  time 
would  be  as  defective  as  an  adoption  of  some  of 
the  Articles  only.  In  short,  any  condition  what- 
ever must  vitiate  the  ratification.  What  the  new 
Congress,  by  virtue  of  the  power  to  admit  new 
States,  may  be  able  and  disposed  to  do  in  such 
case,  1  do  not  inquire,  as  I  suppose  that  is  not 
the  material  point  at  present.  I  have  not  a  mo- 
ment to  add  more  than  my  fervent  wishes  for 
your  success  and  happiness.  The  idea  of  reserv- 
ing a  right  to  withdraw  was  started  at  Rich- 
mond, and  considered  as  a  conditional  ratifica- 
tion, which  was  itself  abandoned  as  worse  than 
a  rejection.     Yours,      James  Madison,  Jr." 

7  Hon.  Reverdy  Johnson,  who  lived  in  the 
same  house  with  John  C.  Calhoun  from  1845  to 
1849,  and  enjoyed  a  very  close  intimacy  with 


358 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


But,  while  it  was  impossible  to 
concede  the  asserted  right  of  Seces- 
sion— that  is,  of  State  withdrawal  at 
pleasure  from  the  Union — (for,  even 
if  the  Constitution  is  to  be  regarded 
as  nothing  more  than  a  compact,  it  is 
evident — as  Mr.  Jefferson  observed,8 
in  speaking  of  our  old  Articles  of 
Confederation  :  "  When  two  parties 
make  a  compact,  there  results  to  each 
the  power  of  compelling  the  other  to 
execute  it") — it  is  not  impossible  so 
to  expound  and  apply  the  original, 
organic,  fundamental  right  of  a  peo- 
ple to  form  and  modify  their  political 
institutions,  as  to  justify  the  Free 
States  in  consenting  to  the  withdraw- 
al from  the  Union  of  the  Slave,  pro- 
vided it  could  be  made  to  appear  that 
such  was  the  deliberate,  intelligent, 
unconstrained  desire  of  the  great 
body  of  their  people.  And  the  South 
had  been  so  systematically,  so  out- 
rageously, deluded  by  demagogues  on 
both  sides  of  the  Slave  line,  with  re- 
gard to  the  nature  and  special  im- 
portance of  the  Union  to  the  North 
— it  being  habitually  represented  as 
an  immense  boon  conferred  on  the 
Free  States  by  the  Slave,  whose  with- 
drawal would  whelm  us  all  in  bank- 


ruptcy and  ruin — that  it  might  do 
something  toward  allaying  the  South- 
ern inflammation  to  have  it  distinctly 
and  plainly  set  forth  that  the  North 
had  no  desire  to  enforce  upon  the 
South  the  maintenance  of  an  abhor- 
red, detested  Union.  Accordingly — 
the  second  day  after  Mr.  Lincoln's 
election  had  been  assured  at  the  polls 
— the  following  leading  article  ap- 
peared9 in  The  New  York  Tribune: 

"  Going  to  Go. — The  people  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  have  indicated,  according  to  the 
forms  prescribed  by  the  Constitution,  their 
desire  that  Abraham  Lincoln,  of  Illinois, 
shall  be  their  next  President,  and  Hannibal 
Hamlin,  of  Maine,  their  Vice-President.  A 
very  large  plurality  of  the  popular  vote  has 
been  cast  for  them,  and  a  decided  majority 
of  Electors  chosen,  who  will  undoubtedly 
vote  for  and  elect  them  on  the  first  Wednes- 
day in  December  next.  The  electoral  votes 
will  be  formally  sealed  up  and  forwarded  to 
Washington,  there  to  be  opened  and  count- 
ed, on  a  given  day  in  February  next,  in  tho 
presence  of  both  Houses  of  Congress ;  and 
it  will  then  be  the  duty  of  Mr.  John  0. 
Breckinridge,  as  President  of  the  Senate,  to 
declare  Lincoln  and  Hamlin  duly  elected 
President  and  Vice-President  of  these  Uni- 
ted States. 

"  Some  people  do  not  like  this,  as  is  very 
natural.  Dogberry  discovered,  a  good  while 
ago,  that  1  When  two  ride  a  horse,  one  must 
ride  behind.'  That  is  not  generally  deemed 
the  preferable  seat;  but  the  rule  remains 
unaffected  by  that  circumstance.  We  know 
how  to  sympathize  with  the  defeated ;  for 


him,  in  a  letter  to  Edward  Everett,  dated  Balti- 
more, June  24,  1861,  says: 

"  He  [Calhoun]  did  me  the  honor  to  give  me 
much  of  his  confidence,  and  frequently  his  Nulli- 
fication doctrine  was  the  subject  of  conversation.  | 
Time  and  time  again  have  I  heard  him,  and  with 
ever-increased  surprise  at  his  wonderful  acute-  I 
ness,  defend  it  on  constitutional  grounds,  and 
distinguish  it,  in  that  respect,  from  the  doctrine  I 
of  Secession.  This  last  he  never,  with  me,  placed  i 
on  any  other  ground  than  that  of  revolution,  j 
This,  he  said,  was  te  destroy  the  Government; 
and  no  Constitution,  the  work  of  sane  men,  ever 
provided  for  its  own  destruction.    The  other  was  ! 
to  preserve  it — was,  practically,  but  to  amend  it, 
and  in  a  constitutional  mode." 

To  the  same  effect,  Hon.  Howell  Cobb — since, 
a  most  notable  Secessionist — in  a  letter  to  the 
citizens  of  Macon,  Ga.,  in  1851,  said: 

u  When  asked  to  concede  the  right  of  a  State 


to  secede  at  pleasure  from  the  Union,  with  or 
without  just  cause,  we  are  called  upon  to  admit 
that  the  framers  of  the  Constitution  did  that 
which  was  never  done  by  any  other  people  pos- 
sessed of  their  good  sense  and  intelligence — that 
is,  to  provide,  in  the  very  organization  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, for  its  own  dissolution.  It  seems  to  me 
that  such  a  course  would  not  only  have  been  an 
anomalous  proceeding,  but  wholly  inconsistent 
with  the  wisdom  and  sound  judgment  which 
marked  the  deliberations  of  those  wise  and 
good  men  wrho  framed  our  Federal  Government. 
While  I  freely  admit  that  such  an  opinion  is  en- 
tertained by  many  for  whose  judgment  I  enter- 
tain the  highest  respect,  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
declaring  that  the  convictions  of  my  own  judg- 
ment are  well  settled,  that  no  such  principle 
was  contemplated  in  the  adoption  of  our  Consti- 
tution." 

"Letter  to  CoL  Carrington,  April  4.  1787. 
9  November  9.  1860. 


OFFER    TO  LET 


THE    SOUTH  GO. 


359 


we  remember  how  we  felt,  when  Adams 
was  defeated ;  and  Clay,  and  Scott,  and 
Fremont.  It  is  decidedly  pleasanter  to  be 
on  the  winning  side,  especially  when — as 
now — it  happens  also  to  be  the  right  side. 

"We  sympathize  with  the  afflicted;  but 
we  cannot  recommend  them  to  do  any  thing 
desperate.  "What  is  the  use?  They  are 
beaten  now ;  they  may  triumph  next  time  : 
in  fact,  they  have  generally  had  their  own 
way  :  had  they  been  subjected  to  the  disci- 
pline of  adversity  so  often  as  we  have,  they 
would  probably  bear  it  with  more  philoso- 
phy, and  deport  themselves  more  befittingly. 
We  live  to  learn  :  and  one  of  the  most  diffi- 
cult acquirements  is  that  of  meeting  reverses 
with  graceful  fortitude. 

"  The  telegraph  informs  us  that  most  of  the 
Cotton  States  are  meditating  a  withdrawal 
from  the  Union,  because  of  Lincoln's  elec- 
tion. Very  well :  they  have  a  right  to  medi- 
tate, and  meditation  is  a  profitable  em- 
ployment of  leisure.  We  have  a  chronic, 
invincible  disbelief  in  Disunion  as  a  remedy 
for  either  Northern  or  Southern  grievances. 
We  cannot  see  any  necessary  connection  be- 
tween the  alleged  disease  and  this  ultra- 
heroic  remedy ;  still,  we  say,  if  any  one  sees 
fit  to  meditate  Disunion,  let  him  do  so  un- 
molested. That  was  a  base  and  hypocritic 
row  that  was  once  raised,  at  Southern  dic- 
tation, about  the  ears  of  John  Quincy  Adams, 
because  he  presented  a  petition  for  the  dis- 
solution of  the  Union.  The  petitioner  had 
a  right  to  make  the  request;  it  was  the 
Member's  duty  to  present  it.  And  now,  if 
the  Cotton  States  consider  the  value  of  the 
Union  debatable,  we  maintain  their  perfect 
right  to  discuss  it.  Nay :  we  hold,  with 
Jefferson,  to  the  inalienable  right  of  commu- 
nities to  alter  or  abolish  forms  of  govern- 
ment that  have  become  oppressive  or  inju- 
rious;  and,  if  the  Cotton  States  shall  decide 
that  they  can  do  better  out  of  the  Union 
than  in  it,  we  insist  on  letting  them  go  in 
peace.  The  right  to  secede  may  be  a  revo- 
lutionary one,  but  it  exists  nevertheless ; 
and  we  do  not  see  how  one  party  can  have 
a  right  to  do  what  another  party  has  a  right 
to  prevent.  We  must  ever  resist  the  assert- 
ed right  of  any  State  to  remain  in  the  Union, 
and  nullify  or  defy  the  laws  thereof :  to 
withdraw  from  the  Union  is  quite  another 
matter.  And,  whenever  a  considerable  sec- 
tion of  our  Union  shall  deliberately  resolve 
to  go  out,  we  shall  resist  all  coercive  mea- 
sures designed  to  keep  it  in.  We  hope  never 
to  live  in  a  republic,  whereof  one  section  is 
pinned  to  the  residue  by  bayonets. 

"  But,  while  we  thus  uphold  the  practical 
liberty,  if  not  the  abstract  right,  of  seces- 
sion, we  must  insist  that  the  step  be  taken, 
if  it  ever  shall  be,  with  the  deliberation  and 
gravity  befitting  so  momentous  an  issue. 


Let  ample  time  be  given  for  reflection ;  let 
the  subject  be  fully  canvassed  before  the 
people ;  and  let  a  popular  vote  be  taken  in 
every  case,  before  Secession  is  decreed.  Let 
the  people  be  told  just  why  they  are  asked 
to  break  up  the  confederation ;  let  them 
have  both  sides  of  the  question  fully  present- 
ed ;  let  them  reflect,  deliberate,  then  vote  ; 
and  let  the  act  of  Secession  be  the  echo  of 
an  unmistakable  popular  fiat.  A  judgment 
thus  rendered,  a  demand  for  separation  so 
backed,  would  either  be  acquiesced  in  with- 
out the  effusion  of  blood,  or  those  who 
rushed  upon  carnage  to  defy  and  defeat  it, 
would  place  themselves  clearly  in  the  wrong. 

"  The  measures  now  being  inaugurated  in 
the  Cotton  States,  with  a  view  (apparently) 
to  Secession,  seem  to  us  destitute  of  gravity 
and  legitimate  force.  They  bear  the  unmis- 
takable impress  of  haste — of  passion — of  dis- 
trust of  the  popular  judgment.  They  seem 
clearly  intended  to  precipitate  the  South 
into  rebellion  before  the  baselessness  of  the 
clamors  which  have  misled  and  excited  her, 
can  be  ascertained  by  the  great  body  of  her 
people.  We  trust  that  they  will  be  con- 
fronted with  calmness,  with  dignity,  and 
with  unwavering  trust  in  the  inherent 
strength  of  the  Union,  and  the  loyalty  of 
the  American  people." 

Several  other  Republican  journal  B, 
including  some  of  the  most  influen- 
tial, held  similar  language,  and  main- 
tained a  position  not  unlike  that  of 
The  Tribune.  None  of  them  coun- 
tenanced the  right  of  a  State  to  secede 
from  the  Union,  or  regarded  it  as 
more  defensible  than  the  right  of  a 
stave  to  secede  from  the  cask  which 
it  helps  to  form ;  nor  did  they  regard 
the  effervescence  now  exhibited  at 
the  South  as  demonstrating  a  real 
desire  on  the  part  of  her  people  to 
break  up  the  Union.  But  they  said 
impressively  to  that  people:  "Be 
calm;  let  us  be  heard;  allow  time 
for  deliberation  and  the  removal  of 
prejudice  ;  unite  with  us  in  calling  a 
Convention  of  the  States  and  People  ; 
and,  if  that  Convention  shall  be  un- 
able to  agree  on  such  amendments  to 
the  Constitution  as  shall  remove 
existing  discontent,  and  your  people 
shall  still,  with  any   approach  to 


360 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


unanimity,  insist  on  disunion,  you 
shall  go  in  peace.  Neither  Congress 
nor  the  President  has  any  power  to 
sanction  a  dissolution  of  the  Union ; 
but  wait  for  and  unite  in  a  Conven- 
tion, and  our  differences  shall  some- 
how be  adjusted  without  fraternal 
bloodshed." 

With  the  same  general  object,  but 
contemplating  a  different  method  of 
attaining  it,  the  veteran  Editor  of 
The  Albany  Evening  Journal  — 
whose  utterances  were  widely  regard- 
ed as  deriving  additional  consequence 
from  his  intimate  and  almost  life-long 
association  with  Gov.  Seward — took 
ground,  at  an  early  day,  in  favor  of 
concessions  calculated — at  all  events, 
intended — to  calm  the  ebullition  of 
Southern  blood.  Being  sharply  criti- 
cised therefor,  by  several  of  his  con- 
temporaries, he  replied10  to  them 
generally  as  follows : 

"  The  suggestions,  in  a  recent  number  of 
The  Journal,  of  a  basis  of  settlement  of  dif- 
ferences between  the  North  and  the  South, 
have,  in  awakening  attention  and  discussion, 
accomplished  their  purpose.  We  knew  that 
in  no  quarter  would  these  suggestions  be 
more  distasteful  than  with  our  own  most 
valued  friends.  We  knew  that  the  occasion 
would  be  regarded  as  inopportune.  We 
knew  also  the  provocations  in  the  contro- 
versy were  with  our  opponents.  Nothing 
ia  easier,  certainly,  than  to  demonstrate  the 
rightfulness  of  the  position  of  the  Republican 
party — a  party  that  was  created  by  the 
repeal  of  the  Missouri  Compromise,  and 
owes  its  recent  triumph  to  the  determina- 
tion of  Slavery  to  extend  and  perpetuate  its 
political  dominion,  aided  by  two  successive 
and  besotted  Federal  Administrations. 

"  But,  unfortunately,  the  pending  issue  is 
to  be  decided  irrespective  of  its  merits.  The 
election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  is  the  pretext  for, 
and  not  the  cause  of,  Disunion.  The  design 
originated  with  Mr.  Calhoun;  who,  when  he 
failed  to  be  chosen  President  of  the  whole 
Union,  formed  the  scheme  of  dividing  it,  and 
devoted  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  training 
the  South  up  to  the  treason  now  impending. 
Mr.  Calhoun  had,  in  McDuffie,  Hayne,  and 
other  statesmen,  eloquent  auxiliaries.  The 


contagion  extended  to  other  Southern  States ; 
and,  by  diligence,  activity,  discipline,  and 
organization,  the  whole  people  of  the  Gulf 
States  have  come  to  sympathize  with  their 
leaders.  The  masses  are,  in  their  readiness 
for  civil  war,  in  advance  of  their  leaders. 
They  have  been  educated  to  believe  us  their 
enemies.  This  has  been  effected  by  system- 
atic misrepresentations  of  the  sentiments 
and  feelings  of  the  North.  The  result  of 
all  this  is,  that,  while  the  Southern  people, 
with  a  unanimity  not  generally  understood, 
are  impatient  for  Disunion,  more  than  one 
half  of  them  are  acting  in  utter  ignorance  of 
the  intentions,  views,  and  feelings,  of  the 
North.  Nor  will  the  leaders  permit  them 
to  be  disabused.  Those  leaders  know  that 
I  Mr.  Lincoln  will  administer  the  Govern- 
i  ment  in  strict  and  impartial  obedience  to  the 
I  Constitution  and  laws,  seeking  only  the 
|  safety  and  welfare  of  the  whole  people, 
through  the  prosperity  and  glory  of  the 
Union.  For  this  reason,  they  precipitate 
the  conflict;  fearing  that,  if  they  wait  for  a 
provocation,  none  will  be  furnished,  and 
that,  without  fuel,  their  fires  must  be  extin- 
guished. 

M  This  question,  involving  the  integrity  of 
the  Union  and  the  experiment  of  self-gov- 
ernment, we  repeat,  will  be  decided  irre- 
spective of  its  merits.  Three  miserable 
months  of  a  miserable  Administration  must 
'drag  its  slow  length  along'  before  the  Re- 
publican Administration  can  act  or  be  heard. 
During  these  three  months,  its  baleful  influ- 
ences will  be  seen  and  felt  in  the  demorali- 
zation of  popular  sentiment.  Its  functiona- 
ries and  its  journals  will  continue  to  malign 
the  North  and  inflame  the  South ;  leaving, 
on  the  4th  of  March,  to  their  successors  an 
estate  as  wretchedly  encumbered  and  dilapi- 
dated as  imbecile  or  spendthrift  ever  be- 
queathed. Mismanaged  as  that  estate  has 
been,  and  wretched  as  its  present  condition  is, 
we  regard  it  as  an  inestimable,  priceless,  and 
precious  inheritance — an  inheritance  which 
we  are  unwilling  to  see  wholly  squandered 
before  we  come  into  possession. 

"  To  our  dissenting  friends,  who  will  not 
question  our  devotion  to  freedom,  however 
much  they  may  mistrust  our  judgment,  we 
submit  a  few  earnest  admonitions : 

"  1.  There  is  imminent  danger  of  a  disso- 
lution of  the  Union. 

"2.  This  danger  originated  in  the  am- 
bition and  cupidity  of  men  who  desire  a 
Southern  despotism ;  and  in  the  fanatic  zeal 
of  Northern  Abolitionists,  who  seek  the 
emancipation  of  slaves  regardless  of  conse- 
quences. 

"3.  The  danger  can  only  be  averted  by 
such  moderation  and  forbearance  as  will 


"November  30,  1860. 


MR     THURLOW  "WEED 


FOR  CONCILIATION. 


301 


draw  out,  strengthen,  and  combine  the 
Union  sentiment  of  the  whole  country. 

"The  Disunion  sentiment  is  paramount  in 
at  least  seven  States;  while  it  divides  and 
distracts  as  many  more.  Nor  is  it  wise  to 
deceive  ourselves  with  the  impression  that 
the  South  is  not  in  earnest.  It  is  in  earnest ; 
and  the  sentiment  has  taken  hold  of  all 
classes  with  such  blind  vehemence  as  to 
'crush  out'  the  Union  sentiment. 

"Now,  while,  as  has  been  said,  it  is  easy 
to  prove  all  this  unjust  and  wrong,  we  have 
to  deal  with  things  as  they  are — with  facts 
as  they  exist — with  people  blinded  by  pas- 
sion. Peaceable  Secession  is  not  intended ; 
nor  is  it  practicable,  even  if  such  were  its 
object.  Mad,  however,  as  the  South  is,  there 
is  a  Union  sentiment  there  worth  cherish- 
ing. It  will  develop  and  expand  as  fast  as 
the  darkness  and  delusion,  in  relation  to  the 
feelings  of  the  North,  can  be  dispelled.  This 
calls  for  moderation  and  forbearance.  We 
do  not,  when  our  dwelling  is  in  flames,  stop 
to  ascertain  whether  it  was  the  work  of  an 
incendiary  before  we  extinguish  the  fire. 
Hence  our  suggestions  of  a  basis  of  adjust- 
ment, without  the  expectation  that  they 
would  be  accepted,  in  terms,  by  either  sec- 
tion, but  that  they  might  possibly  inaugu- 
rate a  movement  in  that  direction.  The 
Union  is  worth  preserving.  And,  if  worth 
preserving,  suggestions  in  its  behalf,  how- 
ever crude,  will  not  be  contemned.  A  vic- 
torious party  can  afford  to  be  tolerant — not, 
as  our  friends  assume,  in  the  abandonment 
or  abasement  of  its  principles  or  character — 
but  in  efforts  to  correct  and  disabuse  the 
minds  of  those  who  misunderstand  both. 

"  Before  a  final  appeal — before  a  resort  to 
the  'rough  frown  of  war' — we  should  like  to 
6ee  a  Convention  of  the  People,  consisting 
of  delegates  appointed  by  the  States.  After 
more  than  seventy  years  of  'wear  and  tear,' 
of  collision  and  abrasion,  it  should  be  no 
cause  of  wonder  that  the  machinery  of  gov- 
ernment is  found  weakened,  or  out  of  repair, 
or  even  defective.  Nor  would  it  be  found 
unprofitable  for  the  North  and  South,  bring- 
ing their  respective  griefs,  claims,  and  pro- 
posed reforms,  to  a  common  arbitrament,  to 
meet,  discuss,  and  determine  upon  a  future. 

"It  will  be  said  that  we  have  done  noth- 
ing wrong,  and  have  nothing  to  offer.  This, 
supposing  it  true,  is  precisely  the  reason  why 
we  should  both  propose  and  offer  whatever 
may,  by  possibility,  avert  the  evils  of  civil 
war,  and  prevent  the  destruction  of  our, 
hitherto,  unexampled  blessings  of  Union. 

"  Many  suppose  that  the  North  has  noth- 
ing to  lose  by  a  division  of  the  Union.  Some 
even  say  that  we  must  be  gainers  by  it.  We 
do  not,  for  obvious  reasons,  intend  to  discuss 
this  aspect  of  the  question.  But  it  is  a  mis- 
take— a  serious  and  expensive  mistake.  The 


North  and  South  were  wisely  and  by  a  good 
Providence  united.  Their  interests,  their 
welfare,  their  happiness,  their  glory,  their 
destiny,  is  one.  Separated,  while  the  North 
languishes,  the  South  becomes,  first,  a  des- 
potism, running  riot,  for  a  season,  with  un- 
restrained African  Slavery,  to  share  in  time 
the  fate  of  every  tropical  nation,  whether 
despotism,  monarchy,  or  republic.  That  fato, 
induced  by  the  indolence,  luxury,  and  laxity 
of  the  privileged  few  over  the  oppressed,  de- 
graded, and  enslaved  many,  is  anarchy  and 
destruction.  That  fate  is  written  in  the  his- 
tory of  all  enslaved  nations — its  ancient, 
seared,  and  crumbling,  but  instructive,  mon- 
uments are  seen  in  Egypt,  in  Italy,  in  Cen- 
tral America,  and  in  Mexico. 

"  These  are  the  evils — and  they  are  not 
imaginary — that  Ave  desire  to  avert.  But, 
conscious  of  the  feebleness  of  a  single  voice 
in  such  a  tempest,  there  is  little  to  expect  but 
to  abide  its  peltings.  The  Republican  party 
now  represents  one  side  of  a  controversy 
fraught  with  the  safety  and  welfare  of  this 
Government  and  nation.  As  an  individual, 
we  shall  endeavor  to  do  our  duty ;  and,  as 
avc  understand  it,  that  duty  does  not  consist 
in  folded  arms,  or  sealed  ears,  or  closed  eyes. 
Even  if,  as  say  our  Rochester  and  Syracuse 
friends — and  they  are  such,  in  the  truest 
meaning  of  the  Avord — the  North  stands,  in 
all  respects,  blameless  in  this  controversy, 
much  is  needed  to  correct  the  impression 
of  the  Southern  people ;  many  of  Avhom, 
truly  informed,  Avould  join  us  in  defending 
the  Union.  We  do  not  mistake  the  mis- 
sion of  the  Republican  party  in  assuming 
that,  Avhile  defending  free  territory  from 
aggression,  it  maintains  and  upholds  the  su- 
premacy of  the  Constitution  and  laws.  The 
people  haATe  intrusted  the  Government  to 
our  keeping ;  and  we  must  not  abuse  their 
confidence  or  disappoint  their  expectations. 

"  We  intend  to  answer  in  detail  the  ques- 
tions raised  by  The  Democrat  and  Journal. 
Tt  is  proper,  though  perhaps  scarcely  neces- 
sary, to  say  that,  in  this  solicitude  for  the 
Union,  we  think  and  speak  only  for  ourself. 
We  are  either  better,  or  not  so  well,  informed 
of  the  condition  of  the  country  and  the  bear- 
ings of  this  controversy  as  others — either  in 
advance  of  or  behind  the  intelligence  of  the 
times.  But,  as  we  speak  only  for  ourself,  no- 
body else  can  be  compromised  or  harmed." 

However  well  intended  and  (under 

certain  aspects)  salutary,  it  may  well 

be  questioned  whether  either  of  these 

overtures  was  not  calculated  to  do 

more  harm  than  good.    Each  was, 

of  course,  intended  to  strengthen  the 

Unionists  of  the  South — the  former 


362 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


by  showing  that  the  North  did 
not  regard  the  Slave  States  as  a  con- 
quest, of  which  it  was  about  to 
take  possession,  nor  jet  as  a  heritage 
whence  were  derived  its  subsistence 
and  wealth ;  but  rather  that  it  looked 
on  their  people  as  misguided,  excited 
brethren,  with  whom  we  were  anx- 
ious to  discuss  all  differences  free- 
ly, settle  them  (if  possible)  amicably, 
or  part — if  part  we  must — in  kind- 
ness and  mutual  good-will.  The  lat- 
ter, in  a  like  spirit,  was  plainly  de- 
signed to  induce  the  Southrons  to 
bring  their  grievances  to  the  bar  of 
amicable  investigation  and  discussion, 
by  assuring  them  that  the  North 
stood  ready  to  redress  every  wrong  to 
the  extent  of  its  power.  But  the 
chronic  misapprehension  at  the  South 
of  any  other  language  from  the  North 
than  that  of  abject  servility,  was  then, 
as  ever,  deserving  of  thoughtful  con- 
sideration. The  palpable  fact  that 
the  North  recoiled  with  shuddering 
aversion  from  a  conflict  of  arms  witli 
the  South,  was  hailed  by  the  Seces- 
sionists as  a  betrayal  of  conscious 
weakness  and  unmanly  fear;  while  j 
the  proffer  of  fresh  concessions  and  a 
new  compromise  was  regarded  by 
Southern  Unionists  as  an  assurance 
that  they  had  only  to  ask,  and  they 
would  receive — that  the  North  would 
gladly  do  anything,  assent  to  any- 
thing, retract  anything,  to  avert  the 
impending  shock  of  war. 

For  the  great  mails,  during  the  last 
few  weeks  of  1860,  sped  southward, 
burdened  with  letters  of  sympathy 
and  encouragement  to  the  engineers 
of  Secession,  stimulating  if  not  coun- 
seling  them  to  go  forward  in  their 
predetermined  course.  A  very  few 
of  the  WTiters  indorsed  Secession  as  a 


right,  and  favored  it  as  an  end  ;  but 
the  great  majority  wished  it  carried 
no  further  than  would  be  necessary 
to  frighten,  or  bully  the  '  Black  lie- 
publicans'  out  of  what  they  termed 
their '  principles,'  and  sink  them,  with 
their  '  conservative'  fellow-citizens, 
into  measureless   abasement  at  the 
footstool  of  the  Slave  Power.  And 
nearly  every  current  indication  of 
public  sentiment  pointed  to  this  as 
the  probable  result,  provided  6  the 
South'  should  only  evince  a  willing- 
ness to  accept  the  prostration,  and 
graciously  forgive  the  suppliant.  As 
trade  fell  off,  and  work  in  the  cities 
and  manufacturing  villages  was  with- 
ered at  the  breath  of  the  Southern 
sirocco,  the  heart  of  the  North  seemed 
to  sink  within  her ;  and  the  Charter 
Elections  at  Boston,  Lowell,  Eox- 
bury,  Charlestown,  Worcester,  etc., 
in  Massachusetts,  and  at  Hudson,  etc., 
in  New  York,  which  took  place  early 
in  December,  1860,  showed  a  striking 
and  general  reduction  of  Republican 
strength.    "What  must  and  could  be 
done  to  placate  the  deeply  offended 
and     almost    hopelessly  alienated 
South,  was  the  current  theme  of  con- 
versation, and  of  newspaper  discussion. 

Of  the  meetings  held  to  this  end, 
the  most  imposing  may  fairly  be  cited 
as  a  sample  of  the  whole.  The  city 
of  Philadelphia  had  given  a  small 
majority  for  Lincoln  over  all  his  com- 
petitors. Her  Mayor,  Alexander 
Henry,  though  of  '  American'  ante- 
cedents, had  been  among  his  support- 
ers. On  the  10th  of  December,  he 
issued  an  official  Proclamation,  "  by 
advice  of  the  Councils"  of  the  city, 
summoning  the  whole  people  there- 
of to  assemble  on  the  13th  in  Inde- 
pendence Square,  there  to  "  counsel 
together,"  in  view  of  the  fact  that 


PHILADELPHIA   FOR  'CONCILIATION.' 


363 


Disunion  appeared  to  be  imminent, 
unless  the  "  loyal  people,  casting  off 
the  spirit  of  party,  should,  in  a  special 
manner,  avow  their  unfailing  fidelity 
to  the  Union,  and  their  abiding  faith 
in  the  Constitution  and  laws." 

The  meeting  was  held  accordingly ; 
called  to  order  by  the  President  of 
the  Common  Council,  prayed  for  by 
Bishop  Potter,  and  the  speaking  ini- 
tiated by  Mayor  Henry,  who,  after 
cautioning  his  hearers  to  discard  "  all 
sordid  and  self-interested  views,"  and 
to  avow  their  "  unbroken  attachment 
to  the  Union,"  and  their  determina- 
tion to  "  leave  no  honest  effort  un- 
tried to  preserve  its  integrity,"  pro- 
ceeded to  set  forth  the  provocations 
to  Secession,  and  the  proper  means 
of  counteracting  it,  after  this  fashion  : 

"  My  fellow-citizens,  I  should  be  false  to 
the  position  in  which  you  have  placed  me — 
I  should  be  recreant  to  my  sense  of  duty — 
if  I  withheld  an  avowal  of  the  truth  which 
this  occasion  demands.  I  speak  to  you 
frankly,  my  fellow-citizens ;  I  tell  you  that, 
if,  in  any  portion  of  our  confederacy,  senti- 
ments have  been  entertained  and  cherished 
which  are  inimical  to  the  civil  rights  and 
social  institutions  of  any  other  portion, 
those  sentiments  should  be  relinquished  and 
discountenanced.  (Cheers.)  The  family  dis- 
cipline which  you  choose  to  adopt  for  your 
own  fireside,  whilst  it  does  not  violate  the 
law  under  which  you  dwell,  is  your  rightful 
prerogative;  and  you  are  prompt  to  resist 
the  officious  intermeddling  of  others,  how- 
ever well  intended.  (Applause.)  The  so- 
cial institutions  of  each  State  in  this  Union 
are  equally  the  rightful  prerogatives  of  its 
citizens;  and,  so  long  as  those  institutions  do 
not  contravene  the  principles  of  your  Federal 
compact,  none  may  justly  interfere  with,  or 
righteously  denounce  them.  (Applause.) 
The  efficient  cause  of  the  distracted  condi- 
tion of  our  country  is  to  be  found  in  the 
prevalent  belief  of  the  citizens  of  the  South 
that  their  brethren  of  the  North  are,  as  a 
community,  arrayed  against  a  social  institu- 
tion which  they  regard  as  essential  to  their 
prosperity.  You  are  ready  to  aver  truth- 
fully that  such  belief  is  mistaken  and  un- 
founded ;  but  it  becomes  all  who  are  actua- 


ted by  an  earnest  brotherhood  to  see  to  it 
that,  where  public  sentiment  has  been  mis- 
led, it  shall  be  restored  to  its  standpoint  of 
twenty-five  years  since.  The  misplaced 
teachings  of  the  pulpit,  the  unwise  rhapso- 
dies of  the  lecture- room,  the  exciting  ap- 
peals of  the  press,  on  the  subject  of  Slavery, 
must  be  frowned  down  by  a  just  and  law- 
abiding  people.  (Great  applause.)  Thus,  and 
thus  only,  may  you  hope  to  avoid  the  section- 
al discord,  agitation,  and  animosity,  which,  at 
frequently  recurring  periods,  have  shaken 
your  political  fabric  to  its  center,  and,  at 
last,  have  undermined  its  very  foundation." 

Hon.  Joseph  R.  Ingersoll  (old-line 
Whig,  but  anti-Lincoln)  followed  in 
a  far  less  humiliating  strain,  but  urg- 
ing the  immediate,  unconditional  re- 
peal of  the  State  act  antagonistic  to 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Law ;  which  prop- 
osition was  hailed  with  enthusiastic 
cheers.    He  closed  as  follows  : 

"  We  are  all  one  country.  It  is  a  farce  to 
suppose  that  this  country  will  be  divided. 
(Applause.)  It  will  be  united  in  peace  or  in 
war.  (Applause.)  You  may  see,  perhaps, 
legions  brought  against  legions,  in  a  domes- 
tic fury  that  shall  be  worse  than  the  fury  of 
a  foreign  enemy,  and  they  will  be  united  in 
doing  harm.  "While  we,  in  the  center  of  the 
country,  will  endeavor  to  interpose  kindness 
and  peace,  in  order  to  restore  the  country  to 
the  situation  in  which  it  was  left  at  the 
death  of  Washington,  let  us  be  determined 
to  maintain  the  rights  of  the  whole  country, 
and  extend  the  feeling  of  fellowship  over  all 
the  land.    (Great  cheering.)" 

Judge  George  W.  Woodward11 
spoke  next,  commencing  by  an  as- 
sault on  Mr.  Lincoln's  premonition 
that  'the  Union  must  become  all 
Slave  or  all  Free,'  and  proceeding 
to  indicate  the  exclusion  of  Slavery 
from  the  territories  as  a  dogma  which 
must  be  given  up,  or  the  Union  was 
lost.  Here  is  his  statement  and  con- 
demnation of  the  policy  inaugurated 
by  Thomas  J efferson  : 

"The  inexorable  exclusion  of  slave  prop- 
erty from  the  common  territories,  which  the 
Government  holds  in  trust  for  the  people  of 
all  the  States,  is  a  natural  and  direct  step 


11  Of  the  State  Supreme  Court ;  since,  beaten 
as  the  Democratic  candidate  for  Governor,  in 


1863,  by  15,238  majority.  A  consistent  antago- 
nist of  1  coercion.' 


36i 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


toward  the  grand  result  of  extinguishing 
Blave  property,  and  was  one  of  the  record 
issues  of  the  late  election.  This  policy 
must  be  considered  as  approved  also.  Not 
that  every  man  who  voted  for  the  successful 
nominee  meant  to  affirm  that  a  trustee  for 
several  coequal  parties  has  a  right,  in  law  or 
reason,  to  exclude  the  property  of  some  and 
admit  that  of  others  of  the  parties  for  whom 
he  holds ;  but  so  is  the  record.  The  South 
seems  inclined  to  accept  the  judgment.  She 
holds  the  property  that  is  to  be  shut  out  of 
the  territories — that  is  to  be  restricted,  crib- 
bed, and  confined  more  and  more  until  it  is 
finally  extinguished.  Everywhere  in  the 
South,  the  people  are  beginning  to  look  out 
for  the  means  of  self-defense.  Could  it  be 
expected  that  she  would  be  indifferent  to 
such  events  as  have  occurred? — that  she 
would  stand  idle,  and  see  measures  concert- 
ed and  carried  forward  for  the  annihilation 
of  her  property  in  slaves?  Several  States 
propose  to  retire  from  the  confederacy;  and 
that  justly  alarms  us.  We  come  together  to 
consider  what  may  be  done  to  prevent  it; 
and  we  are  bound,  in  fidelity  to  ourselves 
and  others,  to  take  the  measure  of  the  whole 
magnitude  of  the  danger." 

The  Judge  proceeded  to  set  forth 
that  the  questions  raised  among  our 
fathers  by  the  introduction  of  Slavery 
had  been  wisely  settled : 

"  If  the  Anglo-Saxon  loves  liberty  above 
all  other  men,  he  is  not  indifferent  to  gain 
and  thrift,  and  is  remarkable  for  his  capacity 
of  adaptation,  whereby  he  takes  advantage 
of  any  circumstances  in  which  he  finds  him- 
self placed.  And,  accordingly,  by  the  time 
the  colonists  were  prepared  to  throw  off  the 
British  yoke,  and  to  assume  among  the  Pow- 
ers of  the  earth  the  separate  and  equal  sta- 
tion to  which  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  na- 
ture's God  entitled  them,  it  had  been  dis- 
covered that  the  unwelcome  workers,  against 
whose  introduction  such  earnest  protests  had 
been  made,  could  be  turned  to  profitable  ac- 
count in  the  Southern  States — that  the  Afri- 
can constitution  was  well  adapted  to  labor 
in  latitudes  which  alone  could  produce  some 
of  the  great  staples  of  life  —  and  that  the 
North,  which  could  not  employ  them  profit- 
ably, would  be  benefited  by  such  employ- 
ment as  the  South  could  afford.  Considera- 
tions of  humanity  also,  as  well  as  the  rights 
of  private  property,  entered  into  the  discus- 
sions of  that  day.  What  was  best  for  an  in- 
ferior race,  thrust  unwillingly  upon  a  supe- 
rior ?  That  both  should  be  free?  or  that  the 
inferior  should  serve  the  superior,  and  the 
superior  be  bound  by  the  law  of  the  relation 
to  protect  the  inferior?  That  was  a  great 
question ;  and,  like  all  the  questions  of  that 


day,  it  was  wisely  settled.  The  Northern 
States  abolished  their  Slavery;  and  so  grati- 
fied their  innate  love  of  freedom — but  they 
did  it  gradually,  and  so  did  not  wound  their 
love  of  gain.  They  sold  out  Slavery  to  the 
South;  and  they  received  a  full  equivalent, 
not  only  in  the  price  paid  down,  but  in  the 
manufacturing  and  commercial  prosperity 
which  grew  up  from  the  productions  of 
slave  labor.  When  the  Constitution  came 
to  be  formed,  some  of  the  Northern  States 
still  held  slaves;  but  several  had  abolished 
the  institution,  and  it  must  have  been  ap- 
parent that  natural  causes  would  force  it 
ultimately  altogether  upon  the  South.  The 
love  of  liberty  was  as  intense  as  ever,  and  as 
strong  at  the  South  as  at  the  North ;  and  the 
love  of  gain  was  common  also  to  both  sec- 
tions. Here  were  two  master  passions  to  be 
adjusted,  under  circumstances  of  the  gravest 
delicacy.  They  were  adjusted,  in  the  only 
manner  possible.  Concessions  and  compro- 
mises— consideration  for  each  others'  feel- 
ings and  interests — sacrifices  of  prejudices, 
forbearance,  and  moderation — these  were 
the  means  by  which  the  '  more  perfect 
Union'  was  formed.  And-  what  a  work  it 
was !  If  the  Union  had  never  brought  us  a 
single  blessing,  the  Constitution  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  would  still  have  been  a  magnifi- 
cent monument  to  the  unselfish  patriotism 
of  its  founders.  Not  an  alliance  merely,  but 
a  close  and  perfect  Union,  between  people 
equally  ambitious,  equally  devoted  to  free- 
dom, equally  bent  on  bettering  their  condi- 
tion, but  separated  by  State  lines  and  jeal- 
ous of  State  rights — one  section  seeks  its 
prosperity  under  institutions  which  were  to 
make  every  man  a  freeman — the  other  un- 
der institutions  which  tolerated  negro  Sla- 
very. Had  the  Constitution  failed  to  work 
out  the  beneficent  results  intended,  here  was 
an  instance  of  human  efforts  to  do  good, 
which  would  forever  have  challenged  the 
admiration  of  mankind.  But  it  did  not  fail, 
thank  God !  it  has  made  us  a  great  and  pros- 
perous nation,  and  the  admiration  of  the 
world  for  the  motives  of  the  founders,  is 
swallowed  up  in  wonder  at  the  success  of 
their  work.  But  all  this  the  '  irrepressible 
conflict'  ignores.  The  passion  for  liberty  has 
burned  out  all  memories  of  the  compromise 
and  the  compact  in  these  Northern  commu- 
nities, which,  under  the  false  name  of  Lib- 
erty bills,  obstruct  the  execution  of  the  bar- 
gain. What  part  of  the  purposes  of  the 
founders  are  the  '  underground  railroads'  in- 
tended to  promote?  Whence  came  these 
excessive  sensibilities,  that  cannot  bear  a  few 
slaves  in  a  remote  territory  until  the  white 
people  establish  a  Constitution  ?  What  does 
that  editor  or  preacher  know  of  the  Union, 
and  of  the  men  who  made  it,  who  habitually 
reviles  and  misrepresents  the  Southern  peo- 


PHILADELPHIA 


IN  SACKCLOTH. 


365 


pie,  and  excites  the  ignorant  and  the  thought- 
less in  our  midst  to  hate  and  persecute  them? 
Be  not  deceived.  Let  me  not  prophesy 
smooth  things,  and  cry  Peace,  when  there 
is  no  peace.  Let  the  truth  be  spoken,  be 
heard,  be  pondered,  if  we  mean  to  save  the 
Union." 

Judge  "Woodward   concluded  his 

address  to  this  non-partisan  Union 

meeting  after  this  fashion  : 

"  Have  I  not  a  right  to  say  that  a  Govern- 
ment which  was  all-sufficient  for  the  coun- 
try fifty  years  ago,  when  soil  and  climate 
and  State  sovereignty  were  trusted  to  regu- 
late the  spread  of  Slavery,  is  insufficient  to- 
day, when  every  upstart  politician  can  stir 
the  people  to  mutiny  against  the  domestic 
institutions  of  our  Southern  neighbors  — 
when  the  ribald  jests  of  seditious  editors  like 
Greeley  and  Beechcr  can  sway  legislatures 
and  popular  votes  against  the  handiwork  of 
Washington  or  Madison — when  the  scurril- 
ous libels  of  such  a  book  as  Helper's  become 
a  favorite  campaign  document,  and  are  ac- 
cepted by  thousands  as  law  and  gospel  both 
— when  jealousy  and  hate  have  extinguished 
all  our  fiaternal  feelings  for  those  who  were 
born  our  brethren,  and  who  have  done  us 
no  harm  ?" 

Mr.  Charles  E.  Lex  (who  had  voted 

for  Lincoln)  made  an  apologetic  and 

deprecatory  speech,  wherein  he  said  : 

"  However  they  may  suppose  the  contra- 
ry, our  affections  are  not  alienated  from  our 
Southern  friends ;  and,  even  now,  the  rumor 
of  any  damage  to  them  from  a  domestic 
source  would  bring  to  their  aid  a  legion  of 
young  men  from  this  State — ay,  and  of 
those  more  advanced  in  life — ready  to  assist 
them  in  the  emergency,  and  willing  to  shed 
their  blood  in  their  defense.  I  appeal  to 
you,  citizens  of  Philadelphia,  whether  I  am 
not  speaking  the  truth.  What,  then,  can  we 
say  to  them  ?  What  more  than  we  have  ex- 
pressed in  the  resolutions  we  have  offered  ? 
If  they  are  really  aggrieved  by  any  laws 
upon  our  statute-books  opposed  to  their 
rights — if,  upon  examination,  any  such  are 
found  to  be  in  conflict  with  the  Constitution 
of  these  United  States — nay,  further:  if  they 
but  serve  to  irritate  our  brethren  of  the 
South,  whether  constitutional  or  not,  I,  for 
one,  have  no  objection  that  they  should  in- 
stantly be  repealed.  They  are  not  necessary 
to  our  existence  as  a  State.  We  have  lived 
without  them  in  years  that  are  past,  and  we 
can  live  without  them  again.  I  am  not 
here,  however,  to  concede  that,  in  this  re- 
spect, our  noble  commonwealth  has  done 
any  intentional  wrong ;  but  if,  in  our  calm 


judgment,  it  shall  appear  that  our  feelings, 
in  the  slightest  degree  warped,  have  appa- 
rently inflicted  any  injury,  she  is  noble  and 
generous  enough  manfully  to  repair  it.  Let 
the  Fugitive  Slave  Law  be  executed  in  its 
full  intent  and  spirit.  It  is  the  law  of  the 
land ;  let  it  be  implicitly  obeyed.  We  might, 
perhaps,  have  desired  to  have  a  few  of  its 
provisions  modified;  but  let  it  remain  as  it 
is,  however  liable  these  portions  may  be  to 
Northern  criticism,  if  the  South  deem  it  ne- 
cessary for  the  protection  of  her  rights.  Let 
us,  too,  submit,  as  we  have  hitherto  cheer- 
fully done,  to  the  decisions  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States.  It  is  the  great 
bulwark  of  the  Constitution.  Its  judgments 
should  be  final  and  conclusive,  and  not  be 
questioned  in  any  quarter.  Whilst  the  free 
discussion  of  every  question  is  the  privilege 
of  every  citizen  of  the  Republic,  let  us  dis- 
countenance any  denunciation  of  Slavery,  or 
of  those  who  maintain  that  institution,  a3 
intemperate  and  wrong,  whether  they  are 
promulgated  in  the  lecture-room,  at  the  po- 
litical gathering,  or  from  the  sacred  desk." 

Mr.  Theodore  Cuyler  followed  in 
a  kindred  strain,  illustrating  his  no- 
tion of  what  was  required  to  bring 
back  the  seceders  and  restore  frater- 
nal concord  to  the  Union,  as  follows : 

"  Let  us  of  the  North  get  back  to  our  true 
position.  Let  us  first  set  the  example  of 
perfect  obedience  to  the  Constitution  and 
the  laws;  and  then,  when  we  shall  have 
pulled  the  beam  from  our  own  eye,  we  may 
talk  to  our  brother  of  the  mote  in  his.  Let 
us  return  the  fugitive  from  labor,  as  we  are 
bound  to  do ;  or,  if  we  permit  his  rescue  by 
unlawful  violence,  compensate  his  owner  for 
the  loss.  Let  us  repeal  our  obnoxious  Per- 
sonal Liberty  bills — those  mean  evasions  of 
the  plainest  duty ;  let  us  receive  our  brother 
of  the  South,  if  he  will  come  among  us  for  a 
little  time,  attended  by  his  servant,  and  per- 
mit him  thus  to  come.  We  are  bound  by  a 
sacred  compact  not  to  interfere  or  meddle 
with  the  institution  of  Slavery  as  it  exists  in 
many  of  our  sister  States ;  and  yet  the  pul- 
pit and  the  press,  and  many  of  our  public 
halls,  are  eloquent  with  violent  and  inflam- 
matory appeals  touching  this  subject,  whose 
mischief,  extending  far  beyond  the  boundary 
of  our  own  Commonwealth,  extends  into 
the  very  heart  of  neighboring  States.  Who 
shall  say,  fellow-citizens,  how  much  of  our 
present  peril  springs  from  this  very  cause? 
Can  we  wonder  that  our  Southern  brother 
feels  that  the  heart  of  his  Northern  fellow- 
citizen  is  shut  against  him  ?  Can  we  forget 
that  these  appeals  have  reached  the  Slaves 


366 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


themselves,  and  filled  with  dread  and  appre- 
hension the  once  quiet  and  happy  homes  of 
many,  very  many,  Southern  masters?  Fel- 
low-citizens, although  the  law  may  be  pow- 
erless, yet  there  is  a  moral  force  which  can 
and  would  arrest  this  evil.  I  appeal  to  you 
earnestly — to  each  one  of  you  individually 
— by  every  lawful  means  in  your  power,  to 
put  an  end  to  the  violent  and  inflamma- 
tory discussion  of  this  unhappy  subject.  The 
past,  the  present,  and  the  future,  appeal  to 
you  eloquently  to  be  true  to  your  country 
and  to  yourselves.  Never  before  has  con- 
stitutional liberty  assumed  so  fair  a  form 
among  men  as  here  with  us.  Never  before, 
under  its  influence  and  protection,  has  any 
people  been  so  speedily  and  happily  borne 
to  great  prosperity;  until  now  the  imagina- 
tion sinks  in  the  effort  to  contemplate  that 
glorious  future  on  whose  very  threshold  our 
feet  have  stood.  Can  it  be  that  madness 
and  fanaticism — can  it  be  that  selfishness 
and  sectionalism — are  about  to  destroy  this 
noblest  form  of  government,  freighted  as  it  is 
wirh  the  highest  hopes  of  humanity  ?  (Loud 
cheers.)" 

Mr.  Isaac  Hazlehurst  closed  the 
discussion  in  a  far  manlier  spirit. 
Himself  a  *  Conservative,'  the  6  Amer- 
ican' candidate  for  Governor  in  1857, 
he  had  no  palinode  to  offer  for  North- 
ern '  fanaticism,'  and  no  thought  of 
crouching  to  Southern  treason.  On 
the  contrary,  he  spoke,  with  singular 
and  manly  directness,  as  follows : 

"  Fellow-citizens,  it  is  no  time  for  party, 
because  there  are  no  party  questions  to  be 
discussed.  We  are  here  for  the  purpose  of 
endeavoring  to  preserve  the  Union  of  these 
States.  The  American  Union  was  made 
perfect  by  the  people  of  these  States,  and 
by  the  people  of  these  States  it  is  to  be 
maintained  and  preserved.  It  is  not  a  ques- 
tion of  lmust  be  preserved,'  but,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  Gen.  Jackson,  lit  shall  be  pre- 
served.' (Applause.)  *  *  *  I  say,  fellow- 
citizens,  that  Pennsylvania  has  been  true  to 
the  Constitution  and  the  Union.  She  has 
always  been  loyal  to  it.  There  is  no  doubt 
upon  that  subject.  She  has  nothing  what- 
ever to  repent  of;  and  we  will  maintain 
these  principles  as  presented  by  your  reso- 
lutions. I  care  not  where  the  traitors  are — 
I  care  not  where  they  hide  themselves — the 
first  arm  that  is  raised  against  the  Constitu- 
tion and  the  Union,  I  will  bring  all  that  I 
have  to  their  defense — all  that  I  have  to  se- 
cure the  enforcement  of  the  laws.  ('  Good !' 
Cheers.)'* 


Of  the  resolutions  in  which  the 
spirit  of  this  meeting  was  embodied, 
these  are  the  most  significant : 

"  Resolved,  4.  That  the  people  of  Philadel- 
phia hereby  pledge  themselves  to  the  citi- 
zens of  the  other  States  that  the  statute- 
books  of  Pennsylvania  shall  be  carefully 
searched  at  the  approaching  session  of  the 
Legislature,  and  that  every  statute,  if  any 
such  there  be,  which,  in  the  slightest  de- 
gree, invades  the  constitutional  rights  of 
citizens  of  a  sister  State,  will  be  at  once  re- 
pealed ;  and  that  Pennsylvania,  ever  loyal  to 
the  Union,  and  liberal  in  construing  her  ob- 
ligations to  it,  will  be  faithful  always  in  her 
obedience  to  its  requirements. 

"  Resolved,  5.  That  we  recognize  the  obli- 
gations of  the  act  of  Congress  of  1850,  com- 
monly known  as  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law, 
and  submit  cheerfully  to  its  faithful  enforce- 
ment ;  and  that  we  point  with  pride  and 
satisfaction  to  the  recent  conviction  and  pun- 
ishment, in  this  city  of  Philadelphia,  of  those 
who  had  broken  its  provisions  by  aiding  in 
the  attempted  rescue  of  a  slave,  as  proof  that 
Philadelphia  is  faithful  in  her  obedience  to  the 
law ;  and  furthermore,  that  we  recommend 
to  the  Legislature  of  our  own  State  the  pas- 
sage of  a  law  which  shall  give  compensa- 
tion, in  case  of  the  rescue  of  a  captured 
slave,  by  the  county  in  which  such  rescue 
occurs,  precisely  as  is  now  done  by  existing 
laws  in  case  of  destruction  of  property  by 
violence  of  mobs. 

"  Resolved,  6.  That,  as  to  the  question  of 
the  recognition  of  slaves  as  property,  and  as 
to  the  question  of  the  rights  of  slaveholders 
in  the  territories  of  the  United  States,  the 
people  of  Philadelphia  submit  themselves 
obediently  and  cheerfully  to  the  decisions  of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States, 
whether  now  made  or  hereafter  to  be  made ; 
and  they  pledge  themselves  faithfully  to  ob- 
serve the  Constitution  in  these  respects,  as 
the  same  has  been  or  may  be  expounded  by 
that  august  tribunal.  And,  further:  they 
recommend  that  whatever  points  of  doubt 
exist  touching  these  subjects  be,  in  some 
amicable  and  lawful  way,  forthwith  submit- 
ted to  the  consideration  of  said  Court ;  and 
that  its  opinion  be  accepted  as  the  final  and 
authoritative  solution  of  all  doubts  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  Constitution  on  controverted 
points. 

" Resolved,  7.  That  all  denunciations  of 
Slavery,  as  existing  in  the  United  States,  and 
of  our  fellow-citizens  who  maintain  that  in- 
stitution, and  who  hold  slaves  under  it,  are 
inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  brotherhood 
and  kindness  which  ought  to  animate  all 
who  live  under  and  profess  to  support  the 
Constitution  of  the  American  Union." 


'CONCILIATION'    BY  GAG-LAW. 


367 


That  the  meaning  of  all  this  was — 
"In  the  hope  of  winning  back  the 
seceded  States,  and  of  retaining  the 
trade,  custom,  and  profits,  which  we 
have  hitherto  derived  from  the  slave- 
holders, we  hereby  solemnly  pledge 
ourselves  never  more  to  say  or  do, 
nor  let  our  neighbors  say  or  do,  aught 
calculated  to  displease  said  slavehold- 
ers or  offend  the  Slave  Power,"  was 
promptly  demonstrated.  Mr.  George 
W.  Curtis,  one  of  our  most  attract- 
ive and  popular  public  speakers,  had 
been  engaged  by  6  the  People's  Liter- 
ary Institute'  of  Philadelphia  to  lec- 
ture on  the  evening  after  the  great 
meeting,  and  had  announced  as  his 
subject,  "  The  Policy  of  Honesty." 
What  reflections  were  suggested  by 
that  topic  or  title  to  the  engineers  of 
the  meeting,  can  only  be  inferred 
from  the  following  notification  : 

"  Office  of  the  Mayor  of  the  City  of  ) 
Philadelphia,  Dec.  10,  1860.  \ 
"  Dear  Sir  : — The  appearance  of  George 
TV.  Curtis,  Esq.,  as  a  lecturer  before  the 
People's  Literary  Institute,  on  Thursday 
evening  next,  will  be  extremely  unwise.  If 
I  possessed  the  lawful  power,  I  would  not 
permit  his  presence  on  that  occasion. 
"  Very  respectfully,  etc. 

"Alexander  Henry,  Mayor. 
"James  TV.  White,  Esq.,  Chairman." 

The  following  letter  from  the  own- 
er of  the  Hall  betrays  a  common  im- 


pulse, if  not  a  common  origin,  with 
the  foregoing: 

"Concert  Hall,  December  11,  1860. 
"Dear  Sir: — I  have  been  officially  in- 
formed that,  in  the  event  of  G.  TV.  Curtis 
lecturing  in  this  Hall  on  Thursday  evening 
next,  a  riot  is  anticipated.    Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, I  cannot  permit  the  Hall  to  be 
used  on  that  occasion.  Respectfully, 
"  Thomas  A.  Andrews. 
"  J.  TV.  TVhite,  Esq." 

So  the  Lincoln  city  of  Philadel- 
phia, like  a  good  many  other  North- 
ern cities,  made  her  bid  for  slave- 
holding  forbearance  and  patronage — 
no  one  observing,  nor  even  hinting, 
that  the  North  had  rights  and  griev- 
ances, as  well  as  the  South — that 
"sectional"  aspirations,  aggressions, 
encroachments,  were  not  confined  to 
Free  States ;  and  that,  in  the  concilia- 
tion so  generally  and  earnestly  com- 
mended, the  Slave  Power  might 
fairly  be  asked  to  accord  some  consid- 
eration, some  respect,  if  not  to  make 
some  concession,  to  that  generous, 
loving  spirit,  which  recognizes  a 
brother  in  the  most  repulsive  form  of 
Humanity,  which  keenly  feels  that 
wrong  and  degradation  to  any  neces- 
sarily involve  reproach  and  peril  to 
all,  and  will  rest  content  with  nothing 
short  of  Universal  Justice  and  Im- 
partial Freedom. 


XXIV. 

'CONCILIATION'    IN  CONGKESS. 


The  XXXYIth  Congress  recon- 
vened for  its  second  and  last  session 
on  Monday,  December  3,  1860,  and 
President  Buchanan  transmitted  his 
fourth  and  last  Annual  Message  next 
day.  After  briefly  stating  therein  that 


the  year  then  closing  had  been  one  of 
general  health,  ample  harvests,  and 
commercial  prosperity,  he  plunged 
into  the  great  political  controversy 
of  the  day  after  this  fashion  : 

"  "Why  is  it,  then,  that  discontent  now  so 


368 


THE   AMEBIC  AN  CONFLICT. 


extensively  prevails,  and  the  Union  of  the 
States,  Which  is  the  source  of  all  these  bless- 
ings, is  threatened  with  destruction  ?  The 
long-continued  and  intemperate  interference 
of  the  Northern  people  with  the  question  of 
Slavery  in  the  Southern  States  has  at  length 
produced  its  natural  etfects.  The  different 
sections  of  the  Union  are  now  arrayed 
against  each  other ;  and  the  time  has  arrived, 
so  much  dreaded  by  the  Father  of  his  Coun- 
try, when  hostile  geographical  parties  have 
been  formed.  I  have  long  foreseen,  and 
often  forewarned  my  countrymen  of  the  now 
impending  danger.  This  does  not  proceed 
solely  from  the  claims  on  the  part  of  Con- 
gress or  the  Territorial  Legislatures  to  ex- 
clude Slavery  from  the  territories,  nor  from 
the  efforts  of  different  States  to  defeat  the 
execution  of  the  Fugitive  Slave  law. 

"  All  or  any  of  these  evils  might  have 
been  endured  by  the  South  without  danger 
to  the  Union  (as  others  have  been),  in  the 
hope  that  time  and  reflection  might  apply 
the  remedy.  The  immediate  peril  arises, 
not  so  much  from  these  causes,  as  from  tho 
fact  that  the  incessant  and  violent  agitation 
of  the  Slavery  question  throughout  the  North 
for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century  has  at 
length  produced  its  malign  influence  on  the 
slaves,  and  inspired  them  with  vague  no- 
tions of  freedom.  Hence,  a  sense  of  secu- 
rity no  longer  exists  around  the  family  altar. 
This  feeling  of  peace  at  home  has  given 
place  to  apprehensions  of  servile  insurrec- 
tion. Many  a  matron  throughout  the  South 
retires  at  night  in  dread  of  what  may  befall 
herself  and  her  children  before  the  morning. 
Should  this  apprehension  of  domestic  dan- 
ger, whether  real  or  imaginary,  extend  and 
intensify  itself  until  it  shall  pervade  the 
masses  of  the  Southern  people,  then  disunion 
will  become  inevitable.  Self-preservation  is 
the  first  law  of  nature,  and  has  been  im- 
planted in  the  heart  of  man  by  his  Creator 
for  the  wisest  purpose;  and  no  political 
union,  however  fraught  with  blessings  and 
benefits  in  all  other  respects,  can  long  con- 
tinue, if  the  necessary  consequence  be  to 
render  the  homes  and  the  firesides  of  nearly 
half  the  parties  to  it  habitually  and  hope- 
lessly insecure.  Sooner  or  later,  the  bonds 
of  such  a  Union  must  be  severed.  It  is  my 
conviction  that  this  fatal  period  has  not  yet 
arrived;  and  my  prayer  to  God  is,  that  lie 
would  preserve  the  Constitution  and  the 
Union  throughout  all  generations. 

"But  let  us  take  warning  in  time,  and  re- 
move the  cause  of  danger.  It  cannot  be  de- 
nied that,  for  five-and-twenty  years,  the  agi- 
tation at  the  North  against  Slavery  in  the 
South  has  been  incessant.  In  1835,  picto- 
rial handbills  and  inflammatory  appeals  were 
circulated  extensively  throughout  the  South, 


of  a  character  to  excite  the  passions  of  tho 
slaves;  and,  in  tho  language  of  Gen. 
Jackson,  '  to  stimulate  them  to  insurrection, 
and  produce  all  the  horrors  of  a  servile  war.' 
This  agitation  has  ever  since  been  continued 
by  the  public  press,  by  the  proceedings  of 
State  and  County  Conventions,  and  by 
Abolition  sermons  and  lectures.  The  time 
of  Congress  has  been  occupied  in  violent 
speeches  on  this  never-ending  subject;  and 
appeals,  in  pamphlet  and  other  forms,  in- 
dorsed by  distinguished  names,  have  been 
sent  forth  from  this  central  point,  and 
spread  broadcast  over  the  Union. 

"How  easy  would  it  be  for  the  American 
people  to  settle  tho  Slavery  question  forever, 
and  to  restore  peace  .and  harmony  to  this 
distracted  country ! 

"  They,  and  they  alone,  can  do  it.  All 
that  is  necessary  to  accomplish  tho  object, 
and  all  for  which  the  Slave  States  have  ever 
contended,  is,  to  be  let  alone,  and  permitted 
to  manage  their  domestic  institutions  in  their 
own  way.  As  sovereign  States,  they,  and 
they  alone,  are  responsible  before  God 
and  the  world  for  the  Slavery  existing  among 
them.  For  this,  the  people  of  the  North 
are  not  more  responsible,  and  have  no  moro 
right  to  interfere,  than  with  similar  institu- 
tions in  Russia  or  in  Brazil.  Upon  their 
good  sense  and  patriotic  forbearance,  I  con- 
fess I  greatly  rely." 

How  a  sane  man  could  talk  in  thi3 
way,  in  full  view  of  the  Texas, Nebras- 
ka, and  Kansas  struggles  of  the  last 
few  years,  and  of  the  persistent  efforts 
to  acquire  Cuba,  and  "regenerate" 
Central  America  in  the  interest  of 
the  Slave  Power,  is  one  of  the  pro- 
blems reserved  for  solution  in  some 
future  and  higher  existence.  To  ex- 
pose its  inconsistency  with  notorious 
facts  were  a  waste  of  time  and  effort ; 
to  lose  temper  over  it  were  even  a 
graver  mistake  :  the  proper,  fittest 
frame  of  mind  wherein  to  contem- 
plate it  is  one  of  silent  wonder. 

Mr.  Buchanan  proceeded  to  argue 
that  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln 
"  does  not  of  itself  afford  just  cause 
for  dissolving  the  Union that 
"from  the  very  nature  of  his  office, 
•and  its  high  responsibilities,  he  must 
necessarily  be  conservative;"  that 


MR.    BUCHANAN    REPUDIATES  'COERCION.' 


369 


no  single  act  has  ever  passed  Con- 
gress, unless  we  may  possibly  except 
the  Missouri  Compromise  *  impair- 
ing, in  the  slightest  degree,  the  rights 
of  the  South  in  their  property  in 
slaves ;  that  no  snch  act  could  be 
passed,  in  the  present  or  in  the  next 
Congress ;  that  the  Dred  Scott  deci- 
sion had  covered  all  the  ground  con- 
tended for  by  the  Slave  States,  ren- 
dering null  and  void  a  recent  act  of 
the  Legislature  of  Kansas,  abolishing 
Slavery  in  that  Territory ;  that  all 
acts  of  State  Legislatures  intended 
to  defeat  the  execution  of  the  Fugi- 
tive Slave  law  were  nullities,  the  Su- 
preme Court  having  so  decided  and 
sustained  that  law  at  every  point ; 
nevertheless,  the   States  that  have 
passed  such  acts  ought,  and  should 
be  urged,   to   repeal  them ;  that, 
should  they  not  be  repealed,  "the 
injured  States"  "would  be  justified 
in   revolutionary  resistance   to  the 
Government  of  the  Union"  (for  un- 
faithfulness to  constitutional  obliga- 
tions by  those  whom  that  Govern- 
ment could  not  control) ;  that  there  is 
no  reserved  or  constitutional  right  of 
State    Secession   from  the  Union, 
which  was  clearly  intended  to  be  per- 
petual; that  the   Federal  Govern- 
ment is  required,  and  the  States  ex- 
pressly forbidden,  to  do  many  things 
essential  to  the  idea  of  sovereignty  ; 
that  the  Federal  Government  "  has 
precisely  the  same  right  to  exercise 
its  power  for  the  people  of  all  these 
States,  in  the  enumerated  cases,  that 
each  one  of  them  possesses  over  sub- 
jects not  delegated  to  the  United 
States ;"  that  the  Federal  Constitu- 
tion is  a  part  of  the  Constitution  of 

1  The  Ordinance  of  1787,  reaffirmed  under  the 
Constitution  in  1789,  is  thus  clearly  affirmed  by 
Mr.  Buchanan  to  be  not  in  derogation  of  1  South- 

24 


each  State,  and  is  binding  upon  the 
people  thereof;  that  the  people  of 
States  aggrieved  or  oppressed  by 
Federal  power  have  the  right  of  revo- 
lutionary resistance,  but  no  other — 
and  yet,  if  any  State  should  see  fit  to 
secede  from  and  defy  the  Union, 
there  is  no  help  for  it !  Let  us  hear 
Mr.  Buchanan  more  fully  on  this 
point : 

"  What,  in  the  mean  time,  is  the  responsi- 
bility and  true  position  of  the  Executive  ? 
He  is  bound  by  solemn  oath,  before  God  and 
the  country,  'to  take  care  that  the  laws  be 
faithfully  executed;'  and  from  this  obligation 
he  cannot  be  absolved  by  any  human  power. 
But  what,  if  the  performance  of  this  duty, 
in  whole  or  in  part,  has  been  rendered  im- 
practicable by  events  over  which  he  could 
have  exercised  no  control?  Such,  at  the 
present  moment,  is  the  case  throughout  the 
State  of  South  Carolina,  so  far  as  the  laws  of 
the  United  States  to  secure  the  administra- 
tion of  justice  by  means  of  the  Federal  Judi- 
ciary are  concerned.  All  the  Federal  officers 
within  its  limits,  through  whose  agency  alone 
these  laws  can  be  carried  into  execution, 
have  already  resigned.  We  no  longer  have 
a  District  Judge,  a  District  Attorney,  or  a 
Marshal,  in  South  Carolina.  In  fact,  the 
whole  machinery  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment necessary  for  the  distribution  of  reme- 
dial justice  among  the  people  has  been  de- 
molished, and  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not 
impossible,  to  replace  it. 

"  The  only  acts  of  Congress  on  the  statute- 
book,  bearing  upon  this  subject,  are  those  of 
28th  February,  1795,  and  3d  March,  1807. 
These  authorize  the  President,  after  he  shall 
have  ascertained  that  the  Marshal,  with  his 
j)osse  comitates,  is  unable  to  execute  civil  or 
criminal  process  in  any  particular  case,  to 
call  out  the  militia  and  employ  the  Army 
and  Navy  to  aid  him  in  performing  this  ser- 
vice, having  first,  by  Proclamation,  com- 
manded the  insurgents  to  'disperse,  and 
retire  peaceably  to  their  respective  abodes, 
within  a  limited  time.'  This  duty  cannot, 
by  possibility,  be  performed  in  a  State  where 
no  judicial  authority  exists  to  issue  process, 
and  where  there  is  no  Marshal  to  execute  it ; 
and  where,  even  if  there  were  such  an 
officer,  the  entire  population  would  consti- 
tute one  solid  combination  to  resist  him." 

But  why  cannot  the  President  ap- 

ern  Rights.'    This,  be  it  remembered,  as  well  as 
the  Missouri  Compromise  itself,  had  the  hearty 
1  support  of  the  entire  South. 


370 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


point  a  new  District  Judge,  a  new  ! 
Marshal,  to  replace  those  who  have  | 
resigned  ?    If  no  one  of  the  vicinage  ! 
will  or  dare  accept  these  trusts,  why 
not  fill  them  from  loyal  States  ?  If 
these  shall  be  resisted,  will  it  not  be  j 
at  the  proper  peril  of  the  insurgents  ?  i 
If  the  Federal  Government  can  be 
driven  out  of  a  State,  and  compelled 
to  stay  out,  by  the  cheap  process  of 
bullying  two  or  three  Federal  officers  I 
into  resigning,  and  bullying  others  out 
of  daring  to  take  their  places,  is  ours  a 
real  government  at  all  ? 

The    President,   proceeding,  set 
forth  the  main  issue  as  follows : 

M  The  question,  fairly  stated,  is  :  Has  the  I 
Constitution  delegated  to  Congress  the  power 
to  coerce  into  submission  a  State  which  is 
attempting  to  withdraw,  or  has  actually 
withdrawn,  from  the  confederacy?    If  an- 
swered in  the  affirmative,  it  must  be  on  the 
principle  that  the  power  has  been  conferred 
upon  Congress  to  declare  and  to  make  war 
against  a  State.    After  much  serious  reflec- 
tion, I  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that 
no  such  power  has  been  delegated  to  Con- 
gress, or  to  any  other  department  of  the 
Federal  Government.    It  is  manifest,  upon  I 
an  inspection  of  the  Constitution,  that  this  j 
is  not  among  the  specific  and  enumerated  j 
powers   granted  to   Congress :  and  it  is 
equally  apparent  that  its  exercise  is  not 
1  necessary  and  proper  for  carrying  into  exe- 
cution' any  one  of  these  powers." 

The  contrast  between  this  logic  and 
that  of  Gen.  Jackson  in  like  circum- 
stances 2  has  already  been  noted.  But 
it  is  difficult  to  realize  that  such  trans- 
parent sophistry  can  have  deceived 
even  its  author.  The  President  had 
already  truly  stated  that 

"  The  Executive  has  no  authority  to  decide 
what  shall  be  the  relations  between  the 
Federal  Government  and  South  Carolina. 
He  has  been  invested  with  no  such  discre- 
tion. He  possesses  no  power  to  change  the 
relations  heretofore  existing  between  them ; 
much  less  to  acknowledge  the  independence 
of  that  State." 

The  act  of  Secession,  so  called,  was 


therefore — at  least,  so  far  as  the  Pre- 
sident was  concerned — a  simple  nul- 
lity. He  could  know  South  Carolina 
only  as  one  of  the  States  composing 
our  Union,  whose  citizens  were  con- 
sequently citizens  of  the  United 
States,  and  bound  to  uphold  their 
Constitution  and  obey  their  laws.  If 
any  or  many  of  those  citizens  chose 
to  break  and  defy  those  laws,  it  was 
his  simple  and  imperative  duty  to 
cause  them  to  be  faithfully  executed, 
at  whatever  inconvenience  or  peril  to 
the  law-breakers.  2so  President  had 
ever  suggested  or  imagined  that  the 
opposition  of  any  State  to  the  Fugi- 
tive Slave  law,  for  example,  could 
absolve  him  from  the  duty  of  enforcing 
that  law.  This  is  the  President's 
duty  in  the  premises,  and  the  whole 
of  it, — to  "take  care  that  the  laws  be 
faithfully  executed." 3  The  Constitu- 
tion and  laws  being,  by  express  pro- 
vision, "the  supreme  law  of  the 
land ;  *  *  *  anything  in  the  Consti- 
tution or  laws  of  any  State  to  the 
contrary  notwithstanding," 4  the  real 
question  was  not — 'Has  the  Consti- 
tution delegated  to  Congress  the 
power  to  coerce  a  State  ?'  but  '  Has 
any  State  a  reserved,  inherent  power 
to  coerce  the  Union  into  acquiescence 
in  the  overthrow  of  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution, the  subversion  of  the  laws, 
and  the  destruction  of  our  National- 
ity?' The  President  is  bound  to 
know  no  legitimate  power  within  the 
Union  acting  in  hostility  to  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws  he  has  solemnly 
sworn  to  uphold  and  enforce.  Who- 
ever and  whatever  stands  in  the  way 
of  such  enforcement,  he  can  regard 
only  as  law-breakers,  insurgents,  and 
traitors. 


2  See  pages  94^100.  <  jj,^  Art.  VL,  §  2.     See  also  Webster's 

a  Federal  Constitution,  Art.  EL,  §  3.  I  Reply  to  Hayne,  pages  86-8. 


J.    S.    BLACK   AGAINST  'COERCION. 


371 


Of  course,  having  decided  not  to 
perform  his  sworn  duty,  the  President 
proceeded  to  lecture  the  people  whom 
he  thus  betrayed  on  the  duty  of 
buying  off  the  banded  traitors  by 
new  concessions  and  guarantees ;  say- 
ing: 

"  The  fact  is,  that  our  Union  rests  upon 
public  opinion,  and  can  never  be  cemented 
by  the  biood  of  its  citizens  shed  in  civil  war. 
If  it  cannot  live  in  the  affections  of  the  peo- 
ple, it  must  one  day  perish.  Congress  pos- 
sess many  means  of  preserving  it  by  concilia- 
tion ;  but  the  sword  was  not  placed  in  their 
hand  to  preserve  it  by  force.1' 

But,  if  it  cannot  be  c  cemented,'  can 
it  be  fmcemented,  dissolved,  and  de- 
stroyed, 6  by  the  blood  of  its  citizens, 
shed  in  civil  war  V  If  it  can,  then  is 
it  the  most  stupendous  mockery  and 
sham  which  ever  duped  and  deluded 
mankind. 

His  panacea  for  the  ills  experi- 
enced or  imminently  impending  was 
an  "explanatory  amendment"  of  the 
Constitution,  which  should  operate 
as  a  "final  settlement"  of  the  true 
construction  of  the  Federal  pact  on 
three  special  points : 

"1.  An  express  recognition  of  the  right 
of  property  in  slaves  in  the  States  where  it 
now  exists  or  may  hereafter  exist. 

"  2.  The  duty  of  protecting  this  right  in 
all  the  common  territories  throughout  their 
territorial  existence,  and  until  they  shall  be 
admitted  as  States  into  the  Union,  with  or 
without  Slavery,  as  their  Constitution  may 
prescribe. 

"  3.  A  like  recognition  of  the  right  of  the 
master  to  have  his  slave,  who  has  escaped 
from  one  State  to  another,  restored  and  1  de- 
livered up'  to  him,  and  of  the  validity  of  the 
Fugitive  Slave  law  enacted  for  this  purpose, 
together  with  a  declaration  that  all  State 
laws  impairing  or  defeating  this  right  are 
violations  of  the  Constitution,  and  are  con- 
sequently null  and  void." 

Behind  this  pitiable  exhibition  was 
an  elaborate  opinion 6  from  Hon.  Jer- 
emiah S.  Black,  of  Pennsylvania,  Mr. 


Buchanan's  Attorney  -  General,  sus- 
taining and  elaborating  the  Presi- 
dent's most  fatal  errors.  After  set- 
ting forth,  in.  a  most  grudging  and 
technical  fashion,  the  occasions  in 
which  the  President  is  authorized  to" 
use  force  in  support  of  the  violated 
laws  of  the  land,  Mr.  Black  proceeds 
as  follows : 

"But  what  if  the  feeling  in  any  State 
against  the  United  States  should  become  so 
universal  that  the  Federal  officers  them- 
selves (including  Judges,  District  Attorneys, 
and  Marshals)  would  be  reached  by  the 
same  influence,  and  resign  their  places  ?  Of 
course,  the  first  step  would  be  to  appoint 
others  in  their  stead,  if  others  could  be  got 
to  serve.  But,  in  such  event,  it  is  more 
than  probable  that  great  difficulty  would  be 
found  in  filling  the  offices.  We  can  easily 
conceive  how  it  might  become  altogether 
impossible.  "We  are,  therefore,  obliged  to 
consider  what  can  be  done  in  case  we  have  no 
Courts  to  issue  judicial  process,  and  no  min- 
isterial officers  to  execute  it.  In  that  event, 
troops  would  certainly  be  out  of  place,  and 
their  use  wholly  illegal.  If  they  are  sent  to 
aid  the  Courts  and  Marshals,  there  mast  he 
Courts  and  Marshals  to  be  aided.  Without 
the  exercise  of  these  functions,  which  be- 
long exclusively  to  the  civil  service,  the  laws 
cannot  be  executed  in  any  event,  no  matter 
what  may  be  the  physical  strength  which  the 
Government  has  at  its  command.  Under 
such  circumstances,  to  send  a  military  force 
into  any  State,  with  orders  to  act  against 
the  people,  would  be  simply  making  war 
upon  them." 

That  is  to  say:  A  little  rebellion 
may  be  legally  and  constitutionally 
repressed ;  but  a  great  one  cannot  be. 

*  If  we  have  no  Courts'  where  they 
are  needed,  we  should  constitute 
them;  and,  'if  we  have  no  ministe- 
rial officers,'  we  should  appoint  them. 
The  President  is  expressly  clothed 
with  the  requisite  power,  and  has  no 
right  to  refrain  from  exercising  it. 
If  no  man  now  living  in  South  Caro- 
lina dare  serve  as  District  Judge  or 
Marshal,  then  one  should  be  sent 
thither  who  has  no  repugnance  and 


6  Dated  November  20,  1860. 


372 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


no  fear,  and  be  backed  by  a  compe- 
tent force.  The  President  could  have 
found  a  thousand  qualified  persons 
to  take  either  position,  had  he  chosen. 
The  fact  that  the  insurgents  were 
locally  formidable — even  omnipotent 
— only  hightened  the  imperative  ne- 
cessity of  dealing  with  them  promptly 
and  sternly.  And,  if  jurors  could  not 
there  be  found  to  render  verdicts  ac- 
cording to  law,  then  the  culprits 
should  be  removed  to  some  region 
where  treason,  at  the  worst,  was  not 
universal.  But  '  The  slothful  man 
says,  There  is  a  lion  in  the  way;'  and 
he  who  has  determined  not  to  do  his 
duty,  will  never  lack  excuses  for  re- 
pudiating it. 

Mr.  Black  closed  his  disorganizing 
opinion  as  follows : 

"  If  it  he  true  that  war  cannot  he  declarer], 
nor  a  system  of  general  hostilities  carried 
on,  hy  the  Central  Government  against  a 
State,  then  it  seem3  to  follow  that  an  at- 
tempt to  do  so  would  he  ipso  facto  an  expul- 
sion of  such  State  from  the  Union.  Being 
treated  as  an  alien  and  an  enemy,  she  would 
be  compelled  to  act  accordingly.  And,  if 
Congress  shall  break  up  the  present  Union 
by  unconstitutionally  putting  strife,  and  en- 
mity, and  armed  hostility,  between  different 
sections  of  the  country,  instead  of  the  '  do- 
mestic tranquillity'  which  the  Constitution 
was  meant  to  insure,  will  not  all  the  States 
be  absolved  from  their  Federal  obligations? 
Is  any  portion  of  the  people  bound  to  con- 
tribute their  money  or  their  blood  to  carry 
on  a  contest  like  that? 

"  The  right  of  the  General  Government  to 
preserve  itself  in  its  whole  constitutional 
vigor,  by  repelling  a  direct  and  positive  ag- 
gression upon  its  property  or  its  officers,  can- 
not be  denied.  But  this  is  a  totally  differ- 
ent thing  from  an  offensive  war  to  pnnish 
the  people  for  the  political  misdeeds  of  State 
Governments,  or  to  prevent  a  threatened 
violation  of  the  Constitution,or  to  enforce  an 
acknowledgment  that  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  is  supreme.  The  States 
are  colleagues  of  one  another ;  and,  if  some 
of  them  should  conquer  the  rest  and  hold 


them  as  subjugated  provinces,  it  would  to- 
tally destroy  the  whole  theory  upon  which 
they  are  now  connected. 

"If  this  view  of  the  subject  be  as  correct 
a3  I  think  it  is,  then  the  Union  must  utterly 
perish  at  the  moment  when  Congress  shall 
arm  one  part  of  the  people  against  another, 
for  any  purpose  beyond  that  of  merely  pro- 
tecting the  General  Government  in  the 
exercise  of  its  proper  constitutional  func- 
tions." 

Strange  as  it  must  now  seem,  this 
assertion  of  the  radical  impotence  of 
the  Government,  this  avowal  of  a 
fixed  purpose  to  t  let  the  Union  slide,' 
|  on  the  part  of  the  President  and  his 
legal  adviser,  were  received  in  Con- 
I  gress  with  general  and  concerted  taci- 
i  turnity  on  the  part  of  the  upholders, 
!  and  with  a  bounteous  display  of  in- 
j  dignation  on  that  of  the  banded  as- 


sailants, of  the  National  life.  Mr.  A. 
R.  Boteler,6  of  Virginia,  moved  a 
reference  of  so  much  of  the  Message 
as  related  to  our  National  perils  to  a 
Select  Committee  of  one  from  each 
State ;  which  in  due  time  prevailed, 
and  a  very  fair  Committee  was  ap- 
pointed— Thomas  Corwin,  of  Ohio, 
Chairman  ;  with  a  large  preponder- 
ance of  the  more  moderate  1  Repub- 
licans' and  pro-Slavery  men  in  its 
composition.  Mr.  Speaker  Penning- 
ton, who  framed  the  Committee,  was 
strongly  inclined  to  c  conciliation,'  if 
that  could  be  effected  on  terms  not 
disgraceful  to  the  North ;  and  at  least 
six  of  the  sixteen  Republicans  placed 
on  the  Committee  desired  and  hoped 
that  an  adjustment  might  yet  be 

of  extreme 
associated 


j  achieved.    No  member 
* '  -  views  was 


anti-Slavery 
with  them. 

But  it  was  soon  evident  that  no 
1  concession'  or  i  conciliation'  was  de- 
sired by  a  large  portion  of  the  pro- 


•  From  the  Potomac  district  next  above  Wash- 
ington ;  originally  a  4  Whig' ;  then  American' ; 
elected  to  this  Congress  and  supported  for 


Speaker  as  1  Union' ;  now,  zealous  for  1  conces- 
sion' and  '  peace' ;  an  open  traitor  from  the  day 
of  Virginia's  secession. 


CLINGMAN  REPEL 


S    'CONCILIATION.'  373 


Slavery  members.  Mr.  Clingman  of 
N.  C. — who  came  into  Congress  as 
a  'Whig'  of  very  moderate  views 
regarding  Slavery,  but  had  finally 
turned  Democrat  under  the  impulse 
of  zeal  for  4  Southern  Rights,'  and 
been  thereupon  promoted  from  the 
House  to  the  Senate,  and  who  had 
changed  from  Douglas  to  Breckin- 
ridge toward  the  end  of  the  Presiden- 
tial canvass  just  closed — assailed  the 
Message,  so  soon  as  it  had  been  read, 
and  broadly  intimated  that  no  con- 
cession would  satisfy  the  South.  The 
repeal  of  all  1  Personal  Liberty  bills,' 
etc.,  he  observed,  "would  not  be 
satisfactory  to  the  State  from  which 
I  come."  He  protested  against "  wait- 
ing for  an  overt  act"  before  seceding, 
and  against  further  parley  or  negotia- 
tion between  the  Free  and  the  Slave 
States.    Said  he : 

"  They  want  to  get  up  a  free  debate,  as 
the  Senator  from  New  York  [Mr.  Seward] 
expressed  it,  in  one  of  his  speeches.  But  a 
Senator  from  Texas  told  me  tlie  other  day 
that  a  great  many  of  these  free  debaters  were 
hanging  from  the  trees  of  that  country 
[Texas].  I  have  no  doubt  they  would  run 
olf  a  great  many  slaves  from  the  Border 
States,  so  as  to  make  them  Free  States ;  and 
then,  Sir,  when  the  overt  act  was  struck,  we 
should  have  a  hard  struggle.  I  say,  there- 
fore, that  our  policy  is  not  to  let  this  thing 
continue.  That,  I  think,  is  the  opinion  of 
North  Carolina.  I  think  the  party  for  im- 
mediate secession  is  gaining  ground  rapidly. 
It  is  idle  for  men  to  shut  their  eyes  to  con- 
sequences like  this,  if  anything  can  be  done 
to  avert  the  evil,  while  we  have  power  to 
do  it." 

Messrs.  Albert  G.  Brown,  of  Mis- 
sissippi, Louis  T.  Wigfall,  of  Texas, 
and  Alfred  Iverson,  of  Georgia,  spoke 
in  a  similar  strain,  but  even  more 
plainly.    Said  Mr.  Iverson  : 

"  Gentlemen  speak  of  concession — of  the 
repeal  of  the  Personal  Liberty  bills.  Repe  al 
them  all  to-morrow,  and  you  cannot  stop 
this  revolution.  It  is  not  the  Liberty  laws 
but  the  mob  law  which  the  South  fears. 


They  do  not  dread  these  overt  acts ;  for, 
without  the  power  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, by  force,  under  Republican  rule,  their 
institution  would  not  last  ten  years ;  and 
they  know  it.  They  intend  to  go  out  of  this 
Union,  and  he  believed  this.  Before  the  4th 
of  March,  five  States  will  have  declared  their 
independence,  and  lie  Avas  satisfied  that  three 
other  States  would  follow  as  soon  as  the 
action  of  their  people  can  be  had.  Arkansas 
will  call  her  Convention,  and  Louisiana  will 
follow.  And,  though  there  is  a  clog  in  the 
way  in  the  'lone  star1  of  Texas,  in  the  per- 
son of  her  Governor,  who  will  not  consent 
to  call  the  Legislature*  yet  the  public  senti- 
ment is  so  strong  that  even  her  Governor 
may  be  overridden  ;  and,  if  he  will  not  yield 
to  that  public  sentiment,  some  Texan  Brutus 
may,  arise  to  rid  his  country  of  this  old, 
hoary-headed  traitor.  [Great  sensation.] 
There  has  been  a  good  deal  of  vaporing  and 
threatening;  but  they  came  from  the  last 
men  who  would  carry  out  their  threats. 
Men  talk  about  their  eighteen  millions;  but 
we  hear  a  few  days  afterward  of  these  same 
men  being  switched  in  the  face,  and  they 
tremble  like  a  sheep-stealing  dog.  There 
will  be  no  war.  The  North,  governed  by 
such  far-seeing  statesmen  as  the  Senator 
from  Ncav  York  [Mr.  Seward],  will  see  tho 
futility  of  this.  In  less  than  twelve  months, 
a  Southern  Confederacy  will  be  formed  ;  and 
it  will  be  the  most  successful  Governnn-nt 
on  earth.  The  Southern  States,  thus  banded 
together,  will  be  able  to  resist  any  force  in 
the  world.  "We  do  not  expect  war;  but  we 
will  be  prepared  for  it;  and  we  are  not  a 
feeble  race  of  Mexicans  either." 

Messrs.  Crittenden,  of  Kentucky, 
and  Saulsbury,  of  Delaware,  botb 
spoke  pleadingly  for  '  conciliation' 
and  the  Union,  but  to  deaf  ears. 

A  caucus  of  Southern  members 
was  beld  on  Saturday  evening,  De- 
cember 8tli ;  but  it  only  served  to 
develop  more  clearly  tlie  broad  line 
of  demarkation  between  the  Union- 
ists and  the  Disunionists.  Messrs. 
Albert  G.  Brown,  of  Mississippi,  and 
John  Slidell,  of  Louisiana,  were 
among  the  most  fierce  for  Secession. 
Messrs.  Jefferson  Davis,  of  Missis- 
sippi, and  James  M.  Mason,  of  Vir- 
ginia, favored  further  efforts,  or,  at 
least,  further  waiting,  for  concilia- 
tion.    Messrs.  Crittenden,  Bayard, 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  several  other  1  Border-State ' 
Senators,  more  earnestly  urged  this 
course. 

Monday.  December  9th,  being  6  res- 
olution day'  in  the  House,  was  signal- 
ized by  the  broaching  of  several  new 
devices  for  saving  the  Union.  Mr. 
John  Sherman,  of  Ohio,  suggested  a 
faithful  observance,  on  all  hands,  of 
the  requirements  and  compromises 
of  the  Constitution,  with  an  immedi- 
ate division  of  the  territories  into 
embryo  States,  with  a  view  to  their 
prompt  admission  into  the  Union. 
Mr.  John  Cochrane,  of  Xew  York, 
revived  the  old  scheme  of  dividing 
the  territories  between  Free  and 
Slave  Labor  on  the  line  of  36°  30'. 
Mr.  English,  of  Indiana,  proposed 
substantially  the  same  thing.  Mr. 
Xoell,  of  Missouri,  proposed  an  abo- 
lition of  the  office  of  President  of  the 
United  States,  and  a  division  of  the 
Union  into  three  districts,  each  to 
elect  one  member  of  an  '  Executive 
Council,'  to  which  the  functions  of 
President  should  be  intrusted.  He 
suggested,  moreover,  a  'restoration 
of  the  equilibrium  between  the  Free 
and  Slave  States,'  by  a  division  of 
several  of  the  latter  into  two  or  more 
States  each.  Mr.  Thomas  C.  Hind- 
man,7  of  Arkansas,  proposed  to  so 
amend  the  Constitution  as  to  pro- 
tect slave  property  in  the  territories, 
etc.,  etc.,  and  that  any  State  which 
should  pass  an  act  impairing  or  de- 
feating the  operation  of  the  Fugitive 
Slave  law  should  thereupon  be  de- 
prived of  her  right  of  representation 
in  Congress.  Mr.  Charles  H.  Larra- 
bee,  of  Wisconsin,  proposed  a  Con- 
vention of  the  States.  All  these 
projects  were  referred  to  the  Grand 
Select  Committee  aforesaid. 


That  Committee,  December  13th, 
after  four  days'  earnest  deliberation, 
united  in  a  resolve,  moved  by  Mr. 
Justin  S.  Morrfll,  of  Vermont,  as  a 
substitute  for  one  moved  by  Mr. 
William  MeKee  Dunn,  of  Indiana, 
affirming  the  necessity  of  proffering 
to  the  Slave  States  "  additional  and 
more  special  guarantees  of  their  pe- 
culiar rights  and  interests."  Mr. 
Morrill's  affirmation  was  as  follows : 

"Besohed.  That,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
Committee,  the  existing  discontents  among 
the  Southern  people,  and  the  growing  hos- 
tility among  them  to  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, are  greatly  to  be  regretted ;  and  that 
any  reasonable,  proper,  and  constitutional 
remedies,  necessary  to  preserve  the  peace 
of  the  country  and  the  perpetuation  of  the 
Union,  should  be  promptly  and  cheerfully 
granted." 

Twenty-two  votes  were  cast  for 
this  proposition,  including  those  of 
all  the  members  from  Slave  States 
who  voted.  Two  (Messrs.  Boyce,  of 
South  Carolina,  and  Hawkins,  of 
Florida)  were  absent.  Mr.  Reuben 
Davis  was  present,  but  did  not  vote. 
The  Xays  (eight)  were  all  Republi- 
cans. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Garnett  B. 
A  drain  (Douglas  Democrat)  of  New 
Jersey,  the  House,*  by  151  Yeas  to  14 
jSays: 

"Rewired,  That  we  deprecate  the  spirit 
of  disobedience  to  the  Constitution,  wherever 
manifested ;  and  that  we  earnestly  recom- 
mend the  repeal  of  all  statutes  by  the  State 
Legislatures  in  conflict  with,  and  in  violation 
of  that  sacred  instrument,  and  the  laws  of 
Congress  passed  in  pursuance  thereof." 

Mr.  Owen  Lovejoy  (Republican) 
of  Illinois,  hereupon  proposed  this 
counterpart  to  the  foregoing : 

"  Whereas,  The  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  is  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  and 
ready  and  faithful  obedience  to  it  a  duty  of 
all  good  and  law-abiding  citizens:  There- 
fore, 

"Resolved,  That  we  deprecate  the  spirit 


Since,  a  Eebel  Brigadier. 


8  December  17th. 


SENATOR   TADE    AGAINST  CONCESSION. 


375 


of  disobedience  to  the  Constitution,  wherever 
manifested ;  and  that  we  earnestly  recom- 
mend the  repeal  of  all  nullification  laws ; 
and  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  President  of 
the  United  States  to  protect  and  defend  the 
property  of  the  United  States." 

The  Yeas  were  124;  the  [Nays 
none — most  of  the  Southern  mem- 
bers refusing  to  vote. 

Mr.  Isaac  X.  Morris  (Democrat) 
of  Illinois,  next  moved 

"  That  we  have  seen  nothing  in  the  past 
nor  do  we  see  anything  in  the  present,  either 
in  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln  to  the 
Presidency,  or  otherwise,  to  justify  a  disso- 
lution of  the  Union,"  etc..  etc. 

On  this,  the  Yeas  were  115  ;  Xays 
4-L  Two  of  the  X ays  were  North- 
ern Democrats.9 

On  the  same  day,  a  resolve,  by  Mr. 
Lazarus  W.  Powell,  of  Kentucky, 
proposing  a  Committee  of  Thirteen 
on  the  absorbing  topic,  came  up  in 
the  Senate,  and  Mr.  Benjamin  F. 
^Vade,  of  Ohio,  uttered  some  weighty 
words  on  the  general  subject.  Hav- 
ing shown  that  the  Government  had 
hitherto  been  under  the  control  of 
the  Slave  Power — that  the  personal 
rights  and  safety  of  Northern  men  of 
anti-Slaverv  views  were  habitually 
violated  in  the  South — that  the  pres- 
ent  pointed  antagonism  between  the  j 
Free  and  the  Slave  States  had  been 
caused  by  a  great  change  of  opinion, 
not  at  the  North,  but  at  the  South,  j 
he  continued : 

"The  Republican  party  holds  the  same 
opinion,  so  far  as  I  know,  with  regard  to 
your  *  peculiar  institution'  that  is  held  by 
every  civilized  nation  on  the  globe.  We  do 
not  differ  in  public  sentiment  from  England, 
France,  Germany,  and  Italy,  on  the  subject  | 
of  Slavery. 

"I  tell  you  frankly  that  we  did  lay  down  j 
the  principle  in  our  platform,  that  we  would  j 
prohibits  if  we  had  the  power.  Slavery  from  I 
invading  another  inch  of  the  free  soil  of  this 
Government.    I  stand  to  that  principle  to- 
day.   I  have  argued  it  to  half  a  million  of 


people,  and  thty  stand  by  it — they  have  com- 
missioned me  to  stand  by  it ;  and.  so  help 
me  God,  I  will!  I  say  to  you.  while  we 
hold  this  doctrine  to  the  end,  there  is  no 
Republican,  or  Convention  of  Republicans, 
or  Republican  paper,  that  pretends  to  have 
any  right  in  your  States  to  interfere  with 
your  peculiar  and  local  institutions.  On  the 
other  hand  our  platform  repudiates  the  idea 
that  we  have  any  right,  or  harbor  any  ulti- 
mate intention,  to  invade  or  interfere  with 
your  institution  in  your  own  States.  *  *  * 

k*I  have  disowned  any  intention,  on  the 
part  of  the  Republican  party,  to  harm  a  hair 
of  your  heads.  We  hold  to  no  doctrine  that 
can  possibly  work  you  any  inconvenience — 
any  wrong — any  disaster.  We  have  been, 
and  shall  remain,  faithful  to  all  the  laws — 
studiously  so.  It  is  not,  by  your  own  con- 
fessions, that  Mr.  Lincoln  is  expected  to 
commit  any  overt  act  by  which  you  may  be 
injured.  You  will  not  even  wait  for  any. 
you  say ;  but,  by  anticipating  that  the  Gov- 
ernment mmj  do  you  an  injury,  you  will  put 
an  end  to  it — which  means,  simply  and 
squarely,  tbat  you  intend  to  rule  or  ruin  this 
Government.  *  *  * 

''As  to  compromises.  I  supposed  that  we 
had  agreed  that  the  day  of  compromises  was 
at  an  end.  The  most  solemn  we  have  made 
have  been  violated,  and  are  no  more.  Since 
I  have  had  a  seat  in  the  Senate,  one  of  con- 
siderable antiquity  was  swept  from  our  sta- 
tute-book :  and  when,  in  the  minority,  I 
stood  up  here,  and  a<ked  you  to  withhold 
your  hands — that  it  was  a  solemn,  sacred 
compact  between  nations — what  was  the 
reply  ?  That  it  was  nothing  but  an  act  of 
Congress,  and  could  be  swept  away  by  the 
same  majority  which  enacted  it.  That  mm 
true  in  tact,  and  true  in  law :  and  it  showed 
the  weakness  of  compromises.  *  *  * 

"  We  beat  you  ou  the  plainest  and  most 
palpable  issue  ever  presented  to  the  Ameri- 
can people,  and  one  which  every  man  un- 
derstood ;  and  now.  when  we  come  to  the 
capital,  we  tell  you  that  our  candidates  must 
and  shall  be  inaugurated — must  and  shall 
administer  this  Government  precisely  as  the 
Constitution  prescribes.  It  would  not  only 
be  humiliating,  but  highly  dishonorable  to 
us,  if  we  listened  to  any  compromise  by 
which  we  should  set  aside  the  honest  verdict 
of  the  people.  When  it  comes  to  that,  you 
have  no  government,  but  anarchy  intervenes, 
and  civil  war  may  follow ;  and  all  the  evils 
that  human  imagination  can  raise  may  be 
consequent  on  such  a  course  as  that.  The 
American  people  would  lose  the  sheet-anchor 
of  their  liberties  whenever  it  is  denied  on 
this  floor  that  a  majority,  fairly  given,  shall 
rule.    I  know  not  what  others  may  do :  but 


9  Daniel  E.  Sickles  of  New  York ;  Thomas  B.  Florence,  of  Pennsylvania. 


376 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


I  tell  yon  that,  with  that  verdict  of  the  peo- 
ple in  my  pocket,  and  standing  on  the  plat- 
form on  which  these  candidates  were  elected, 
I  would  suffer  anything  before  I  would 
compromise  in  any  way.  I  deem  it  no  case 
where  we  have  a  right  to  extend  courtesy 
and  generosity.  The  absolute  right,  the 
most  sacred  that  a  free  people  can  bestow 
upon  any  man,  is  their  verdict  that  gives  him 
a  full  title  to  the  office  he  holds.  If  we 
cannot  stand  there,  we  cannot  stand  any- 
where :  and,  my  friends,  any  other  verdict 
would  be  as  fatal  to  you  as  to  us." 

The  venerable  and  Union-loving 
John  J.  Crittenden,  of  Kentucky — 
the  Xestor  of  the  Bell-Everett  party 
— who  had  first  entered  Congress  as 
a  Senator  forty-four  years  before — 
who  had  served,  at  different  times,  no 
less  than  twenty  years,  in  the  upper 
House  of  Congress;  and  who,  after 
filling,  for  a  season,  the  post  of  Attor- 
ney-General under  Gen.  Harrison, 
and  again  under  Mr.  Fillmore,  was 
now,  in  his  fullness  of  years,  about 
to  give  place  to  a  Democrat,10  elected 
because  of  the  greater  confidence  of 
the  slaveholding  interest  in  the  Demo- 
cratic than  in  the  adverse  party — 
came  forward  to  tender  his  peace- 
offering  ;  and  no  anti-Republican  in 
Congress  or  in  the  country  could  have 
risen  whose  personal  character  and 
history  could  have  more  disposed  the 
Republicans  to  listen  to  him  with  an 
anxious  desire  to  find  the  acceptance 
of  his  scheme  compatible  with  their 
principles  and  their  sense  of  public 
duty.  His  olive-branch  was  as  fol- 
lows : 

11 A  Joint  Resolution  proposing  certain 
amendments  to  the  Constitution  of  the  Uni- 
ted States: 

.  "Whereas,  serious  and  alarming  dissen- 
sions have  arisen  between  the  Northern 
and  the  Southern  States,  concerning  the 
rights  and  security  of  the  rights  of  the  slave- 
holding  States,  and  especially  their  rights  in 
the  common  territory  of  the  United  States; 
and  whereas,  it  is  eminently  desirable  and 
proper  that  these  dissensions,  which  now 


threaten  the  very  existence  of  this  Union, 
should  be  permanently  quieted  and  settled 
by  constitutional  provisions,  which  shall  do 
equal  justice  to  all  sections,  and  thereby  re- 
store to  the  people  that  peace  and  good-will 
which  ought  to  prevail  between  all  the  citi- 
zens of  the  United  States :  Therefore, 

"Resolved,  by  the  Seriate  and  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives of  the  United  States  of  America, 
in  Congress  assembled  (two-thirds  of  both 
Houses  concurring),  That  the  following  arti- 
cles be,  and  are  hereby,  proposed  and  sub- 
mitted as  amendments  to  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  which  shall  be  valid,  to 
all  intents  and  purposes,  as  part  of  said  Con- 
stitution, when  ratified  by  Conventions  of 
three-fourths  of  the  several  States : 

"Abticle  1.  In  all  the  territory  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  now  held,  or  hereafter  acquired, 
situate  north  of  latitude  36°  30',  Slavery  or 
involuntary  servitude,  except  as  a  punish- 
ment for  crime,  is  prohibited,  while  such 
territory  shall  remain  under  territorial  gov- 
ernment. In  all  the  territory  south  of 
said  line  of  latitude,  Slavery  of  the  Afri- 
can race  is  hereby  recognized  as  existing, 
and  shall  not  be  interfered  with  by  Congress, 
but  shall  be  protected  as  property  by  all 
the  departments  of  the  territorial  govern- 
ment during  its  continuance.  And  when 
any  territory,  north  or  south  of  said  line, 
within  such  boundaries  as  Congress  may 
prescribe,  shall  contain  the  population  re- 
quisite for  a  member  of  Congress,  according 
to  the  then  Federal  ratio  of  representation 
of  the  people  of  the  United  States,  it  shall, 
if  its  form  of  government  be  republican,  be 
admitted  into  the  Union,  on  an  equal  foot- 
ing with  the  original  States ;  with  or  with- 
out Slavery,  as  the  Constitution  of  such  new 
State  may  provide. 

uAet.  2.  Congress  shall  have  no  power 
to  abolish  Slavery  in  places  under  its  exclu- 
sive jurisdiction,  and  situate  within  the  lim- 
its of  States  that  permit  the  holding  of 
slaves. 

"  Aet.  3.  Congress  shall  have  no  power 
to  abolish  Slavery  within  the  District  of 
Columbia,  so  long  as  it  exists  in  the  adjoin- 
ing States  of  Virginia  and  Maryland,  or 
either,  nor  without  the  consent  of  the  in- 
habitants, nor  without  just  compensation 
first  made  to  such  owners  of  slaves  as  do  not 
consent  to  such  abolishment.  Nor  shall 
Congress,  at  any  time,  prohibit  officers  of 
the  Federal  Government,  or  members  of 
Congress  whose  duties  require  them  to  be 
in  said  District,  from  bringing  with  them 
their  slaves,  and  holding  them  as  such  dur- 
ing the  time  their  duties  may  require  them 
to  remain  there,  and  afterward  taking  them 
from  the  District. 


John  C.  Breckinridge;  chosen  to  take  Mr.  Crittenden's  seat  on  the  4th  of  March,  1861. 


THE    CRITTENDEN  COMPROMISE. 


377 


"Art.  4.  Congress  shall  have  no  power 
to  prohibit  or  hinder  the  transportation  of 
slaves  from  one  State  to  another,  or  to  a  ter- 
ritory in  which  slaves  are,  by  law,  permitted 
to  be  held,  whether  that  transportation  be 
by  land,  navigable  rivers,  or  by  the  sea. 

"Art.  5.  That,  in  addition  to  the  provis- 
ions of  the  third  paragraph  of  the  second 
section  of  the  fourth  article  of  the  Constitu- 
tion of  the  United  States,  Congress  shall 
have  power  to  provide  by  law,  and  it  shall 
be  its  duty  to  provide,  that  the  United  States 
shall  pay  to  the  owner  who  shall  apply  for 
it,  the  full  value  of  his  fugitive  slaves  in  all 
cases  where  the  marshal,  or  other  officer 
whose  duty  it  was  to  arrest  said  fugitive, 
was  prevented  from  so  doing  by  violence  or 
intimidation,  or  where,  after  arrest,  said  fu- 
gitive was  rescued  by  force,  and  the  owner 
thereby  prevented  and  obstructed  in  the  pur- 
suit of  his  remedy  for  the  recovery  of  his 
fugitive  slave  under  the  said  clause  of  the 
Constitution  and  the  laws  made  in  pursu- 
ance thereof.  And  in  all  such  cases,  when 
the  United  States  shall  pay  for  such  fugitive, 
they  shall  have  the  right,  in  their  own  name, 
to  sue  the  county  in  which  said  violence,  in- 
timidation, or  rescue,  was  committed,  and 
recover  from  it,  with  interest  and  damages, 
the  amount  paidNby  them  for  said  fugitive 
slave.  And  the  said  county,  after  it  has  paid 
said  amount  to  the  United  States,  may,  for 
its  indemnity,  sue  and  recover  from  the 
wrong-doers  or  rescuers  by  whom  the  owner 
was  prevented  from  the  recovery  of  his  fugi- 
tive slave,  in  like  manner  as  the  owner  him- 
self might  have  sued  and  recovered. 

"Art.  6.  No  future  amendment  of  the 
Constitution  shall  affect  the  live  preceding 
articles ;  nor  the  third  paragraph  of  the  sec- 
ond section  of  the  first  article  of  the  Consti- 
tution ;  nor  the  third  paragraph  of  the  sec- 
ond section  of  the  fourth  article  of  said 
Constitution;  and  no  amendment  shall  be 
made  to  the  Constitution  which  shall  au- 
thorize or  give  to  Congress  any  power  to 
abolish  or  interfere  with  Slavery  in  any  of 
the  States  by  whose  laws  it  is,  or  may  be, 
allowed  or  permit  tod. 

''And  whereas,  also,  besides  those  causes 
of  dissension  embraced  in  the  foregoing 
amendments  proposed  to  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  there  are  others  which 
come  within  the  jurisdiction  of  Congress, 
and  may  be  remedied  by  its  legislative  pow- 
er ;  And  whereas,  it  is  the  desire  of  Congress, 
as  far  as  its  power  will  extend,  to  remove  all 
just  cause  for  the  popular  discontent  and 
agitation  which  now  disturb  the  peace  of 
the  country  and  threaten  the  stability  of  its 
institutions :  Therefore, 

"Resolved,  by  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives  in  Congress  assembled,  That 


I  the  laws  now  in  force  for  the  recovery  of 
I  fugitive  slaves  are  in  strict  pursuance  of  the 
plain  and  mandatory  provisions  of  the  Con- 
stitution, and  have  been  sanctioned  as  valid 
and  constitutional  by  the  judgment  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States;  that 
the  slaveholding  States  are  entitled  to  the 
faithful  observance  and  execution  of  those 
laws;  and  that  they  ought  not  to  be  re- 
pealed, or  so  modified  or  changed  as  to  im- 
pair their  efficiency ;  and  that  laws  ought  to 
be  made  for  the  punishment  of  those  who 
attempt,  by  rescue  of  the  slave,  or  other  ille- 
gal means,  to  hinder  or  defeat  the  due  exe- 
cution of  said  laws. 

M  2.  That  all  State  laws  which  conflict 
with' the  fugitive  slave  acts  of  Congress,  or 
any  other  Constitutional  acts  of  Congress, 
or  which,  in  their  operation,  impede,  hinder, 
or  delay,  the  free  course  and  due  execution 
of  any  of  said  acts,  are  null  and  void  by  the 
plain  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States  ;  yet  those  State  laws,  void  as 
they  are,  have  given  color  to  practices,  and 
led  to  consequences,  which  have  obstructed 
the  due  administration  and  execution  of  acts 
of  Congress,  and  especially  the  acts  for  the 
delivery  of  fugitive  slaves ;  and  have  thereby 
contributed  much  to  the  discord  and  com- 
motion now  prevailing.  Congress,  therefore, 
in  the  present  perilous  juncture,  does  not 
deem  it  improper,  respectfully  and  earnestly, 
to  recommend  the  repeal  of  those  laws  to 
the  several  States  which  have  enacted  them, 
or  such  legislative  corrections  or  explana- 
tions of  them  as  may  prevent  their  being 
used  or  perverted  to  such  mischievous  pur- 
poses. 

"  3.  That  the  act  of  the  18th  of  September, 
1850,  commonly  called  the  Fugitive  Slave 
law,  ought  to  be  so  amended  as  to  make  the 
fee  of  the  Commissioner,  mentioned  in  the 
eighth  section  of  the  act,  equal  in  amount 
in  the  cases  decided  by  him,  whether  his 
decision  be  in  favor  of  or  against  the  claim- 
ant. And,  to  avoid  misconstruction,  the 
last  clause  of  the  fifth  section  of  said  act, 
which  authorizes  the  person  holding  a  war- 
rant for  the  arrest  or  detention  of  a  fugitive* 
slave  to  summon  to  his  aid  the  posse  comi- 
tatus,  and  which  declares  it  to  be  the  duty 
of  all  good  citizens  to  assist  him  in  its  exe- 
cution, ought  to  be  so  amended  as  to  ex- 
pressly limit  the  authority  and  duty  to  cases 
in  which  there  shall  be  resistance,  or  danger 
of  resistance  or  rescue. 

"4.  That  the  laws  for  the  suppression  of 
the  African  Slave-Trade,  and  especially  those 
prohibiting  the  importation  of  slaves  into 
the  United  States,  ought  to  be  more  effectual, 
and  ought  to  be  thoroughly  executed  ;  and 
all  further  enactments  necessary  to  those 
ends  ought  to  be  promptly  made." 


378  THE  AMERICA 

A  white  man  and  an  Indian,  says 
the  legend,  once  went  hunting  in 
partnership ;  and  the  net  product  of 
their  joint  efforts  was  a  turkey  and 
an  owl,  which  were  to  be  divided 
between  them.  "  I  will  take  the  tur- 
key," said  the  white  man,  "  and  you 
may  have  the  owl ;  or  you  may  have 
the  owl,  and  Pll  take  the  turkey." 
"Ah,  but,"  demurred  the  Indian, 
"  you  don't  say  '  turkey'  once  to  me" 

I.  For  a  generation,  the  Free  North 
had  been  struggling  against  a  series 
of  important  measures,  forming  a 
system  of  public  policy,  whereof  the 
purpose  and  necessary  effect  were 
the  diffusion  and  aggrandizement  of 
Slavery.  Mr.  Crittenden,  by  coope- 
rating therein,  to  a  certain  extent, 
had  clearly  affirmed,  to  that  extent, 
the  right  and  justice  of  this  resistance. 
He  had  earnestly  opposed  the  viola- 
tion of  our  public  faith  solemnly 
plighted  to  the  Creek  and  Cherokee 
Indians ;  he  had  struggled  manfully 
against  the  annexation  of  Texas. 
True,  he  had  not  openly  condemned 
and  resisted  the  repudiation  of  the 
Missouri  Compact;  but  his  studied 
silence  on  that  topic,  in  "view  of  the 
Southern  f  uror  in  favor  of  the  Ne- 
braska Bill,  proves  clearly  his  tacit 
concurrence  in  the  Northern  repug- 
nance to  that  measure.  So  also  with 
regard  to  the  projected  purchase  or 
seizure  of  Cuba.  Yet  this  struggle 
of  the  North,  its  importance  and  its 
justice,  are  utterly  ignored  in  this 
plan  of  6  adjustment'  and  '  concilia- 
tion ;'  while  the  South  is  proffered 
guarantees  of  the  perpetuity  of  Sla- 
very in  the  District  of  Columbia  as 
well  as  in  the  Slave  States,  with  the 
utmost  facilities  and  aids  to  slave- 
hunting  ever  known  in  any  country. 


N"  CONFLICT. 

The  show  of  concession,  in  the  forego- 
ing project,  to  Northern  convictions, 
relates  to  the  1  mint,  anise  and  cummin' 
of  the  great  controversy ;  it  proffers  to 
the  Free  States  no  guarantee  on  a 
single  point  ever  deemed  by  them 
essential.  Then  as  to  the  territories  : 
Mr.  Crittenden's  proposition,  in  sub- 
stance, is,  that  the  North  shall  not 
merely  permit,  but  establish  and  gua- 
rantee, Slavery  in  all  present  and 
future  territories  of  the  Union  south 
of  36°  30'.  The  direct  incitement 
herein  proffered,  the  strong  tempta- 
tion held  out,  to  fillibustering  raids 
upon  Mexico,  Central  America,  Cuba, 
Hayti,  etc.,  could  never  be  ignored. 
The  Slave  Power  would  have  claimed 
this  as  a  vital  element  of  the  new 
compromise — that  she  had  surren- 
dered her  just  claim  to  all  territory 
north  of  36°  30'  for  the  conceded 
right  to  acquire  and  enjoy  new  terri- 
tory south  of  that  line,  and  would 
have  insisted  on  her  6  pound  of  flesh' 
— a  rigorous  fulfillment  of  the  com- 
pact. Her  Sam  Houstons,  William 
Walkers  and  Bickleys  would  have 
plotted  at  home  and  plundered 
abroad,  in  the  character  of  apostles, 
laboring  to  readjust  the  disturbed 
equilibrium  of  the  Union  by  acquiring 
for  the  South  that  to  which  she  was  en- 
titled by  the  Crittenden  Compromise. 

II.  The  essence  and  substance  of 
Mr.  Crittenden's  6  adjustment'  inhere 
in  his  proposition  that,  of  the  vast 
territories  acquired  by  us  from  Mexico, 
with  all  that  may  be  acquired  here- 
after, so  much  as  lies  south  of  the 
parallel  36°  30',  shall  be  absolutely 
surrendered  and  guaranteed  to  Sla- 
very. But  this  very  proposition  was 
made,  on  behalf  of  the  South,  by  Gen. 
Burt,  of  S.  C,  in  1847,  and  was 
then  defeated  by  the  decisive  vote  of 


THE    CRITTENDEN  COM 

114  to  82 — not  one  Whig,  and  but 
four  Democrats,  from  the  Free  States, 
sustaining  it.11  It  was  defeated  again 
in  the  next  Congress,  when  proposed 
by  Mr.  Douglas,  in  1848  :  Yeas  82  ; 
■Nays  121 ;  only  three  Democrats  and 
no  Whig  from  Free  States  sustaining 
it.*3  The  Eepublican  party  was  now 
required,  in  the  year  1861,  to  assent 
to  a  partition  of  the  territories,  and 
an  establishment  of  Slavery  therein, 
which  both  the  Whig  and  the  Demo- 
cratic parties  of  the  Free  States  had 
repeatedly,  and  all  but  unanimously, 
rejected  before  there  was  any  Eepub- 
lican party.  Thus  the  North,  under 
the  lead  of  the  Republicans,  was  re- 
quired to  make,  on  pain  of  civil  war, 
concessions  to  Slavery  which  it  had 
utterly  refused  when  divided  only 
between  the  4  conservative'  parties  of 
lifteen  or  twenty  years  ago. 

III.  The  vital  principle  of  this,  as 
of  all  compromises  or  projects  of  con- 
ciliation proposed  from  the  South  to 
the  North,  was  this :  6  You  shall  re- 
gard Slavery  as  we  do,  and  agree  with 
us  that  it  is  beneficent  and  right. 
We  will  concede  that  it  is  not  desi- 
rable nor  profitable  in  your  harsh  cli- 
mate, on  your  rugged  soil ;  and  you 
must  concur  with  us  in  affirming  that 
it  is  the  very  thing  for  our  fervid  suns 
and  fertile  vales.  Then  we  will  go 
forward,  conquering,  annexing,  set- 
tling, planting,  and  filling  the  markets 
of  the  world  with  our  great  staples, 
while  you  shall  be  amply  enriched 
by  our  commerce  and  by  our  con- 
stantly expanding  markets  for  your 
food  and  manufactures.'  In  other 
words,  Slavery  was  henceforth  to  be 
regarded,  on  all  hands,  as  the  basis 
at  once  of  our  National  industry  and 
our  National  policy. 


PROMISE    CONSIDERED.  379 

IY.  As  a  part  of  this  compact,  the 
North  was  to  silence  her  lecturers, 
muzzle  her  press,  chloroform  her  pul- 
pits, and  bully  her  people  into  a  si- 
lence respecting  Slavery,  which  should 
be  broken  only  by  the  utterance  of 
vindications  and  panegyrics.  Already 
the  great  publishing  houses  of  our 
Northern  cities  had  been  very  gene- 
rally induced  to  mutilate  the  works 
they  from  time  to  time  issued,  by  ex- 
punging from  them  every  passage  or 
sentiment  obnoxious  to  the  fastidious, 
exacting  taste  of  the  slaveholders. 
Some  of  our  authors — Mr.  James  K. 
Paulding  conspicuous  among  them — 
had  revised  their  own  works,  and  is- 
sued new  editions,  wherein  their  old- 
time  utterances  adverse  to  Slavery 
had  been  supplanted  by  fulsome  adu- 
lations of  the  system  or  vehement 
abuse  of  its  opponents.  Our  Mission- 
ary, Tract,  and  other  religious  organ- 
izations, had  very  generally  been  in- 
duced to  expurgate  their  publications 
and  their  efforts  of  all  anti-Slavery 
ideas.  Our  great  popular  churches 
had  either  bent  to  the  storm  or  been 
broken  by  it.  And  now,  the  work 
was  to  be  completed  by  a  new  and 
comprehensive  '  adjustment,'  taking 
the  place  and,  in  part,  the  name  of 
that  '  Compromise'  which  the  Slave 
Power  had  first  forced  upon  the 
North  and  then  coolly  repudiated; 
an  adjustment  which  was  to  bind  the 
Free  States  over  to  perpetual  com- 
plicity in  slaveholding,  and  perpetual 
stiffing  of  all  exposure  of,  or  remon- 
strance against,  the  existence,  the 
domination,  and  the  diffusion  of  Sla- 
very. 

These  strictures  are  neither  im- 
pelled nor  colored  by  any  unkindly 
feeling  toward  Mr.  Crittenden,  whose 


"See  pages  196-7. 


12  See  pages  197-8. 


380 


tfHE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


patriotism  and  fairness  they  are  not 
designed  to  impeach.  He  doubtless 
considered  carefully  and  well  what 
the  South  could  be  induced  to  accept ; 
and  he  undoubtingly  believed  this  to 
be  embodied  and  presented  in  his 
plan  of  compromise.  A  slaveholder 
himself;  born,  educated,  and  living 
amid  the  influences  of  the  institution ; 
he  could  not  or  did  not  realize  that 
his  conditions  would  seem  inadmis- 
sible to  any  but  the  narrowest  and 
most  miserable  fanatics.  Assuming 
his  premises,  regarding  the  matter 
exclusively  from  his  standpoint,  and 
putting  conscience  and  consistency 
entirely  out  of  the  question,  his  pro- 
posal was  fair  enough  ;  and  its  cordial 
adoption  would  doubtless  have  exhi- 
larated the  stock  market,  and  caused 
general  rejoicing  on  exchanges  and 
around  the  dinner-tables  of  merchant 
priuces.  Its  advocates,  with  good 
reason,  claimed  a  large  majority  of 
the  people  in  its  favor,  and  clamored 
for  its  submission  to  a  direct  popular 
vote.  Had  such  a  submission  been 
accorded,  it  is  very  likely  that  the 
greater  number  of  those  who  voted  at 
all  would  have  voted  to  ratify  it. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  these  facts 
deserve  consideration : 

I.  The  Democratic  and  6  Conserva- 
tive' politicians  who  united  on  the 
Crittenden  Compromise,  and  clamor- 
ed for  its  adoption,  had  had  control 
of  Congress  and  the  Federal  Executive 
through  seven-eighths  of  our  past 
national  history.  If  this  were  the 
true  panacea  for  our  troubles  respect- 
ing Slavery,  why  had  they  not  ap- 
plied it  long  ago  ?  "Why  not  adopt 
it  under  Polk  or  Fillmore,  Pierce  or 
Buchanan,  without  waiting  to  the  last 
sands  of  their  departing  power  ?  "Why 
not  unite  upon  it  as  their  platform  in 


the  Presidential  contest  of  1860? 
Why  call  upon  the  Republicans  to 
help  them  do,  after  forty  years  of 
controversy,  what  they  might  them- 
selves have  done,  without  help,  al- 
most any  time  during  those  forty 
years?  Why  repudiate,  against  the 
most  urgent  remonstrances,  in  1854, 
a  compromise  which,  so  far  as  it  went, 
was  substantially  identical  with  this, 
and  now  ask  those  whom  they  then 
overbore  to  unite  with  them  in  rati- 
fying another  and  a  worse,  in  1861  ? 

II.  The  '  Conservatives,'  so  called, 
were  still  able  to  establish  this  Crit- 
tenden Compromise  by  their  own 
proper  strength,  had  they  been  dis- 
posed so  to  do.  The  President  was 
theirs ;  the  Senate  strongly  theirs ; 
in  the  House,  they  had  a  small  ma- 
jority, as  was  evinced  in  their  defeat 
of  John  Sherman  for  Speaker.  Had 
they  now  come  forward  and  said, 
with  authority:  'Enable  us  to  pass 
the  Crittenden  Compromise,  and  all 
shall  be  peace  and  harmony,'  they 
would  have  succeeded  without  diffi- 
culty. It  was  only  through  the 
withdrawal  of  pro-Slavery  members 
that  the  Republicans  had  achieved 
an  unexpected  majority  in  either 
House.  Had  those  members  chosen 
to  return  to  the  seats  still  awaiting 
them,  and  to  support  Mr.  Crittenden's 
proposition,  they  could  have  carried 
it  without  difficulty. 

III.  But  it  was  abundantly  evident 
that  the  passage  of  this  measure 
would  not  restore  the  Union.  Several 
States  had  already  plunged  into  Se- 
cession, their  oracles  avowing  that 
they  wanted  no  concession,  and  would 
be  satisfied  with  none.  Every  sug- 
gestion that  they  should  wait  for 
some  overt  act,  at  least  for  some  offi- 
cial declaration,  from  Mr.  Lincoln^ 


SENATOR   ANTHONY'S  PROPOSITION. 


381 


had  been  spurned  by  them.  They 
made  haste  to  secede,  from  fear  that 
concessions  would  be  offered — that 
their  pretexts  for  disruption  would 
somehow  be  obviated.  To  send  con- 
cessions after  them,  in  their  scornful, 
imperious,  insulting  stampede,  would 
be  inviting  them  to  heap  new  and 
more  dishonoring  indignities  on  the 
nation  they  were  defying.  It  was,  in 
fact,  to  justify  their  past  treason,  and 
incite  them  to  perseverance  and 
greater  daring  in  the  evil  way  they 
had  chosen. 

IY.  Our  ( conservative'  .  Supreme 
Court,  by  its  Dred  Scott  decision, 
had  denied  to  Congress  all  power  to 
exclude  Slavery  from  a  single  acre  of 
the  common  territories  of  the  Union ; 
it  had  held  the  Missouri  Compromise 
invalid  on  this  very  ground;  and 
now,  the  North  was  called  to  reen- 
act  and  extend  that  very  line  of 
demarkation  between  Free  and  Slave 
territory  which  the  Court  had  pro- 
nounced a  nullity.  True,  Mr.  Crit- 
tenden proposed  that  the  new  com- 
promise should  be  ingrafted  upon  the 
Constitution ;  but  that  only  increased 
the  difficulty  of  effecting  the  adjust- 
ment, without  assuring  its  validity. 
For,  if  the  new  Southern  doctrines 
respecting  property,  and  the  rights  of 
property,  and  the  duty  of  protecting 
those  rights,  and  the  radical  inability 
of  the  Government  to  limit  or  impair 
them,  be  sound,  then  the  guarantee 
to  Free  Labor  of  the  territory  north 
of  36°  30',  must  prove  delusive.  In- 
deed, Mr.  Jefferson  Davis^  at  a  meet- 
ing of  the  Select  Committee  framed 
to  consider  these  very  resolutions, 
proposed,  on  the  26th  of  December, 
the  following : 


"Resolved,  That  it  shall  be  declared,  by- 
amendment  of  the  Constitution,  that  prop- 
erty in  slaves,  recognized  as  such  by  the 
local  law  of  any  of  the  States  of  the  Union, 
shall  stand  on  the  same  footing,  in  all  con- 
stitutional and  Federal  relations,  as  any  other 
species  of  property  so  recognized  ;  and,  like 
other  property,  shall  not  be  subject  to  be 
divested  or  impaired  by  the  local  law  of  any 
other  State,  either  in  escape  thereto,  or  by 
the  transit  or  sojourn  of  the  owner  therein. 
And  in  no  case  whatever  shall  such  property 
be  subject  to  be  divested  or  impaired  by  any 
legislative  act  of  the  United  States,  or  any 
of  the  territories  thereof." 

%* 

When  the  Senate  came  to  act13 
upon  Mr.  Crittenden's  proposition, 
Mr.  Anthony,  of  Rhode  Island — a 
very  moderate,  conservative  Repub- 
lican—  made  a  new  overture  which 
ought  to  have  closed  the  controversy. 
Announcing  his  intention  to  vote  for 
the  substitute  proposed  by  Mr.  Dan- 
iel Clark,  of  New  Hampshire,  as  "  ab- 
stractly true,"  and  more  in  accord- 
ance with  his  idea  of  the  mode  in 
which  our  troubles  should  be  com- 
posed, Mr.  Anthony  proceeded  : 

"I  believe,  Mr.  President,  that,  if  the 
danger  which  menaces  us  is  to  be  avoided 
at  all,  it  must  be  by  legislation ;  which  is 
more  ready,  more  certain,  and  more  likely  to 
be  satisfactory,  than  constitutional  amend- 
ment. The  main  difficulty  is  the  territorial 
question.  The  demand  of  the  Senators  on 
the  other  side  of  the  chamber,  and  of  those 
whom  they  represent,  is,  that  the  territory 
South  of  the  line  of  the  Missouri  Compro- 
mise shall  be  open  to  their  peculiar  proper- 
ty. All  this  territory,  except  the  Indian  res- 
ervation, is  within  the  limits  of  New  Mexico, 
which,  for  a  part  of  its  northern  boundary, 
runs  up  two  degrees  beyond  that  line.  This 
is  now  a  slave  territory ;  made  so  by  territo- 
rial legislation;  and  Slavery  exists  there, 
recognized  and  protected.  Now,  I  am  will- 
ing, so  soon  as  Kansas  can  be  admitted,  to 
vote  for  the  admission  of  New  Mexico  as  a 
State,  with  such  Constitution  as  the  people 
may  adopt. 

"This  disposes  of  all  the  territory  that  is 
adapted  to  slave  labor,  or  that  is  claimed  by 
the  South.  It  ought  to  settle  the  whole 
question.  Surely,  if  we  can  dispose  of  all 
the  territory  that  we  have,  we  ought  not  to 


13  January  16,  1861 


382 


THE  AMERICA 


N  CONFLICT. 


quarrel  over  that  which  we  have  not,  and 
which  we  have  no  very  honest  way  of  ac- 
quiring. Let  us  settle  the  difficulties  that 
threaten  us  now,  and  not  anticipate  those 
which  may  never  come.  Let  the  public  mind 
have  time  to  cool ;  let  us  forget,  in  the  gen- 
eral prosperity,  the  mutual  dependence  and 
the  common  glory  of  our  country,  that  we 
have  ever  quarreled  over  the  question  that 
we  have  put  at  rest ;  and  perhaps  when,  in 
the  march  of  events,  the  northern  provinces 
of  Mexico  are  brought  under  our  sway,  they 
may  come  in  without  a  ripple  on  the  po- 
litical sea,  whose  tumultuous  waves  now 
threaten  to 'ingulf  us  all  in  one  common 
ruin. 

"  In  offering  to  settle  this  question  by  the 
admission  of  New  Mexico,  we  of  the  North 
who  assent  to  it  propose  a  great  sacrifice, 
and  offer  a  large  concession.  We  propose 
to  take  in  a  State  that  is  deficient  in  popu- 
lation, and  that  possesses  but  imperfectly 
many  of  the  elements  of  a  member  of  the 
Union,  and  that  will  require,  in  one  form  or 
another,  even  after  its  admission,  the  aid  of 
the  General  Government.  But  we  make  the 
offer  in  a  spirit  of  compromise  and  good  feel- 
ing, which  we  hope  will  be  reciprocated. 

"And  now,  Mr.  President,  I  appeal  to* 
Senators  on  the  other  side,  when  we  thus 
offer  to  bridge  over  seven-eighths  of  the 
frightful  chasm  that  separates  us,  will  you 
not  build  the  other  eighth?  "When,  with 
outstretched  arms,  we  approach  you  so  near, 
that  by  reaching  out  your  hands  you  can  clasp 
ours  in  the  fraternal  grasp  from  which  they 
should  never  be  separated,  will  you,  with 
folded  arms  and  closed  eyes,  stand  upon  ex- 
treme demands  which  you  know  we  cannot 
accept,  and  for  which,  if  we  did,  we  could 
not  carry  our  constituents?" 

There  was  no  response"  to  this  ;  and 
the  Senate,  after  having  refused — 30 
to  25 — to  postpone  the  subject  to 
take  up  the  Kansas  Admission  bill, 
proceeded  to  vote  on  Mr.  Clark's  sub- 
stitute, which  was  in  these  words : 

"Resolved,  That  the  provisions  of  the  Con- 
stitution are  ample  for  the  preservation  of 
the  Union,  and  the  protection  of  all  the  ma- 
terial interests  of  the  country ;  that  it  needs 
to  be  obeyed  rather  than  amended ;  and  that 
an  extrication  from  our  present  dangers  is 
to  be  looked  for  in  strenuous  efforts  to  pre- 
serve the  peace,  protect  the  public  property, 
and  enforce  the  laws,  rather  than  in  new 
guarantees  for  peculiar  interests,  compromi- 
ses for  particular  difficulties,  or  concessions 
to  unreasonable  demands. 


"Resolved,  That  all  attempts  to  dissolve  the 
present  Union,  or  overthrow  or  abandon  the 
present  Constitution,  with  the  hope  or  ex- 
pectation of  constructing  a  new  one,  are 
dangerous,  illusory,  and  destructive;  that, 
in  the  opinion  of  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States,  no  such  reconstruction  is  practicable; 
and,  therefore,  to  the  maintenance  of  the 
existing  Union  and  Constitution  should  be 
directed  all  the  energies  of  all  the  depart- 
ments of  the  Government,  and  the  efforts  of 
all  good  citizens."  * 

The  vote  was  now  taken  on  this 
substitute,  which  was  adopted,  as  fol- 
lows: 

Yeas. — Messrs.  Anthony,  Baker,  Bingham, 
Cameron,  Chandler,  Clark,  Collamer,  Dixon, 
Doolittle,  Durkee,  Fessenden,  Foot,  Foster, 
Grimes,  Hale,  Harlan,  King,  Sew^ard,  Sim- 
mons, Sumner,  Ten  Eyck,  Trumbull,  Wade, 
Wilkinson,  and  Wilson — 25  [all  Republi- 
cans]. 

Nats. — Messrs.  Bayard,  Bigler,  Bragg, 
Bright,  Clingman,  Crittenden,  Fitch,  Green, 
Gwin,  Hunter,  Johnson,  of  Tennessee,  Ken- 
nedy, Lane,  of  Oregon,  Mason,  Nicholson, 
Pearce,  Polk,  Powell,  Pugh,  Rice,  Saulsbury, 
and  Sebastian — 23  [all  Democrats,  but  two 
Bell-Conservatives,  in  italics]. 

Messrs.  Iverson,  of  Georgia,  Ben- 
jamin and  Slidell,  of  Louisiana, 
Hemphill  and  TTigfall,  of  Texas,  and 
R.  W.  Johnson,  of  Arkansas — who 
had  voted  just  before  against  taking 
up  the  Kansas  bill — had  now  ab- 
sented themselves  or  sat  silent,  and 
allowed  Mr.  Clark's  resolves  to  sup- 
plant Mr.  Crittenden's,  which  were 
thus  defeated.  They  doubtless  did 
this  in  obedience  to  a  resolve,  precon- 
certed with  Messrs.  Davis,  Toombs, 
etc.,  to  accept  no  adjustment  or  con- 
cession which  did  not  receive  the 
vote  of  a  majority  of  the  Republi- 
cans. 

In  the  last  hours  of  the  session,14 
the  subject  was  called  up  by  Mr. 
J.  M.  Mason,  of  Virginia,  when  Mr. 
Clark's  substitute  aforesaid  was  re- 
considered and  rejected — 22  to  14 — 
in  order  to  have  a  direct  vote  on  the 


"March  2,  1861. 


GOV.    SEWARD'S  CONCESSIONS. 


383 


Crittenden  proposition;  which  was 
then  defeated:  Yeas  19  ['Conserva- 
tives'] ;  Nays  20  [Republicans] ;  as 
before.  Several  more  Southern  Sen- 
ators had  meantime  seceded  and  left. 

Mr.  Lazarus  W.  Powell,  of  Ken- 
tucky, having  moved15  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  Select  Committee  of  Thir- 
teen on  the  crisis  at  which  the 
country  had  now  arrived,  the  Sen- 
ate assented,  and  Yice-President  John 
C.  Breckinridge 16  appointed  Messrs. 
Powell,  Hunter,  Crittenden,  Seward, 
Toombs,  Douglas,  Collamer,  Davis, 
Wade,  Bigler,  Rice,  Doolittle,  and 
Grimes  on  said  Committee — five  of 
the  thirteen  Republicans  (in  italics). 
Mr.  Davis  [Jefferson]  asked  to  be  ex- 
cused from  serving,  but  finally  con- 
sented. The  Committee  met  two  or 
three  days  thereafter,  and  held  seve- 
ral animated  sessions,  but  to  little 
purpose.  Mr.  Crittenden's  main  prop- 
osition— the  line  of  36°  30' — was  vo- 
ted down  after  full  discussion  :  Yeas 
Messrs.  Bigler,  Crittenden,  Douglas, 
Rice,  and  Powell — 5;  Nays,  Messrs. 
Davis,  Doolittle,  Collamer,  Wade, 
Tooinbs,  Grimes,  and  Hunter — 7 : 
absent,  Mr.  Seward.  Messrs.  Hunter, 
Toombs,  and  Davis,  it  is  said,  would 
have  supported  it,  had  it  been  pro- 
posed and  sustained  by  the  Republi- 
cans. The  remaining  propositions 
of  Mr.  Crittenden  received  generally 
a  majority  of  the  whole  number  of 
votes,  but  were  not  considered  adopt- 
ed; the  Committee  having  agreed 
upon  a  rule  that  nothing  should  be  so 
considered  that  did  not  receive  a  ma- 
jority both  of  the  Republican  and  the* 
anti-Republican  votes.  When  the 
Committee  met  again,17  Mr.  Seward 
submitted  the  following  proposition : 

"First.  No  amendment  shall  be  made  to 

u  December  5,  18G0.    18  December,  20,  1860. 


the  Constitution  which  will  authorize  or 
give  to  Congress  any  power  to  abolish  or 
interfere,  in  any  State,  with  the  domestic 
institutions  thereof,  including  that  of  per- 
sons held  to  service  or  labor  by  the  laws  of 
such  State.1' 

This  was  adopted  by  the  following 
vote : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Powell,  Hunter,  Critten- 
den, Seward,  Douglas,  Collamer,  Wade,  Big- 
ler, Rice,  Doolittle,  and  Grimes — 11. 

Nays — Messrs.  Davis  and  Toombs — 2. 

"Second,  The  Fugitive  Slave  law  of  1850 
shall' be  so  amended  as  to  secure  to  the 
alleged  fugitive  a  trial  by  jury." 

This,  having  been  amended,  on  mo- 
tion of  Mr.  Douglas,  so  as  to  have  the 
alleged  fugitive  sent  for  trial  to  the 
State  from  which  he  was  charged 
with  escaping,  was  voted  down — all 
the  Republicans  and  Mr.  Crittenden 
sustaining  it;  all  the  rest  opposing 
it. 

Mr.  Seward 18  further  proposed,  and 
the  Republicans  sustained,  the  fol- 
lowing : 

"  Resolved,  That,  under  the  fourth  section 
of  the  fourth  article  of  the  Constitution,  Con- 
gress should  pass  an  efficient  law  for  the 
punishment  of  all  persons  engaged  in  the 
armed  invasion  of  any  State  from  another 
by  combinations  of  individuals,  and  punish- 
ing all  persons  in  complicity  therewith,  on 
trial  and  conviction,  in  the  State  or  District 
where  their  acts  of  complicity  were  com- 
mitted, in  the  Federal  Courts." 

This  Was  negatived  by  the  solid 
vote  of  the  anti-Republican  mem- 
bers. 

It  can  hardly  be  necessary  to  trace 
further  the  abortive  proceedings  of 
this  Committee.  They  came  to 
nothing,  through  no  want  of  good-will 
on  the  part  of  a  majority  of  its  mem- 
bers, but  because  most  or  all  of  those 
from  the  South  could  or  would  ac- 
cept nothing  as  sufficient  short  of 
an  utter  and  shameful  repudiation  by 
the  Republicans  of  the  vital  principle 
of  their  party — the  consecration  of 

17  December  24th.  18  December  26th. 


384 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  Territories  to  Free  Labor.  Thus : 
Mr.  Robert  Toombs,  of  Georgia, 
having  submitted  a  series  of  propo- 
sitions, which  were,  in  substance,  the 
Breckinridge  platform,  without  wait- 
ing a  vote  or  any  decisive  action 
thereon,  made  haste  to  telegraph  to 
Georgia,  for  effect  upon  her  approach- 
ing election,  as  follows : 

"Washington,  Dec.  23,  1860. 

"  I  came  here  to  secure  your  constitutional 
rights,  and  to  demonstrate  to  you  that  you 
can  get  no  guarantee  for  those  rights  from 
your  Northern  confederates. 

u  The  whole  subject  was  referred  to  a 
Committee  of  thirteen  in  the  Senate.  I  was 
appointed  on  the  Committee,  and  accepted 
the  trust.  I  submitted  propositions,  which, 
so  far  from  receiving  a  decided  support  from 
a  single  member  of  the  Republican  party  of 
the  Committee,  were  all  treated  with  derision 
and  contempt. 

"  A  vote  was  then  taken  in  the  Committee 
on  amendments  to  the  Constitution,  proposed 
by  Hon.  J.  J.  Crittenden ;  and  each  and  all 
of  them  were  voted  against,  unanimously, 
by  the  Black  Republican  members  of  the 
Committee. 

"In  addition  to  these  facts,  a  majority  of 
the  Black  Republican  members  of  the  Com- 
mittee declared  distinctly  that  they  had  no 
guarantees  to  offer;  which  was  silently 
acquiesced  in  by  the  other  members. 

"The  Black  Republican  members  of  the 
Committee  are  representative  men  of  the 
party  and  section,  and,  to  the  extent  of  my 
information,  truly  represent  them. 

"  The  Committee  of  thirty-three  on  Fri- 
day adjourned  for  a  week,  without  coming 
to  any  vote,  after  solemnly  pledging  them- 
selves to  vote  on  all  the  propositions  then 
before  them,  that  day.  It  is  controlled  by 
the  Black  Republicans,  your  enemies,  who 
only  seek  to  amuse  you  with  delusive  hopes 
until  your  election,  that  you  may  defeat  the 
friends  of  Secession. 

"  If  you  are  deceived  by  them,  it  shall  not 
be  my  fault.  I  have  put  the  test  fairly  and 
frankly.  It  is  decisive  against  you  now.  I 
tell  you,  upon  the  faith  of  a  true  man,  that 
all  further  looking  to  the  North  for  security 
for  your  constitutional  rights,  ought  to  be 
instantly  abandoned. 

"  It  is  fraught  with  nothing  but  ruin  to 
yourselves  and  to  your  posterity.  Secession, 
by  the  4th  day  of  March  next,  should  be 
thundered  from  the  ballot-box  by  the  unani- 
mous voice  of  Georgia,  on  the  2d  day  of 


January  next.  Such  a  voice  will  be  your 
best  guarantee  for  liberty,  tranquillity,  and 
glory.  R.  Toombs." 

Though  it  is  neither  essential  nor 
practicable  here  to  record  all  the 
abortive  projects  of '  conciliation'  sub- 
mitted to  Congress  at  this  fruitlessly 
fruitful  session,  that  presented  by  Mr. 
C.  L.  Yallandigham,  of  Ohio,  deserves 
notice,  as  the  fullest  and  most  logical 
embodiment  yet  made  of  Mr.  Cal- 
houn's subtile  device  for  enabling  a 
minority  to  obstruct  and  baffle  the 
majority  under  a  political  system 
preserving  the  forms  of  a  republic. 

Mr.  V.,  after  a  preamble,  setting 
forth  "  the  tendency  of  stronger  gov- 
ernments to  enlarge  their  powers  and 
jurisdiction  at  the  expense  of  weaker," 
"  and  of  majorities  to  usurp  and  abuse 
power,  and  oppress  minorities  ;"  also 
affirming  that  "sectional  divisions 
can  no  longer  be  suppressed,"  etc., 
etc.,  proposed19  that  Congress  should 
recommend  to  the  States  a  radical 
change  of  the  Federal  Constitution, 
by  adding  thereto  as  follows  : 

"Article  XIII.  Sec.  1.  The  United 
States  are  divided  into  four  sections,  as 
follows: 

"  The  States  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire, 
Vermont,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island.  Con- 
necticut, New  York,  New  Jersey,  and  Penn- 
sylvania ;  and  all  new  States  annexed  and 
admitted  into  the  Union  or  formed  or  erect- 
ed within  the  jurisdiction  of  said  States, 
or  by  the  junction  of  two  or  more  of  the 
same  or  of  parts  thereof,  or  out  of  territory 
acquired  north  of  said  States,  shall  consti- 
tute one  section,  to  be  known  as  The  North. 

*"The  States  of  Ohio,  Indiana,  Illinois, 
Michigan,  Wisconsin,  Minnesota,  Iowa,  and 
Kansas,  and  all  new  States  annexed  or  ad- 
mitted into  the  Union,  or  erected  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  any  of  said  States,  or  by  the 
junction  of  two  or  more  of  the  same,  or  of  r 
parts  thereof,  or  out  of  territory  now 
held  or  hereafter  acquired  north  of  latitude 
3(5°  30'  and  east  of  the  crest  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  shall  constitute  another  section, 
to  be  known  as  Tjie  West. 

"  The  States  of  Oregon  and  California,  and 


19  February  7,  1861. 


MR. 


TALL  ANDIGHAM'S  PROJECT. 


385 


all  new  States  annexed  or  admitted  into  the 
Union,  or  formed  or  erected  within  the  juris- 
diction of  any  of  said  States,  or  by  the  junction 
of  two  or  more  of  the  same,  or  of  parts  there- 
of, or  out  of  territory  now  held  or  hereafter 
acquired  west  of  the  crest  of  the  Rocky  Moun- 
tains and  of  the  Rio  Grande,  shall  constitute 
another  section,  to  be  known  as  The  Pacific. 

"  The  States  of  Delaware,  Maryland,  Vir- 
ginia, North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Geor- 
gia, Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi,  Louisi- 
ana, Texas,  Arkansas,  Tennessee,  Kentucky, 
and  Missouri,  and  all  new  States  annexed 
or  admitted  into  the  Union,  or  formed  or 
erected  within  the  jurisdiction  of  any  of  said 
States,  or  by  the  junction  of  two  or  more  of 
the  same,  or  of  parts  thereof,  or  out  of  terri- 
tory acquired  east  of  the  Rio  Grande  and 
south  of  latitude  36°  30',  shall  constitute  an- 
other section,  to  be  known  as  The  South. 

"  Sec.  2.  On  demand  of  one-third  of  the 
Senators  of  any  one  of  the  sections  on  any 
bill,  order,  resolution,  or  vote,  to  which  the 
concurrence  of  the  House  of  Representatives 
may  be  necessary,  except  on  a  question  of 
adjournment,  a  vote  shall  be  had  by  sec- 
tions; and  a  majority  of  the  Senators  from 
each  section  shall  be  necessary  to  the  pas- 
sage of  each  bill,  order,  or  resolution,  and  to 
the  validity  of  every  such  vote. 

"  Sec.  3.  Two  of  the  Electors  of  President 
and  Vice-President  shall  be  appointed  by 
each  State,  in  such  manner  as  the  Legislature 
thereof  may  direct,  for  the  State  at  large. 
The  other  Electors  to  which  each  State  may 
be  entitled  shall  be  chosen  in  the  respective 
Congressional  Districts  into  which  the  State 
may,  at  the  regular  decennial  period,  have 
been  divided,  by  the  electors  of  each  District 
having  the  qualifications  requisite  for  elect- 
ors of  the  most  numerous  branch  of  the 
State  Legislature.  A  majority  of  all  the 
Electors  in  each  of  the  four  sections  in  this 
article  established,  shall  be  necessary  to  the 
choice  of  President  and  Vice-President ;  and 
the  concurrence  of  a  majority  of  the  States 
of  each  section  shall  be  necessary  to  the 
choice  of  President  by  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, and  of  the  Senators  from  each 
section  to  the  choice  of  Vice-President  by 
the  Senate,  whenever  the  right  of  choice 
shall  devolve  upon  them  respectively. 

"Sec.  4.  The  President  and  Vice-Presi- 
dent shall  hold  their  offices  each  during  the 
term  of  six  years ;  and  neither  shall  be  eligi- 
ble to  more  than  one  term  except  by  the 
votes  of  two-thirds  of  all  the  Electors  of 
each  section,  or  of  the  States  of  each  section, 
whenever  the  right  of  choice  of  President 
shall  devolve  upon  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives ;  or  of  the  Senators  from  each  section, 
whenever  the  right  of  choice  of  Vice-Presi- 
dent shall  devolve  upon  the  Senate. 

"Sec.  5.  The  Congress  shall  provide  by 
25 


law  for  the  case  of  a  failure  by  the  House  of 
Representatives  to  choose  a  President,  and 
of  the  Senate  to  choose  a  Vice-President, 
whenever  the  right  of  choice  shall  devolve 
upon  them  respectively,  declaring  what  offi- 
cer shall  then  act  as  President;  and  such 
officer  shall  then  act  accordingly  until  a 
President  shall  be  elected.  The  Congress 
shall  also  provide  by  law  for  a  special  elec- 
tion for  President  and  Vice-President  in 
such  case,  to  be  held  and  completed  within 
six  months  of  the  expiration  of  the  term  of 
office  of  the  last  preceding  President,  and  to 
be  conducted  in  all  respects  as  provided  for 
in  the  Constitution  for  regular  elections  of 
the  same  officers ;  except  that,  if  the  House 
of  Representatives  shall  not  choose  a  Presi- 
dent, should  the  right  of  choice  devolve  upon 
them,  within  twenty  days  of  the  opening  of 
the  certificates  and  counting  of  the  Electoral 
votes,  then  the  Vice-President  shall  act  as 
President,  as  in  the  case  of  the  death  or 
other  constitutional  disability  of  the  Presi- 
dent. The  term  of  office  of  the  President 
chosen  under  such  special  election  shall  con- 
tinue six  years  from  the  4th  day  of  March 
preceding  such  election. 

"  Art.  XIV.  No  State  shall  secede,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Legislatures  of  all  the 
States  of  the  section  to  which  the  State  pro- 
posing to  secede  belongs.  The  President 
shall  have  power  to  adjust  with  seceding 
States  all  questions  arising  by  reason  of  their 
secession  ;  but  the  terms  of  adjustment  shall 
be  submitted  to  the  Congress  for  their  ap- 
proval before  the  same  shall  be  valid. 

"  Art.  XV.  Neither  the  Congress  nor  a 
Territorial  Legislature  shall  have  power  to 
interfere  with  the  right  of  the  citizens  of 
any  of  the  States  within  either  of  the  sec- 
tions to  migrate,  upon  equal  terms  with  the 
citizens  of  the  States  within  either  of  the 
other  sections,  to  the  territories  of  the 
United  States ;  nor  shall  either  have  power 
to  destroy  or  impair  any  rights  of  either 
person  or  property  in  the  territories.  New 
States  annexed  for  admission  into  the  Union, 
or  formed  or  erected  within  the  jurisdiction 
of  the  other  States,  or  by  the  junction  of 
two  or  more  States,  or  parts  of  States,  and 
States  formed  with  the  consent  of  Congress 
out  of  any  territory  of  the  United  States, 
shall  be  entitled  to  admission  upon  an  equal 
footing  with  the  original  States,  under  any 
Constitution  establishing  a  government  re- 
publican in  form,  which  the  people  thereof 
may  ordain,  whenever  such  States  shall  con- 
tain, within  an  area  of  not  less  than  thirty 
thousand  square  miles,  a  population  equal 
to  the  then  existing  ratio  of  representation 
for  one  member  of  the  House  of  Representa- 
tives." 

Dr.  Franklin — who  failed  to>  per- 


386 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


eeive  the  wisdom  of  dividing  a  legis- 
lature into  two  '  houses' — once  com- 
pared said  device  to  that  of  a  Dutch- 
man, who,  having  a  loaded  wagon 
stuck  fast  in  a  bog,  hitched  a  span  of 
horses  to  either  end  and  '  whipped 
up  both  ways.'  It  is  not  certain  that 
he  might  not  have  thus  extricated  his 
load — or,  at  least,  overturned  it ;  for 
even  our  old  Confederation,  though 
a  feeble  and  vicious,  was  not  an  im- 
possible frame-work  of  government. 
We  could  not  have  so  rapidly  in- 
creased in  wealth  or  power  under  it ; 
yet  we  need  not  have  permanently 
held  in  the  scale  of  nations  a  lower 
rank  than  that  of  Switzerland  or 
Sweden.  But  this  project  of  Mr. 
Yallandigham,  if  adopted,  would 
have  given  us  a  government  which 
no  civilized  people  could  have  en- 
dured through  a  quarter  of  a  cen- 
tury— a  government  embodying  in 
an  aggravated  form  all  the  vices  of 
the  old  Confederation,  with  few  or 
none  of  its  virtues — a  government 
requiring  a  President,  yet  rendering 
his  election  a  rare  and  happy  acci- 
dent— a  Congress  wherein  the  pas- 
sage of  a  single  act  of  any  decided 
importance  would  be  the  event  of  a 
decade — a  rule  hardly  to  be  endured, 
yet  not  to  be  escaped  without  a  revo- 
lution. For  the  chief  end  of  this,  as 
of  nearly  every  kindred  contrivance 
of  the  session,  was  the  construction 
of  a  balance  whereby  three  hundred 
thousand  slaveholders  would  weigh 
down  twenty  millions  of  freemen,  and 
a  section  which  systematically  repels 
immigration,  degrades  industry,  and 
discourages  improvement,  be  ren- 
dered enduringly  equal  in  power  and 
consideration  with  one  cherishing  a 
policy  radically  antagonistic  to  this. 


Yet  this  inevitable  disparity  in  growth 
and  strength  between  the  Free  and 
the  Slave  States  was  the  basis  of  all 
Southern  discontent  with  the  Union, 
and  to  counteract  or  overbear  it  the 
object  of  every  device  for  the  removal 
of  Southern  grievances  and  the  re- 
dress of  Southern  wrongs. 

The  House  Committee  of  Thirty- 
three  encountered  the  same  obstacles, 
and  achieved  a  like  failure,  with  its 
counterpart  in  the  Senate.  Mr.  Al- 
bert Rust,  of  Arkansas,  submitted  to 
it 20  a  proposition  which  was  substan- 
tially identical  with  Mr.  Crittenden's, 
and  which  he  presented  as  the  ulti- 
matum of  the  South.  It  was  voted 
down  some  days  afterward:  Yeas 
12 ;  Nays  15  :  no  Republican  sustain- 
ing it.  On  the  18th,  Mr.  Henry 
Winter  Dans,  of  Md.,  offered  the 
following,  which  was  adopted  unani- 
mously : 

"Resolved,  oy  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives,  That  the  several  States  be 
respectfully  requested  to  cause  their  statutes 
to  be  revised,  with  a  view  to  ascertain  if 
any  of  them  are  in  conflict  with,  or  tend  to 
embarrass  or  hinder,  the  execution  of  the 
laws  of  the  United  States,  made  in  pursuance 
of  the  second  section  of  the  IVth  Article  of 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  for 
the  delivering  up  of  persons  held  to  labor  by 
the  laws  of  any  State  and  escaping  there- 
from ;  and  the  Senate  and  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives earnestly  request  that  all  enact- 
ments having  such  tendency  be  forthwith 
repealed,  as  required  by  a  just  sense  of  con- 
stitutional obligations,  and  by  a  due  regard 
for  the  peace  of  the  Republic.  And  the 
President  of  the  United  States  is  requested 
to  communicate  these  resolutions  to  the 
Governors  of  the  several  States,  with  the 
request  that  they  will  lay  the  same  before 
the  Legislatures  thereof  respectively." 

Mr.  Thomas  Corwin,  of  Ohio,  from 
a  majority  of  this  Committee,  made 
an  elaborate  report,  on  the  14th  of 
January,  1861,  favoring  concession 


December  17  th. 


MR.    CORWIN'S    'PEACE'  MEASURE. 


387 


and  compromise,  but  not  the  line  of 
36°  30/'  Messrs.  C.  C.  Washburne, 
of  Wisconsin,  and  Mason  W.  Tappan, 
of  N.  II.,  tendered  a  minority  report, 
setting  forth  that,  in  view  of  the  Re- 
bellion, now  in  progress,  no  conces- 
sions should  be  made.  They  closed 
by  submitting  the  resolve  which  had 
been  offered  in  the  Senate  by 
Mr.  Clark,  of  N.  TL,  and  which  has 
already  been  given. 

Messrs.  Birch,  of  California,  and 
Stout,  of  Oregon,  submitted  a  sepa- 
rate minority  report,  proposing  a 
Convention  of  the  States  to  amend 
the  Federal  Constitution.  This  pro- 
posal had  been  voted  down  by  15 
to  14  in  the  Committee,  and  it  was 
likewise  voted  down  in  the  House: 
Yeas  64 ;  Nays  108. 

The  Crittenden  proposition  was 
moved  in  the  House,  as  a  substitute 
for  Mr.  Corwin's,  and  rejected :  Yeas 
80 ;  Nays  113. 

The  conclusions  of  the  Grand  Com- 
mittee, as  reported  by  Mr.  Corwin 
and  sustained  by  the  House,  were  as 
follows : 

"  1.  Resolved,  oy  the  Senate  and  House  of 
Representatives  of  the  United  States  of  Amer- 
ica in  Congress  assembled,  That  all  attempts, 
on  the  part  of  the  Legislatures  of  any  of 
the  States,  to  obstruct  or  hinder  the  recov- 
ery and  surrender  of  fugitives  from  labor, 
are  in  derogation  of  the  Constitution  of  the 
United  States,  inconsistent  with  the  comity 
and  good  neighborhood  which  should  pre- 
vail among  the  several  States,  and  danger- 
ous to  the  peace  of  the  Union. 

2.  [Mr.  II.  Winter  Davis's  proposition, 
already  given  on  page  3 80.] 

"  3.  Resolved,  That  we  recognize  Slavery 
as  now  existing  in  fifteen  of  the  United 
States,  by  the  usages  or  the  laws  of  those 
States;  and  we  recognize  no  authority,  le- 
gally or  otherwise,  outside  of  a  State  where 
it  so  exists,  to  interfere  with  slaves  or  Sla- 
very in  such  States,  in  disregard  of  the  rights 
of  their  owners  or  the  peace  of  Society. 

"4.  Resolved,  That  we  recognize  the  just- 
ness and  propriety  of  a  faithful  execution  of 
the  Constitution,  and  laws  made  in  pursu- 


ance thereof,  on  the  subject  of  fugitive 
slaves,  or  fugitives  from  service  or  labor, 
and  discountenance  all  mobs,  or  hindrances 
to  the  execution  of  such  laws ;  and  that  citi- 
zens of  each  State  shall  be  entitled  to  all 
the  privileges  and.  immunities  of  citizens  in 
the  several  States. 

"  5.  Resolved,  That  we  recognize  no  such 
conflicting  element  in  its  composition,  or 
sufficient  cause  from  any  source  for  a  disso- 
lution of  this  Government;  that  we  are  not 
sent  here  to  destroy,  but  to  sustain  and  har- 
monize, the  institutions,  and  to  see  that 
equal  justice  is  done  to  all  parts  of  the 
same;  and,  finally,  to  perpetuate  its  exist- 
ence,on  terms  of  equality  and  justice  to  all 
the  States. 

"  6.  Resolved,  That  the  faithful  observ- 
ance, on  the  part  of  all  the  States,  of  all  their 
constitutional  obligations  to  each  other,  and 
to  the  Federal  Government,  is  essential  to 
the  peace  of  the  country. 

u7.  Resolved,  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Federal  Government  to  enforce  the  Federal 
laws,  protect  the  Federal  property,  and  pre- 
serve the  Union  of  these  States. 

"8.  Resolved,  That  each  State  is  request- 
ed to  revise  its  statutes,  and,  if  necessary,  so 
to  amend  the  same  as  to  secure,  without 
legislation  by  Congress,  to  citizens  of  other 
States  traveling  therein,  the  same  protection 
as  citizens  of  such  State  enjoy;  and  that 
she  also  protect  the  citizens  of  other  States 
traveling  or  sojourning  therein  against 
popular  violence  or  illegal  summary  punish- 
ment, without  trial,  in  due  form  of  law,  for 
imputed  crimes. 

"  9.  Resolved,  That  each  State  be  also  re- 
spectfully requested  to  enact  such  laws  as 
will  prevent  and  punish  any  attempt  what- 
ever in  such  State  to  recognize  or  set  on 
foot  the  lawless  invasion  of  any  other  State 
or  territory. 

"  10.  Resolved,  That  the  President  be  re- 
quested to  transmit  copies  of  the  foregoing 
resolutions  to  the  Governors  of  the  several 
States,  with  a  request  that  they  be  commu- 
nicated to  their  respective  Legislatures." 

The  Speaker  decided  Mr.  Corwin's 
report  an  indivisible  proposition,  and 
the  House,  after  refusing  to  lay  it  on 
the  table,  finally  passed  it  by  the  de- 
cisive majority  of  83 :  Yeas  136 ; 
Nays  53  :  the  proportion  of  Republi- 
cans to  anti-Republicans  being  about 
the  same  in  the  Yeas  as  in  the  Nays. 

Mr.  Corwin  further  reported  a  joint 
resolution  proposing  an  amendment 
to  the  Constitution,  whereby  any  fu- 


388 


THE  AMEEICAX  CONFLICT. 


ture  amendment  giving  Congress 
power  over  Slavery  in  the  States  is 
forbidden;  which  was  defeated,  not 
receiving  the  requisite  two-thirds — 
Yeas  123 ;  Nays  71.  It  was  recon- 
sidered, however,  on  motion  of  Mr. 
Daniel  Kilgore,  of  Indiana,  seconded 
by 21  Mr.  Benjamin  Stanton,  of  Ohio  ; 
adopted :  Yeas  133  ;  Nays  65  :  and 
the  Senate  concurred :  Yeas  24 ; 
Nays  12. 

This  closed  the  efforts  in  Congress 
to  disarm  the  sternly  purposed  Rebel- 
lion, by  yielding  without  bloodshed  a 
substantial  triumph  to  the  Rebels. 

At  this  session,  after  the  withdrawal 
of  Southern  members  in  such  numbers 
as  to  give  the  Republicans  a  large 
majority  in  the  House  and  a  practical 
control  of  the  Senate,  three  separate 
acts  were  passed,  organizing  the  Ter- 
ritories of  Colorado,  Nevada,  and  Da- 
kotah  respectively — the  three  together 


covering  a  very  large  proportion  of 
all  the  remaining  territory  of  the 
United  States.  All  these  acts  were 
silent  with  regard  to  Slavery  ;  leav- 
ing whatever  rights  had  accrued  to 
'the  South'  under  the  Constitution, 
as  interpreted  and  affirmed  by  the 
Supreme  Court  in  the  Dred  Scott  de- 
cision, not  merely  unimpaired,  but 
unassailed  and  unquestioned,  by  any 
Federal  legislation  or  action.  The 
passage  of  these  acts  in  this  form  was 
certainly  intended  to  soothe  the 
prevalent  madness,  and  to  strengthen 
the  Unionists  of  the  South,  especially 
of  the  Border  States ;  though  it  does 
not  seem  to  have  had  any  such  effect. 
And,  indeed,  it  is  not  probable  that 
any  concession  could  have  been  made, 
after  the  withdrawal  of  Toombs, 
Davis,  etc.,  from  Washington,  that 
would  not  have  evoked  the  stern 
answer — i  Too  late !' 


XXV. 


PEACE  DEMOCRACY  — PEACE  CONFERENCE. 


On  the  31st  of  January,  1861,  a 
Democratic  State  Convention,  called 
to  consider  the  impending  peril  of 
Disunion,  assembled  at  Tweddle  Hall, 
Albany.  It  was  probably  the  strong- 
est and  most  imposing  assemblage  of 
delegates  ever  convened  within  the 
State.  Not  less  than  thirty  of  them 
had  been  chosen  to  seats  in  Congress, 
while  three  1  of  them  had  been  Demo- 
cratic candidates  for  Governor ;  one 
of  them  once  elected,  and  since  chosen 
again.    Though  called  as   6  Demo- 


cratic,' there  was  a  large  and  most 
respectable  representation  of  the  old 
Whig  party,  with  a  number  who  had 
figured  as  '  Americans.'  No  Conven- 
tion which  had  nominations  to  make, 
or  patronage  to  dispose  of,  was  ever 
so  innuentially  constituted.  All  sym- 
pathizing State  officers  and  members 
of  the  Legislature  were  formally  in- 
vited to  participate  in  its  delibera- 
tions. Sanford  E.  Church,  of  Albion, 
was  temporary  Chairman,  and  Judge 
Amasa  J.  Parker,  of  Albany,  Presi- 


21  February  28,  1861. 


1  Horatio  Seymour,  Amasa  J.  Parker,  and  William  Kelly. 


VIEWS   OP   JUDGE    PARKER   AND    A.    B.    JOHNSON.  389 


dent.  On  taking  the  Chair,  Judge 
Parker  said : 

"This  Convention  has  been  called  with 
no  view  to  mere  party  objects.  It  looks 
only  to  the  great  interests  of  State.  We 
meet  here  as  conservative  and  representative 
men  who  have  differed  among  themselves  as 
to  measures  of  governmental  policy,  ready, 
all  of  them,  I  trust,  to  sacrifice  such  differ- 
ences upon  the  altar  of  our  common  coun- 
try. He  can  be  no  true  patriot  who  is  not 
ready  to  yield  his  own  prejudices,  to  surren- 
der a  favorite  theory,  and  to  clip  even  from 
his  own  party  platform,  where  such  omission 
may  save  his  country  from  ruin  otherwise 
inevitable.    [Loud  cheers.] 

"The  people  of  this  State  demand  the 
peaceful  settlement  of  the  questions  that 
have  led  to  disunion.  They  have  a  right  to 
insist  that  there  shall  be  conciliation,  con- 
cession, compromise.  While  yet  the  pillars 
of  our  political  temple  lie  scattered  on  the 
ground,  let  them  be  used  to  reconstruct  the 
edifice.  The  popular  sentiment  is  daily  ga- 
thering strength,  and  will  overwhelm  in  its 
progress  alike  those  who  seek  to  stem  it  on 
the  frail  plank  of  party  platforms  and  those 
who  labor  to  pervert  it  to  mere  party  advan- 
tage. [Cheers.]" 

The  venerable  Alex.  B.  Johnson, 
of  Utica,  followed,  in  an  address 
which  landed  the  good  understanding 
which  had  always  existed  between 
the  Democratic  party  and  the  South  ; 
which  he  attributed  to  a  mutual  dread 
of  the  undue  extension  and  aggran- 
dizement of  Federal  power.  He  said : 

"  To  a  superficial  observer,  our  difficulties 
consist  of  revolutionary  movements  in  the 
Southern  States  ;  but  these  movements  are 
only  symptoms  of  a  disorder,  not  the  disorder 
itself;  and,  before  we  can  treat  the  disorder 
understanding^,  with  a  view  to  its  remedy, 
we  must  understand  its  cause  ;  and  we  shall 
find  it  in  the  avowed  principles  on  which 
the  late  presidential  election  was  conducted 
to  its  final  triumph — principles  inculcating 
sectional  hate  in  place  of  federal  kindness  ; 
in  direct  contravention  with  the  dying  in- 
junctions of  the  Father  of  his  Country,  and 
of  the  most  eminent  of  his  successors  in  the 
presidency,  General  Jackson." 

He  proceeded  to  blame  the  Repub- 
licans, "  whose  principles  and  con- 
duct have  produced  the  mischief," 
for  refusing  to  give  4  the  South'  such 


guarantees  of  her  rights  as  are  re- 
quired ;  adding : 

"  What  the  guarantees  should  be  is  in  vain 
for  us  to  prescribe,  having  no  power  to  either 
inaugurate  them  or  to  conduct  them  to  a 
successful  consummation ;  but,  speaking  for 
the  Democratic  party  of  this  State,  and  of, 
we  believe,  the  whole  Union,  and,  indeed, 
for  a  vast  body  of  citizens  not  identified 
with  any  party,  we  feel  safe  in  saying  that 
no  guarantee  will  be  unwelcome  that  shall 
give  the  South,  and  all  its  property,  the 
same  rights  that  are  or  shall  be  possessed  by 
the  North  and  its  property  :  the  same  rights 
which  the  South  possessed  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  confederacy  :  Slavery  being  at 
that  time  no  object  of  antagonism,  but  the 
common  institution  of  all  the  States  but  one ; 
and  we  will  accord  this  equality  the  more 
readily,  by  reason  that  any  settlement  which 
shall  continue  any  inequality  between  the 
North  and  the  South  will  be  prejudicial  to 
the  permanency  of  the  settlement,  and  hence 
should  not  be  offered  by  the  North,  even  if 
the  South,  from  a  love  of  the  Union,  should 
be  willing  to  remain  therein  with  less  than 
an  equality  of  its  advantages." 

He  considered  the  prescribed  modes 
of  amending  the  Constitution,  and 
then  continued: 

"  Possibly,  all  remedies  may  be  withheld 
till  the  seceded  States  shall  have  become 
confederated  together  and  refuse  to  return. 
In  the  possibility  of  this  unhappy  determi- 
nation, and  which  the  present  aspect  of  par- 
ties compels  us  to  consider,  we  are  certain 
that  the  will  of  a  large  portion  of  the  citi- 
zens of  this  State  is  against  any  armed  coer- 
cion, on  the  part  of  the  General  or  State 
governments,  to  restore  the  Union  by  civil 
war ;  and,  in  this  connection,  we  have  seen 
with  disapprobation  the  haste  evinced  by 
our  Legislature  to  imbrue  their  hands  in 
fraternal  blood,  and  the  pernicious  zeal 
which,  without  even  the  apology  of  any  le- 
gislative direction,  induced  the  transmission 
of  this  aggressive  intention  to  the  governors 
of  not  only  the  seceded  States,  but  of  the 
Border  States,  who,  at  the  time,  were  strug- 
gling to  restrain  their  citizens  from  seces- 
sion, and  thus  revealing  to  us,  that,  unless 
our  Northern  people  interfere,  the  mistaken 
sectionalism,  which  has  produced  our  pre- 
sent misfortunes,  is  not  to  be  corrected  by 
any  evidence  of  its  destructiveness,  but  is  to 
be  continued  by  partisans,  till  the  South  is 
either  subjugated  or  destroyed.  The  advo- 
cates of  this  horrid  violence  against  the  doc- 
trines of  our  Declaration  of  Independence, 
and  which,  if  successful  in  its  object,  would 


390 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


constitute  a  more  radical  revolution  in  our 
form  of  government  than  even  secession, 
certainly  mistake  not  only  the  age  in  which 
we  live,  but  the  people  whom  they  repre- 
sent, and  who  sympathize  in  no  desire  to 
take  a  bloody  revenge  on  those  who  think 
they  can  live  more  peacefully  and  prosper- 
ously alone,  than  in  a  Union  with  those  who 
have,  for  years,  irritated  them  almost  to 
madness,  by  denouncing  them  as  a  reproach 
and  a  disgrace." 

Mr.  Johnson  concluded  in  these 

words : 

uBut  we  are  asked,  rather  triumphantly, 
'  Have  we  a  government  V  The  question  is 
intended  to  imply,  that  the  government 
must  be  strong  enough  for  self-preservation, 
whatever  may  become  a  necessary  means. 
The  answer  is,  that  the  government  is  as 
strong  as  its  founders  could  agree  to  make 
it.  Its  weakness  in  emergencies  like  the 
present  was  foreseen  by  the  men  that  framed 
the  Constitution;  but  they  soon  perceived 
that  they  must  take  the  Constitution  as  it 
now  stands,  or  no  confederation  could  be 
formed.  If,  therefore,  we  now  attempt  to 
strengthen  the  government  by  coercive  ac- 
tion, which  all  men  know  its  founders  would 
have  rejected  with  scorn,  ice  are  the  revo- 
lutionists, and  not  the  South;  so  jealous,  in- 
deed, were  the  States  of  Federal  interference, 
that  its  protection  of  them  against  domestic 
violence  was  prohibited,  till  the  disturbed 
State  applied  for  protection  by  its  legisla- 
ture, or  by  its  chief  executive  when  the  le- 
gislature could  not  be  convened.  If,  then, 
the  States  would  not  accept  protection  from 
the  general  government  till  it  was  demand- 
ed, how  much  less  would  they  have  accepted 
coercion  against  their  own  actions !  The 
government  was  strong  enough  while  ce- 
mented by  mutual  good  fellowship  ;  but  no 
government,  and  ours  the  least  of  all,  is  suffi- 
ciently strong  to,  resist  incessant  aggravations. 
Finally,  if  Congress  and  our  States  cannot, 
or  will  not,  win  back  our  Southern  brethren, 
let  us,  at  least,  part  as  friends ;  and  then  pos- 
sibly, if  experience  shall,  as  we  suppose  it 
will,  show  the  departed  States  that,  in  leaving 
the  Union,  they  have  only  deserted  a  happy 
home,  they  may  be  willing  to  sue  us  to  re- 
admit them ;  or,  if  they  shall  find  a  perma- 
nent separation  more  desirable  than  Union, 
we  may  still  exist  together  as  useful  and  pro- 
fitable neighbors,  assisting  each  other  when 
either  is  threatened  by  injustice  from  the 
nations  of  Europe;  and  the  two  sections,  in- 
stead of  wasting  their  time  and  energies  in 
quarreling  with  each  other  about  Slavery, 
will  at  least  have  more  time  to  severally  em- 
ploy all  their  energies  in  seeking  then*  own 
prosperity  in  their  own  way." 


Gov.  Horatio  Seymour  followed, 
berating  the  Republicans  generally, 
but  especially  those  in  Congress,  as 
the  responsible  authors  of  the  perils 
now  darkening  the  National  sky. 
Eeferring  to  the  refusal  of  the  Repub- 
licans in  Congress  to  cooperate  in  the 
legalization  of  Slavery  in  the  territo- 
ries, he  asked : 

"What  spectacle  do  we  present  to-day? 
Already  six  States  have  withdrawn  from  this 
confederacy.  Revolution  has  actually  be- 
gun. The  term  '  secession'  divests  it  of 
none  of  its  terrors,  nor  do  arguments  to  prove 
secession  inconsistent  with  our  Constitution 
stay  its  progress,  or  mitigate  its  evils.  All 
virtue,  patriotism,  and  intelligence,  seem  to 
have  fled  from  our  National  Capitol ;  it  has 
been  well  likened  to  the  conflagration  of  an 
asylum  for  madmen — some  look  on  with 
idiotic  imbecility ;  some  in  sullen  silence ;  and 
some  scatter  the  firebrands  which  consume 
the  fabric  above  them,  and  bring  upon  all  a 
common  destruction.  Is  there  one  revolting 
aspect  in  this  scene  which  has  not  its  paral- 
lel at  the  Capitol  of  your  country  ?  Do  you 
not  see  there  the  senseless  imbecility,  the 
garrulous  idiocy,  the  maddened  rage,  dis- 
played with  regard  to  petty  personal  passions 
and  party  purposes,  while  the  glory,  the 
honor,  and  the  safety  of  the  country  are  all 
forgotten  ?  The  same  pervading  fanaticism 
has  brought  evil  upon  all  the  institutions  of 
our  land.  Our  churches  are  torn  asunder 
and  desecrated  to  partisan  purposes.  The 
wrongs  of  our  local  legislation,  the  growing 
burdens  of  debt  and  taxation,  the  gradual 
destruction  of  the  African  in  the  Free  States, 
which  is  marked  by  each  recurring  census, 
are  all  due  to  the  neglect  of  our  own  duties, 
caused  by  the  complete  absorption  of  the 
public  mind  by  a  senseless,  unreasoning  fana- 
ticism. The  agitation  of  the  question  of 
Slavery  has  thus  far  brought  greater  social, 
moral,  and  legislative  evils  upon  the  people 
of  the  free  States  than  it  has  upon  the  insti- 
tutions of  those  against  whom  it  has  been 
excited.  The  wisdom  of  Franklin  stamped 
upon  the  first  coin  issued  by  our  government, 
the  wise  motto,  '  Mind  your  business!'  The 
violation  of  this  homely  proverb,  which  lies 
at  the  foundation  of  the  doctrines  of  local 
rights,  has*,  thus  far,  proved  more  hurtful  to 
the  meddlers  in  the  affairs  of  others  than  to 
those  against  whom  this  pragmatic  action  is 
directed." 

Gov.  Seymour  proceeded  to  argue 
i  that  the  North  had,  thus  far,  had 


GOT.    SEYMOUR  U 


RG-ES  CONCESSION. 


391 


greatly  the  advantage  in  the  division 
or  disposition  of  the  Federal  territo- 
ries— that  the  claims  put  forth  on  be- 
half of  the  South  were  just  and  rea- 
sonable— that  the  difference  ought  to 
be  settled  by  compromise — that  we 
have  no  alternative  but  compromise 
or  civil  war — adding : 

"We  are  advised  by  the  conservative 
States  of  Virginia  and  Kentucky  that,  if  force 
is  to  be  used,  it  must  be  exerted  against  the 
united  South.  It  would  be  an  act  of  folly 
and  madness,  in  entering  upon  this  contest, 
to  underrate  our  opponents,  and  thus  subject 
ourselves  to  the  disgrace  of  defeat  in  an  in- 
glorious warfare.  Let  us  also  see  if  success- 
ful coercion  by  the  North  is  less  revolution- 
ary than  successful  secession  by  the  South. 
Shall  we  prevent  revolution  by  being  fore- 
most in  overthrowing  the  principles  of  our 
government,  and  all  that  makes  it  valuable 
to  our  people,  and  distinguishes  it  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth  ?" 

Gov.  Seymour  proceeded  to  dilate 
on  the  valor  and  sagacity  of  the  men 
of  the  South — the  extent  of  their 
coast-line,  rendering  its  effectual 
blockade  nearly  impossible — the  ruin 
of  our  own  industry  which  must  re- 
sult from  civil  war — and  to  urge 
afresh  the  necessity  of  compromise  ; 
saying : 

"  The  question  is  simply  this — '  Shall  we 
have  compromise  after  war,  or  compromise 
without  war  V  " 

He  urged  that  a  compromise  was 
required,  not  to  pacify  the  States 
which  have  seceded  from  the  Union, 
but  to  save  the  Border  States  from 
following,  by  strengthening  the  hands 
of  their  Unionists. 

There  is  no  point  whereon  men  are 
apt  to  evince  more  generosity  than 
in  the  sacrifice  of  other  men's  convic- 
tions. What  they  may  consider  vital 
principles,  but  which  we  regard  as 
besotted  prejudices  or  hypocritical 
pretenses,  we  are  always  willing  to 
subordinate  to  any  end  which  we 
consider  beneficent.  In  fact,  a  frank, 


ingenuous  confession  of  the  errors 
and  sins  of  his  adversaries  is  one  of 
the  politician's  commonest  exhibi- 
tions of  sincerity  and  patriotism. 
Thus  Gov.  Seymour  continues : 

"  Let  us  take  care  that  we  do  not  mistake 
passion  and  prejudice  and  partisan  purposes 
for  principle.  The  cry  of  '  no  compromise'  is 
false  in  morals  ;  it  is  treason  to  the  spirit  of 
the  Constitution ;  it  is  infidelity  in  religion : 
the  cross  itself  is  a  compromise,  and  is  plead- 
ed by  many  who  refuse  all  charity  to  their 
felloAV-citizens.  It  is  the  vital  principle  of 
social  existence ;  it  unites  the  family  circle ; 
it  sustains  the  church,  and  upholds  national- 
ities.' 

"But  the  Republicans  complain  that,  hav- 
ing won  a  victory,  we  ask  them  to  surren- 
der its  fruits.  We  do  not  wish  them  to  give 
up  any  political  advantage.  We  urge  mea- 
sures which  are  demanded  by  the  honor  and 
the  safety  of  our  Union.  Can  it  be  that  they 
are  less  concerned  than  we  are?  Will  they 
admit  that  they  have  interests  antagonistic 
to  those  of  the  whole  commonwealth  ?  Are 
they  making  sacrifices,  when  they  do  that 
which  is  required  by  the  common  welfare?" 

Had  New  England  and  some  other 
of  the  Fremont  States  revolted,  or 
threatened  to  revolt,  after  the  elec- 
tion of  1856,  proclaiming  that  they 
would  never  recognize  nor  obey  Mr. 
Buchanan  as  President,  unless  ample 
guarantees  were  accorded  them  that 
Kansas  should  thenceforth  be  regard- 
ed and  treated  as  a  Free  Territory  or 
State,  would  any  prominent  Demo- 
crat have  thus  insisted  that  this  de- 
mand should  be  complied  with? 
Would  he  have  urged  that  the  ques- 
tion of  Freedom  or  Slavery  in  Kan- 
sas should  be  submitted  to  a  direct 
popular  vote,  as  the  only  means  of 
averting  civil  war?  Yet  Gov.  Sey- 
mour demanded  the  submission  of 
the  Crittenden  Compromise  to  such 
a  vote,  under  circumstances  wherein 
(as  Gov.  Seward  had  so  forcibly  sta- 
ted) "  the  argument  of  fear"  was  the 
only  one  relied  on,  and  Republicans 
were  to  be  coerced  into  voting  for 


392 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


that  Compromise,  or  staying  away 
from  the  polls ;  not  that  their  con- 
victions had  changed  one  iota,  but 
because  they  could  only  thus  avert 
the  unutterable  woes  and  horrors  of 
a  gigantic  and  desperate  civil  war. 

Mr.  James  S.  Thayer  (a  Whig  of 
other  days)  followed  in  a  speech 
which  urged  the  call,  by  the  Legisla- 
ture, of  a  constitutional  State  Con- 
vention, to  march  abreast  with  simi- 
lar Conventions  in  the  Border  Slave 
States,  in  quest  of  "  some  plan  of  ad- 
justment on  this  great  question  of 
difference  between  the  North  and 
the  South."    He  continued  : 

"  If  we  cannot,  we  can  at  least,  in  an  au- 
thoritative way  and  a  practical  manner,  arrive 
at  the  basis  of  a  peaceable  separation  [re- 
newed cheers] ;  we  can  at  least  by  discussion 
enlighten,  settle,  and  concentrate  the  public 
sentiment  in  the  State  of  New  York  upon 
this  question,  and  save  it  from  that  fear- 
ful current,  that  circuitously,  but  certainly, 
sweeps  madly  on,  through  the  narrow  gorge 
of  'the  enforcement  of  the  laws,'  to  the 
shoreless  ocean  of  civil  war.  [Cheers.] 
Against  this,  under  all  circumstances,  in 
every  place  and  form,  we  must  now  and  at 
all  times  oppose  a  resolute  and  unfaltering 
resistance.  The  public  mind  will  bear  the 
avowal,  and  let  us  make  it — that  if  a  revolu- 
tion of  force  is  to  begin,  it  shall  be  inaugu- 
rated at  home.  [Cheers.]  And  if  the  in- 
coming Administration  shall  attempt  to 
carry  out  the  line  of  policy  that  has  been 
foreshadowed,  wTe  announce  that,  when  the 
hand  of  Black  Republicanism  tftrns  to  blood- 

2  Tlie  Bangor  (Maine)  Union  of  about  this  date 
(copied  approvingly  into  T/ie  Cincinnati  Enquirer 
of  February  8th),  said : 

"  The  difficulties  between  the  North  and  the 
South  must  be  compromised,  or  the  separation 
of  the  States  shall  be  peaceable.  If  the  Re- 
publican party  refuse  to  go  the  full  length  of  the 
Crittenden  Amendment — which  is  the  very  least 
the  South  can  or  ought  to  take — then,  here  in 
Maine,  not  a  Democrat  will  be  found  who  will 
raise  an  arm  against  his  brethren  of  the  South. 
From  one  end  of  the  State  to  the  other,  let  the 
cry  of  the  Democracy  be,  Compromise  or  Peace- 
able Separation." 

The  Detroit  Free  Press  of  February  3d  or  4th 
(copied  into  The  Cincinnati  Enquirer  of  February 
6th),  more  boldly  and  frankly  said: 

"  We  can  tell  the  Republican  Legislature,  and 


red,  and  seeks  from  the  fragment  of  the 
Constitution  to  construct  a  scaffolding  for 
coercion — another  name  for  execution — we 
will  reverse  the  order  of  the  French  Revo- 
lution, and  save  the  blood  of  the  people  by 
making  those  who  would  inaugurate  a  reign 
of  terror  the  first  victims  of  a  national  guil- 
lotine.2   [Enthusiastic  applause.]"' 

Mr.  Thayer  proceeded  to  argue 
that  Southern  Secession,  under  the 
circumstances,  was  justified  by  ur- 
gent considerations  of  necessity  and 
safety.    He  said :  f 

"  The  Democratic  and  Union  party  at  the 
North  made  the  issue  at  the  last  election 
with  the  Republican  party  that,  in  the  event 
of  their  success,  and  the  establishment  of 
their  policy,  the  Southern  States  not  only 
would  go  out  of  the  Union,  but  would  have 
adequate  cause  for  doing  so.  [Applause.] 
Who  of  us  believed  that,  with  the  govern- 
ment in  the  hands  of  a  party  whose  avowed 
policy  was  no  more  slave  States,  no  further 
extension  of  Slavery,  and  asserting  the  power 
and  duty  of  Congress  to  prohibit  it  in  all  the 
territories,  that  the  Southern  States  would 
remain  in  the  Union  ?  It  seems  to  me,  thus 
encompassed  and  menaced,  they  could  not, 
with  safety  to  their  largest  interest,  and  any 
prudent  consideration  for  their  future  con- 
dition and  welfare,  continue  in  the  confed- 
eracy. What  would  become,  in  twenty-five 
years,  of  8,000,000  of  white  people  and 
4,000,000  of  slaves,  with  their  natural  in- 
crease, walled  in  by  Congressional  prohibi- 
tion, besieged  and  threatened  by  a  party 
holding  the  seats  of  Federal  power  and  pat- 
ronage, that,  according  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  President  elect,  must  '  arrest  the  further 
spread  of  Slavery,'  and  place  the  institution 
itself  '  where  the  public  mind  will  rest  satis- 


the  Republican  Administration  of  Michigan,  and 
the  Republican  party  everywhere,  one  thing  : 
that,  if  the  refusal  to  repeal  the  Personal  Liberty 
laws  shall  be  persisted  in,  and  if  there  shall  not 
be  a  change  in  the  present  seeming  purpose  to 
yield  to  no  accommodation  of  the  National  diffi- 
culties, and  if  troops  shall  be  raised  in  the  North 
to  march  against  the  people  of  the  South,  a  fire 
in  the  rear  will  be  opened  upon  such  troops,  which 
will  either  stop  their  march  altogether,  or  wonder- 
fully accelerate  it. 

"In  other  words,  if,  in  the  present  posture  of 
the  Republican  party  toward  the  National  diffi- 
culties, war  shall  be  waged,  that  war  will  be 
fought  in  the  North.  We  warn  it  that  the  con- 
flict, which  it  is  precipitating,  will  not  be  with 
the  South,  but  with  tens  of  thousands  of  people  in 
the  North.  When  civil  war  shall  come,  it  will  be 
here  in  Michigan,  and  here  in  Detroit,  and  in 
every  Northern  State.'' 


J.  S.  THAYER    AND    R.  H.  "WALWORTH    ON  'PEACE.' 


393 


fied  in  the  belief  that  it  is  in  the  course  of 
ultimate  extinction?' 

"  This  is  the  position  I  took,  with  313,000 
voters  in  the  State  of  New  York,  on  the 
6th  of  November  last.  I  shall  not  recede 
from  it ;  having  admitted  that,  in  a  certain 
contingency,  the  Slave  States  would  have 
just  and  adequate  causes  for  a  separation. 
Now  that  the  contingency  has  happened,  I 
shall  not  withdraw  that  admission,  because 
they  have  been  unwise  or  unreasonable  in 
the  1  time,  mode,  and  measure  of  redress/ 
[Applause.] 

"  Aside  from  particular  acts  that  do  not 
admit  of  any  justification,  those  who  imagine 
that  the  Southern  States  do  not  well  know 
what  they  are  about,  forget  that  they  have 
been  for  fifteen  years  looking  at  this  thing  with 
all  its  importance  to  their  largest  interest,  as 
well  as  to  their  safety,  and  mistake  the  deep 
and  deliberate  movement  of  a  revolution  for 
the  mere  accidents  and  incidents  which  al- 
ways accompany  it.  [Applause.]  There  are 
some  Democrats  and  Union  men  who,  when 
the  fever  for  a  fight  has  subsided,  will  wake 
up  and  wonder  that  they  mistook  the  mad- 
ness of  passion  for  the  glow  of  patriotism. 
Again:  Ave  should  consider  that,  whatever 
may  be  our  construction  of  the  Constitution 
under  which  we  live,  as  to  any  right  under  it 
for  one  or  more  States  to  go  out  of  the 
Union,  when  six  States,  by  the  deliberate, 
formal,  authoritative  action  of  their  people, 
dissolve  their  connection  with  the  govern- 
ment, and  nine  others  say  that  that  dissolu- 
tion shall  be  final  if  the  seceding  members 
so  choose,  announcing  to  the  North,  'No 
interference ;  we  stand  between  you  and 
them.'  Can  you  bring  them  back?  No! 
Enforcement  of  the  laws  in  six  States  is  a 
war  with  fifteen.  And,  after  all,  to  speak 
plainly  on  this  subject,  and  reveal  the  true 
secret  of  the  utter  repugnance  of  the  people 
to  resort  to  any  coercive  measures,  it  is 
within  their  plain  judgment  and  practical 
common  sense,  that  the  very  moment  you 
go  outside  the  narrow  circle  of  the  written 
letter  and  provisions  of  the  Constitution  of 
the  United  States,  you  are  confronted  with 
the  great  world  of  facts,  and  find  this  is  not 
a  consolidated  government;  not  a  govern- 
ment of  the  whole  people  in  the  sense  and 
meaning  now  attached  to  it.  [Applause.]" 

Mr.  Thayer  proceeded  to  speak  of 
"coercion"  in  terms  which  go  far 
to  elucidate  the  outcry  since  made 
against  alleged  usurpations  and  dis- 
regard of  personal  rights  in  dealing 
with  partisans  of  the  Rebellion.  Said 
he: 


"It  is  announced  that  the  Republican 
Administration  will  enforce  the  laws  against 
and  in  all  the  seceding  States.  A  nice  dis- 
crimination must  be  exercised  in  the  per- 
formance of  this  duty :  not  a  hair's  breadth 
outside  the  mark.  You  remember  the  story 
of  William  Tell,  who,  when  the  condition  was 
imposed  upon  him  to  shoot  an  apple  from 
the  head  of  his  own  child,  after  he  had  per- 
formed the  task,  he  let  fall  an  arrow.  '  For 
what  is  that?'  said  Gesler.  'To  kill  thee, 
tyrant,  had  I  slain  my  boy!'  [Cheers.]  Let 
one  arrow  winged  by  the  Federal  bow  strike 
the  heart  of  an  American  citizen,  and  who 
can  number  the  avenging  darts  that  will 
cloud' the  heavens  in  the  conflict  that  will 
ensue?  [Prolonged  applause.]  "What,  then, 
is  the  duty  of  the  State  of  New  York? 
What  shall  we  say  to  our  people  when  we 
come  to  meet  this  state  of  facts  ?  That  the 
Union  must  be  preserved.  But  if  that 
cannot  be,  what  then?  Peaceable  separa- 
tion. [Applause.]  Painful  and  humiliating 
as  it  is,  let  us  temper  it  with  all  we  can  of 
love  and  kindness,  so  that  we  may  yet  be 
left  in  a  comparatively  prosperous  condi- 
tion, in  friendly  relations  with  another  Con- 
federacy. [Cheers.]" 

The  Committee  on  Resolutions  hav- 
ing reported,  the  venerable  ex-Chan- 
cellor, Reuben  H.  Walworth,  ap- 
peared on  the  platform  in  support  of 
the  second,  which  earnestly  depreca- 
ted civil  war  ;  saying : 

"  Civil  War  will  not  restore  the  Union, 
but  will  defeat,  forever,  its  reconstruction." 

Said  the  ex-Chancellor : 

"  It  would  be  as  brutal,  in  my  opinion,  to 
send  men  to  butcher  our  own  brothers  of  the 
Southern  States,  as  it  would  be  to  massacre 
them  in  the  Northern  States.  We  are  told, 
however,  that  it  is  our  duty  to,  and  we  must, 
enforce  the  laws.  But  why — and  what  laws 
are  to  be  enforced?  There  were  laws  that 
were  to  be  enforced  in  the  time  of  the  Ame- 
rican Revolution,  and  the  British  Parliament 
and  Lord  North  sent  armies  here  to  enforce 
them. 

"  But  what  did  Washington  say  in  regard 
to  the  enforcement  of  those  laws  ?  That 
man — honored  at  home  and  abroad  more 
than  any  other  man  on  earth  ever  was  hon- 
ored— did  he  go  for  enforcing  the  laws? 
No,  he  went  to  resist  laws  that  were  oppres- 
sive against  a  free  people,  and  against  the 
injustice  of  which  they  rebelled.  [Loud 
cheers.] 

"  Did  Lord  Chatham  go  for  enforcing  the 
laws  ?   No,  he  gloried  in  defence  of  the  lib- 


39i 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


erties  of  America.  He  made  that  memo- 
rable declaration  in  the  British  Parliament, 
'If  I  was  an  American  citizen  instead  of 
being  as  I  am,  an  Englishman*  I  never  would 
submit  to  such  laws — never,  never,  never!' 
[Prolonged  applause.]" 

A  single  voice  was  raised  in  dissent 
from  these  inculcations.  A  Mr.  El- 
seffer  having  proposed  to  amend  one 
of  the  reported  resolutions  by  an  as- 
sertion that,  if  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment should  undertake  to  "use  force," 
"under  the  specious  and  untenable 
pretense  of  enforcing  the  laws,"  it 
would  "  plunge  the  nation  into  civil 
war,"  and  been  warmly  supported 
therein  by  Mr.  Thayer  and  others, 
Hon.  Geo.  W.  Clinton,3  of  Buffalo, 
rose  in  opposition,  and  said : 

"  We  all  agree  in  detesting  the  very 
thought  of  war.  [Applause.]  But  is  our 
country  gone?  Is  the  Union  dissolved?  Is 
there  no  government  binding  these  States 
in  peace  and  harmony  !  Why,  the  proposi- 
tion was  before  you,  ten  minutes  ago,  that  I 
this  Union  was  dissolved,  and  you  voted  it 
down.  God  grant  it  may  for  ever  continue  I 
[Applause.]  Oh !  let  us  conciliate  our  erring 
brethren  who,  under  a  strange  delusion, 
have,  as  they  say,  seceded  from  us  ;  but,  for 
God's  sake,  do  not  let  us  humble  the  glorious 
government  under  which  we  have  been  so 
happy! — which  has  done,  and,  if  we  will  by 
judicious  means  sustain  it,  will  yet  do,  so 
much  for  the  happiness  of  mankind.  [Ap- 
plause.] 

"  Gentlemen :  I  hate  to  use  a  word  that 
would  offend  my  Southern  brother,  erring 
as  he  does;  but  we  have  reached  a  time 
when,  as  a  man — if  you  please,  as  a  Demo- 
crat— I  must  use  plain  terms.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  legal  secession.  There  is  no 
such  thing,  I  say,  unless  it  is  a  secession 
which  is  authorized  by  the  original  com- 
pact,— and  the  Constitution  of  these  United 
States  was  intended  to  form  a  firm  and  per- 
petual Union.  [Cheers.]  There  is  no  war- 
rant for  it  in  the  Constitution.  Where,  then, 
do  you  find  the  warrant  for  it?  It  is  in  the 
unhappy  delusion  of  our  Southern  brethren, 
who  doubt  our  love  for  them  and  our  attach- 
ment to  the  Constitution.  Let  us  remove 
that  illusion.  We  will  try  to  do  it.  But  if 
secession  be  not  lawful,  oh!  what  is  it!  I 
use  the  term  reluctantly  but  truly — it  is  re- 
bellion !    [Cries  of  '  Uo !  In  o  !  revolution. '] 


It  is  rebellion !  rebellion  against  the  noblest 
government  that  man  ever  framed  for  his 
own  benefit  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  world." 
"  [A  Voice:  We  are  all  rebels,  then.]" 
"  Judge  Clixtox  :  Maybe  so,  sir.  Gen- 
tlemen, this  secession  doctrine  is  not  a  new 
thing.  The  people  have  passed  upon  it. 
They  passed  upon  it  in  the  last  war.  You 
may  do  what  you  please,  my  friend ;  but  I 
never,  never  can  be  prevailed  upon  to  see, 
by  any  process  of  reasoning,  by  any  impulse 
of  feeling,  that  the  Hartford  Convention  was 
not  what  the  people  of  the  Union  pronounced 
it — a  damnable  treason.  [Applause.]  WThat 
is  it — this  secession  ?  I  am  not  speaking  of 
the  men.  I  love  the  men,  but  I  hate  trea- 
son. What  is  it,  but  the  nullification  of  all 
the  rights  of  the  United  States,  and  the  exe- 
cution of  the  laws !  A  threat  to  reject  them, 
in  arms !  It  is  nullification  by  the  whole- 
sale. I,  for  one,  have  venerated  Axdrew 
Jacksox,  and  my  blood  boiled,  in  old  time, 
when  that  brave  patriot  and  soldier  of  De- 
mocracy said — '  The  Union — it  must  and 
shall  be  preserved!'  [Loud  applause.]  Pre- 
serve it !  Preserve  it !  Why  should  we 
preserve  it,  if  it  would  be  the  thing  that 
these  gentlemen  would  make  it — that  this 
amendment  would  make  it!  Why  should 
we  love  a  government  that  has  no  dignity 
and  no  power?  [Applause.]  •  Admit  the 
doctrine,  and  what  have  you  ?  A  govern- 
ment that  no  man  who  is  a  freeman  ought 
to  be  content  for  one  day  to  live  under. 
Admit  it,  and  any  State,  of  its  own  sovereign 
will,  may  retire  from  the  Union !  Look  at 
it  for  a  moment.  Congress,  for  just  cause, — 
for  free  trade  or  sailor's  rights — declares  war. 
Oh !  where  is  your  government !  Why 
should  it!  What  right  has  it  to  declare 
war !  The  Constitution  invested  that  power 
in  it,  but  one  State  says, '  War  is  not  for  me — 
I  secede.'  And  so  another  and  another,  and 
the  government  is  rendered  powerless.  *  *  * 
'kI  understand  this  amendment  to  have 
this  point,  and  no  other.  It  is  perfectly  nu- 
gatory and  useless,  unless  it  has  this  point, 
because  all  the  other  points  for  which  it  can 
provide  are  already  provided  for  in  the  reso- 
lution. It  is  this  :  You  shall  use  no  force  to 
protect  the  property  of  the  United  States,  to 
retain  it  in  your  possession,  or  to  collect  your 
revenue  for  the  common  benefit,  and  the 
payment  of  the  common  debt.  Now,  I  am 
willing  to  say,  that  the  government  is  false 
to  itself,  false  to  us,  and  false  to  all,  if  it 
should  use  more  than  necessary  force  for 
these  purposes ;  but  I  am  not  prepared  to 
humble  the  general  government  at  the  feet 
of  the  seceding  States.  [Applause.]  I  am 
unwilling  to  say  to  the  government,  '  You 
must  abandon  your  property — you  must 


Son  of  the  illustrious  De  Witt  Clinton. 


'PEACE'    RESOLVES    OF  THE 


XEI    YORK   DEMOCRACY.  395 


cease  to  collect  the  revenues,  because  you 
are  threatened ! ' 

"  In  other  words,  gentlemen,  it  seems  to 
me — and  I  know  I  speak  the  wishes  of  my 
constituents, — that,  while  I  abhor  coercion, 
in  one  sense,  as  war,  I  wish  to  preserve  the 
dignity  of  the  government  of  these  United 
States  as  well.  [Applause.]" 

Mr.  Elseffer's  amendment  was 
thereupon  withdrawn,  and  the  origi- 
nal resolutions  unanimously  adopted. 

They  are  eight  in  number ;  where- 
of the  first  affirms  that  "  the  crisis 
into  which  the  country  has  been 
thrown"  has  been  produced  by  "  the 
conflict  of  sectional  passions and 
that  the  calamities  now  imminent  of 
civil  war  can  only  be  averted  by  con- 
cessions. The  second  condemns  a 
resort  to  civil  war,  on  the  part  of  the 
Federal  Government,  asserting  that 
"  civil  war  will  not  restore  the  Union, 
but  will  defeat,  for  ever,  its  recon- 
struction." The  third  calls  for  con- 
ciliation, concession,  and  compromise, 
declaring  that  "  it  would  be  monstrous 
to  refuse  them."  The  fourth  declares 
that  it  is  eminently  fit  that  we  should 
listen  to  the  appeals  of  loyal  men  in 
the  Border  States.  Tlie  fifth  approves 
of  the  Crittenden  proposition,  and 
urges  that  it  be  submitted  by  the 
Legislature  to  a  vote  of  the  electors 
of  this  State.  The  sixth  urges  upon 
Congress  "  adequate  measures  of  con- 

4  The  Albany  Argus,  for  example,  of  November 
10, 1860 — four  days  after  the  election  of  Mr.  Lin- 
coln— thus  clearly  and  temperately  expressed 
the  view  generally  taken  of  the  Secession  move- 
ment by  the  Democratic  journals  of  the  Free 
States : 

"  We  are  not  at  all  surprised  at  the  manifesta- 
tions of  feeling  at  the  South.  We  expected  and 
predicted  it ;  and  for  so  doing  were  charged  by 
the  Republican  press  with  favoring  disunion; 
while,  in  fact,  wo  simply  correctly  appreciated 
the  feeling  of  that  section  of  the  Union.  We 
sympathize  with  and  justify  the  South,  as  far  as 
this — their  rights  have  been  invaded  to  the  ex- 
treme limit  possible  within  the  forms  of  the 
Constitution,  and,  beyond  tins  limit,  their  feel- 


ciliation,"  and  requests  the  Legisla- 
ture to  take  steps  toward  the  sum- 
moning of  a  Convention  of  the  States. 
The  seventh  urges  a  compliance  with 
the  request  of  the  Legislature  of  Vir- 
ginia for  a  meeting  of  Commissioners 
at  Washington,  and  asks  the  Legis- 
lature of  New  York  to  appoint  Com- 
missioners thereto ;  and,  in  case  of 
its  failure,  names  seven  eminent  citi- 
zens— not  one  of  them  a  Republican — 
as  such  Commissioners.  The  eighth 
implores  "  the  States  in  the  attitude 
of  secession  to  stay  the  sword  and 
save  the  nation  from  civil  war,"  so  as 
to  give  time  for  perfecting  a  compro- 
mise ;  appealing  also  to  the  non- 
seceded  Southern  States  to  act  in  a 
similar  spirit.  Committees  were  ap- 
pointed to  present  these  resolutions 
to  Congress  and  to  the  State  Legis- 
lature, as  also  to  correspond  with 
other  States ;  and  then  the  Conven- 
tion adjourned,  after  empowering  its 
President  to  reconvene  it  in  his  dis- 
cretion. 

The  action  of  this  Convention  was 
of  great  moment  under  two  distinct 
aspects ;  first,  as  indicating  truly  and 
clearly  the  light  in  which  the  Seces- 
sion movement  was  regarded  by  the 
'  conservative'  politicians  of  the 
North ; 4  secondly,  as  revealing  to  the 

ings  have  been  insulted  and  their  interests  and 
honor  assailed  by  almost  every  possible  form  of 
denunciation  and  invective  ;  and,  if  we  deemed  it 
certain  that  the  real  animus  of  the  Republican 
party  could  be  carried  into  the  administration  of 
the  Federal  Government,  and  become  the  per- 
manent policy  of  the  nation,  we  should  think 
that  all  the  instincts  of  self-preservation  and  of 
manhood  rightfully  impelled  them  to  a  resort  to 
revolution  and  a  separation  from  the  Union,  aud 
we  would  applaud  them  and  wish  them  God 
speed  in  the  adoption  of  such  a  remedy." 

In  the  same  spirit,  Tlie  Rochester  Union,  two 
or  three  days  later,  argued  that  the  threatened 
secession  of  the  Slave  States  was  but  a  counter- 
poise of  the  Personal  Liberty  bills  and  other 


396 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


South  the  probable  action  of  those 
'  conservatives,'  should  the  Union  be 
constrained  to  defend  itself  by  force 
against  a  slaveholding  effort  for  its 
disintegration  and  overthrow.  And, 
whatever  may  have  been  the  intent 
of  those  assembled,  it  is  certain  that 
the  sentiments  expressed  by  Messrs. 
Parker,  A.  B.  Johnson,  Seymour, 
Thayer,  etc.,  and  the  approving  re- 
sponse which  they  elicited,  were  hailed 
by  the  engineers  of  Secession  as  proof 
positive  that  they  would  either  not 
be  forcibly  opposed  at  all,  or  would 
have  no  difficulty  in  overcoming,  by 
the  help  of  their  sympathizing  friends 
and  allies  in  the  Free   States,  any 

measures  of  antagonism  to  slaveholding  at  the 
North.    Said  The  Union  : 

"  Restricting  our  remarks  to  actual  violations 
of  the  Constitution,  the  North  have  led  the  way, 
and  for  a  long  period  have  been  tlie  sole  offenders 
or  aggressors.  For  many  years,  laws  have  been 
on  the  statute-books  of  Northern  States,  which 
were  passed  with  the  avowed  object  of  prevent- 
ing the  '  delivering  up'  of  fugitive  slaves,  which 
the  Constitution  says,  '  shall  be  delivered  up.' 
Owing  to  their  different  circumstances,  Northern 
States  have  been  enabled  to  secure  their  che- 
rished object  by  violating  the  Constitution  in  a 
way  that  does  not  necessitate  secession  from,  or 
a  dissolution  of,  the  Union.  Owing  to  their 
peculiar  circumstances,  the  Southern  States  can- 
not retaliate  upon  the  North  without  taking 
ground  for  secession  from  or  a  dissolution  of  the 
Union.  But,  in  resorting  to  this  mode  and 
measure  of  redress,  they  simply  followed  the 
example  set  by  Northern  States  in  violating  tlie 
Constitution  to  such  an  extent  as  they  deem  neces- 
sary to  secure  their  objects.  The  Northern  States 
stopped  at  one  given  point  in  their  career  of 
nullification,  because  they  had  no  object  to  gain 
by  going  further.  The  Southern  States  propose 
to  stop  at  another  given  point,  which,  in  their 
judgment,  is  indicated  by  the  necessities  of  their 
position." 

6  The  Albany  Argus  of  Nov.  12,  1860,  said: 
"  Should  secession  from  the  Union  be  actually 
attempted  by  South  Carolina  alone,  or  in  connec- 
tion with  other  States,  it  will  be  a  most  important 
question  for  the  present  and  next  Administra- 
tion, how  it  shall  be  treated.  Shall  it  be  met  by 
force  ?  Shall  the  military  power  of  the  Govern- 
ment be  employed  to  retain  seceding  States 
within  the  Union,  and  compel  them  to  yield 
obedience  to  the  requirements  of  the  Constitu- 
tion ?  Waiving,  in  what  we  now  have  to  say, 
all  question  about  the  right  of  secession,  we  be- 
lieve that,  as  a  matter  of  practical  administration, 


resistance  to  their  purpose  that  might 
be  offered.5  Mr.  Roscoe  Conkling 
attests  that,  when  the  proceedings  of 
this  Convention  reached  "Washington, 
they  were  hailed  with  undisguised 
exultation  by  the  Secessionists  still 
lingering  in  the  halls  of  Congress; 
one  of  whom  said  to  him  triumphant- 
ly, "  If  your  President  should  attempt 
coercion,  he  will  have  more  opposi- 
tion at  the  North  than  he  can  over- 
come." 6 


The  "  Peace  Conference,"  or  Con- 
gress, so  called,  was  assembled  on  the 
unanimous  invitation  of  the  Legisla- 

neither  Mr.  Buchanan  nor  Mr.  Lincoln  will  em- 
ploy force  against  the  seceding  States.  If  South 
Carolina,  or  any  other  State,  through  a  conven- 
tion of  her  people,  shall  formally  separate  her- 
self from  the  Union,  probably  both  the  present 
and  the  next  Executive  will  simply  let  her  alone, 
and  quietly  allow  all  the  functions  of  the  Federal 
Government  within  her  limits  to  be  suspended. 
Any  other  course  would  be  madness;  as  it  would 
at  once  enlist  all  the  Southern  States  in  the  con- 
troversy, and  plunge  the  whole  country  into  a 
civil  war.  The  first  gun  fired  in  the  way  of 
forcing  a  seceding  State  back  to  her  allegiance 
to  the  Union,  would  probably  prove  the  knell  of 
its  final  dismemberment.  As  a  matter  of  policy 
and  wisdom,  therefore,  independent  of  the  ques- 
tion of  right,  we  should  deem  resort  to  force 
most  disastrous." 

6  TJie  New  York  Herald  of  November  9th — the 
third  day  after  that  of  the  Presidential  election — 
in  its  leading  editorial,  had  said: 

"For  far  less  than  this  [the  election  of  Lin- 
coln], our  fathers  seceded  from  Great  Britain; 
and  they  left  revolution  organized  in  every  State,  to 
act  whenever  it  is  demanded  by  public  opinion. 
The  confederation  is  held  together  only  by  pub- 
lic opinion.  .  Each  State  is  organized  as  a  com- 
plete government,  holding  the  purse  and  wield- 
ing the  sword,  possessing  the  right  to  break  the  tie 
of  the  confederation  as  a  nation  might  break  a  treaty, 
and  to  repel  coercion  as  a  nation  might  repel  inva- 
sion. *  *  *  Coercion,  if  it  were  possible,  is  out 
of  the  question." 

The  Charleston  Courier  of  November,  1860, 
announced  the  formation  of  Military  organiza- 
tions in  various  parts  of  the  North  in  defense  of 
1  Southern  rights.'  Allentown,  Pa.,  was  speci- 
fied as  one  of  the  points  at  which  such  forces 
were  mustering  and  drilling. 


PROPOSITIONS   IN  THE 


'PEACE'  CONFERENCE. 


39T 


ture  of  Virginia,7  and  convened8  in 
Washington  one  month  prior  to 
Mr.  Lincoln's  inauguration.  Thir- 
teen Free  States  were  represented, 
viz. :  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Ver- 
mont, Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island, 
Connecticut,  New  York,  New  Jer- 
sey, Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Indiana, 
Illinois,  and  Iowa;  and  seven  Slave 
States,  viz. :  Delaware,  Maryland, 
Virginia,  North  Carolina,  Kentucky, 
Tennessee,  and  Missouri.  Ex-Presi- 
dent John  Tyler,  of  Virginia,  was 
called  to  the  Chair.  On  motion  of 
Mr.  James  Guthrie,  of  Kentucky,  it 
was 9 

M  Resolved,  That  a  Committee  of  one  from 
each  State  be  appointed  by  the  Commission- 
ers thereof,  to  be  nominated  to  the  Presi- 
dent, and  to  be  appointed  by  him,  to  whom 
shall  be  referred  the  resolutions  of  the  State 
of  Virginia,  and  the  other  States  represent- 
ed, and  all  propositions  for  the  adjustment 
of  existing  difficulties  between  States;  wTith 
authority  to  report  what  they  may  deem 
right,  necessary,  and  proper,  to  restore  har- 
mony and  preserve  the  Union ;  and  that  they 
report  on  or  before  Friday." 

This  Committee  was  composed  as 
follows : 

Maine,  Lot  M.  Morrill ;  New  Hampshire, 
Asa  Fowler  ;  Vermont,  Hiland  Hall ;  Mas- 

7  Adopted  January  19,  1861. 

So  early  as  Nov.  30, 1860,  Gov.  John  Letcher, 
of  Virginia,  who,  as  a  Douglas  Democrat  and 
former  anti-Slavery  man,  was  regarded  as  among 
the  most  moderate  of  Southern  politicians,  in  an- 
swer to  a  Union  letter  from  Rev.  Lewis  P.  Clover, 
a  Democrat  of  Springfield,  111.,  had  said : 

"  I  now  consider  the  overthrow  of  the  Union 
absolutely  certain.  South  Carolina  will  secede  ; 
and  the  chain,  once  broken,  is  not  very  likely  to 
be  reunited.  *  *  *  Unless  something  shall  be 
speedily  do  le  to  quiet  the  apprehensions  of  the 
South,  the  Union  is  gone  beyond  all  hope." 

Mr.  Clover  replied,  stating  that  he  had  shown 
Gov.  L.'s  letter  to  Mr.  Lincoln  (who  asked  Mr. 
C,  whether  it  was  just  to  hold  him  responsible 
for  the  Personal  Liberty  bills,  etc.,  which  he  had 
never  favored),  and  trusting  that  the  President 
elect  would  "  be  found  a  friend  to  the  South." 


sachusetts,  Francis  B.  Crowninshield ;  Rhode 
Island,  Samuel  Ames;  Connecticut,  Eogcr 
S.  Baldwin ;  New  YorJc,  David  Dudley  Field ; 
New  Jersey,  Peter  D.  Vroom ;  Pennsylva- 
nia, Thomas  White;  Ohio,  Thomas  Ewing; 
Indiana,  Charles  B.  Smith;  Illinois,  Ste- 
phen F.  Logan ;  Iowa,  James  Harlan  ;  Dela- 
ware, Daniel  M.  Bates ;  North  Carolina, 
Thomas  Ruffin ;  Virginia,  James  A.  Seddon ; 
Kentucky,  James  Guthrie;  Maryland,  Rev- 
erdy  Johnson;  Tennessee,  F.  K.  Zollicoffer; 
Missouri,  A.  W.  Doniphan. 

Mr.  Guthrie,  from  the  majority  of 
said  Committee,  on  the  15th,  made  a 
report,  recommending  several  amend- 
ments to  be  ingrafted  on  the  Federal 
Constitution ;  which  amendments, 
as  perfected  and  voted  on  by  the 
Conference,  will  hereafter  be  given. 

Gov.  Roger  S.  Baldwin  [Republi- 
can], of  Connecticut,  made  a  dissent- 
ing report ;  recommending  that,  in- 
stead of  the  aforesaid  amendments, 
this  body  adopt  and  recommend  the 
suggestion  of  the  Legislature  of  Ken- 
tucky— that  of  a  General  Convention 
of  the  States.  [His  proposition  will 
be  given  in  full,  in  connection  with 
its  disposal  by  the  Conference.] 

Mr.  James  A.  Seddon,  of  Virginia, 
made  another  minority  report,  where- 
in he  affirms  that  the  majority  report 
would  not  be  acceptable  to  Virginia, 

Gov.  Letcher  responded  (Dec.  25,  1860),  saying: 

"  I  regard  the  government  as  now  doomed, 
beyond  a  contingency,  to  destruction.  *  *  *  I 
have  lost  all  hope,  as  I  see  no  disposition  in  the 
free  States  to  adjust  the  controversy.  We  have 
just  heard  from  Washington  that  the  Republi- 
cans  have  presented  their  ultimatum;  and  I  say 
to  you,  in  sincerity  and  sorrow,  that  it  will  never 
be  assented  to.  I  believe  ninety-nine  men  out 
of  every  hundred  in  Virginia  will  repudiate  it 
with  scorn.  Conservative  as  I  am,  and  laboring 
as  I  have  been  for  months  to  secure  an  adjust- 
ment, before  I  will  assent  to  that  proposition,  I 
will  welcome  civil  war  with  all  its  horrors.  It 
would  be  dishonorable  in  the  South  to  accept  it ; 
and  my  motto  is,  'Death  before  dishonor.'  " 

Such  were  the  Southern  Unionists  whom  the 
Republicans  were  expected  to  conciliate,  and 
stigmatized  as  repelling. 

8  February  4th.       9  On  the  6th. 


398 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


because  it  gave  less  to  the  South 
than  even  the  Crittenden  Compro- 
mise ;  whereas,  Yirginia  required  the 
whole  of  that,  and  something  more. 
He  proposed  sundry  amendments  to 
the  Federal  Constitution,  in  addition 
to  the  guarantee  to  Slavery,  forever, 
of  all  territory  south  of  36°  30';  one 
of  which  secures  to  every  slaveholder 
the  right  to  take  his  slave  through 
any  non-slaveholding  State  or  terri- 
tory, in  passing  from  one  slavehold- 
ing  State  or  territory  to  another ;  and 
also  secures  to  him  protection  for  his 
slaves  as  property,  while  at  sea  on  such 
a  j  ourney .   Another  is  in  these  words : 

"Aeticle  7.  Sec.  1.  The  elective  fran- 
chise and  the  right  to  hold  office,  whether 
Federal,  State,  territorial,  or  municipal,  shall 
not  be  exercised  by  persons  who  are,  in 
whole  or  in  part,  of  the  African  race." 

Another  of  these  amendments  pre- 
sumes, and  recognizes,  the  right  of 
peaceable  State  secession,  undertak- 
ing to  guard  against  its  abuses. 

Mr.  Charles  A.  Wickliffe,  of  Ken- 
tucky, proposed  that  this  Convention 
request  the  several  States  which  have 
passed  Personal  Liberty  bills,  to  ab- 
rogate them ;  also,  that  they  allow 
slaves  to  be  carried  across  their  soil 
respectively. 

Mr.  Amos  Tuck  [Republican],  of 
New  Hampshire,  submitted  an  Ad- 
dress to  the  People  of  the  United 
States,  "  deploring  the  divisions  and 
distractions  that  now  afflict  our  coun- 
try," but  deprecating  secession  or  vio- 
lence, and  insisting  that  "  the  Consti- 
tution of  the  United  States,  properly 
understood  and  fairly  enforced,  is 
equal  to  every  exigency."  Mr.  Tuck's 
address  closed  with  three  resolutions ; 
which  will  be  given  hereafter. 

Gov.  S.  P.  Chase,  of  Ohio,  pro- 
posed that  this  Convention  adjourn 


to  the  4th  of  April,  to  enable  other 
States  to  be  represented  therein :  but 
this  was  not  agreed  to. 

After  several  days'  discussion  and 
consideration,  with  votes  upon  vari- 
ous amendments,  Mr.  David  Dudley 
Field,  of  New  York,  moved  to  amend 
the  Committee's  report,  by  striking 
out  §  7,  and  inserting  as  follows : 

"Aeticle  1.  No  State  shall  withdraw  from 
the  Union  without  the  consent  of  all  the 
States,  given  in  a  Convention  of  the  States, 
convened  in  pursuance  of  an  act  passed  by 
two-thirds  of  each  House  of  Congress." 

This  proposition  was  rejected,"  as 
follows : 

Ats — Connecticut,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa, 
Maine,  Massachusetts,  New  York,  New  Hamp- 
shire, Vermont,  Kansas — 10. 

Noes — Delaware,  Kentucky,  Maryland, 
Missouri,  New  Jersey,  North  Carolina,  Ohio, 
Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  Tennessee,  Vir- 
ginia— 11. 

Mr.  Guthrie's  report  at  length 
coming  up  for  action  thereon,  Gov. 
Baldwin  moved  a  substitution  for  said 
report  of  his  proposition  aforesaid; 
which  was  in  the  following  words : 

"  TFT^ra^unhappy  differences  exist  which 
have  alienated  from  each  other  portions  of 
the  people  of  the  United  States  to  such  an 
extent  as  seriously  to  disturb  the  peace  of 
the  nation,  and  impair  the  regular  and  effi- 
cient action  of  the  Government  within  the 
sphere  of  its  constitutional  powers  and  duties: 

"And  whereas,  the  Legislature  of  the  State 
of  Kentucky  has  made  application  to  Con- 
gress to  call  a  Convention  for  proposing 
amendments  to  the  Constitution  of  the  Uni- 
ted States : 

"And  whereas,  it  is  believed  to  be  the 
opinion  of  the  people  of  other  States  that 
amendments  to  the  Constitution  are  or  may 
become  necessary  to  secure  to  the  people  of 
the  United  States,  of  every  section,  the  full 
and  equal  enjoyment  of  their  rights  and  lib- 
erties, so  far  as  the  same  may  depend  for 
their  security  and  protection  on  the  powers 
granted  to  or  withheld  from  the  General 
Government,  in  pursuance  of  the  national 
purposes  for  which  it  was  ordained  and 
established : 

"And  whereas,  it  may  be  expedient  that 
such  amendments  as  any  of  the  States  may 


February  26,  1861. 


REPUBLICAN    OVERTURES  REJECTED. 


399 


desire  to  have  proposed,  should  be  presented 
to  the  Convention  in  such  form  as  the  re- 
spective States  desiring  the  same  may  deem 
proper : 

"  This  convention  does,  therefore,  recom- 
mend to  the  several  States  to  unite  with 
Kentucky  in  her  application  to  Congress  to 
call  a  Convention  for  proposing  amendments 
to  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States,  to 
be  submitted  to  the  Legislatures  of  the  sev- 
eral States,  or  to  conventions  therein,  for 
ratification,  as  the  one  or  the  other  mode  of 
ratification  may  be  proposed  by  Congress,  in 
accordance  with  the  provision  in  the  fifth 
article  of  the  Constitution  :" 

which  was  defeated  by  the  following 

vote : 

Ays — Connecticut,  Illinois,  Iowa,  Maine, 
Massachusetts,  New  York,  New  Hampshire, 
Vermont — 8. 

Noes — Delaware.  Indiana,  Kentucky,  Ma- 
ryland, Missouri,  New  Jersey,  North  Caro- 
lina, Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Khode  Island,  Ten- 
nessee, Virginia,  Kansas — 13. 

Mr.  Seddon's  project,  excluding 
that  part  which  provides  for  State 
secession,  was  likewise  moved  as  a 
substitute,  and  defeated  by  the  fol- 
lowing vote : 

Ays — Kentucky  Missouri,  North  Carolina, 
Virginia — 4. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Delaware,  Illinois, 
Indiana,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Maryland, 
New  Jersey,  New  York,  New  Hampshire, 
Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  Tennes- 
see, Vermont,  Kansas — 16. 

Mr.  James  B.  Clay,11  of  Kentucky, 
now  moved  a  very  long  substitute, 
which  was  substantially  Mr.  Seddon's 
over  again;  which  was  rejected  by 
the  following  vote : 

Ays — Kentucky,  Missouri,  North  Caro- 
lina, Tennessee,  Virginia— 5. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Delaware,  Illinois, 
Indiana,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Maryland, 
New  Jersey,  New  York,  New  Hampshire, 
Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Iihode  Island,  Ver- 
mont— 14. 

Mr.  Tuck's  proposition,  consisting 
of  an  address  and  three  resolves,  was 
now  moved  as  a  substitute.  His  re- 
solves were  as  follows : 

"  1st.  Resolved,  That  this  Convention  rec- 


ognize the  well  understood  proposition  that 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  gives 
no  power  to  Congress,  or  any  branch  of  the 
Federal  Government,  to  interfere  in  any 
manner  with  Slavery  in  any  of  the  States ; 
and  we  are  assured,  by  abundant  testimony, 
that  neither  of  the  great  political  organiza- 
tions existing  in  the  country  contemplates  a 
violation  of  the  spirit  of  the  Constitution  in 
this  regard,  or  the  procuring  of  any  amend- 
ment thereof,  by  which  Congress,  or  any 
department  of  the  General  Government, 
shall  ever  have  jurisdiction  over  Slavery  in 
any  of  the  States. 

u2d.  Resolved,  That  the  Constitution  was 
ordained  and  established,  as  set  forth  in  the 
preamble,  by  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
in  order  to  form  a  more  perfect  Union,  es- 
tablish justice,  insure  domestic  tranquillity, 
provide  for  the  common  defense,  promote 
the  general  welfare,  and  secure  the  blessings 
of  liberty  to  themselves  and  their  posterity ; 
and  when  the  people  of  any  State  are  not  in 
full  enjoyment  of  all  the  benefits  intended  to 
be  secured  to  them  by  the  Constitution,  or 
their  rights  under  it  are  disregarded,  their 
tranquillity  disturbed,  their  prosperity  re- 
tarded, or  their  liberty  imperiled,  by  the 
people  of  any  other  State,  full  and  adequate 
redress  can  and  ought  to  be  provided  for 
such  grievances. 

"  3d.  Resolved,  That  this  Convention  rec- 
ommend to  the  Legislatures  of  the  several 
States  of  the  Union  to  follow  the  example 
of  the  Legislatures  of  the  States  of  Kentucky 
and  Illinois,  in  applying  to  Congress  to  call 
a  Convention  for  the  proposing  of  amend- 
ments to  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States,  pursuant  to  the  fifth  article  thereof." 

The  Conference  refused  thus  to  sub- 
stitute, by  the  following  vote  : 

Ays — Connecticut,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa, 
Maine,  Massachusetts,  New  York,  NewHamp- 
shire,  Vermont — 9. 

Noes — Delaware,  Kentucky,  Maryland, 
Missouri,  New  Jersey,  North  Carolina,  Ohio, 
Pennsylvania,  Khode  Island,  Tennessee,  Vir- 
ginia— 1 1 . 

The  question  was  next  taken  on 
the  first  section  of  Mr.  Guthrie's  plan 
of  constitutional  amendment,  as  fol- 
lows : 

"Section  1.  In  all  the  present  territory 
of  the  United  States,  north  of  the  parallel 
of  thirty-six  degrees  and  thirty  minutes  of 
north  latitude,  involuntary  servitude,  except 
in  punishment  of  crime,  is  prohibited.  In 
all  the  present  territory  south  of  that  line, 
the  status  of  persons  held  to  involuntary 


11  Son  of  Henry  Clay;  since  a  prominent  Rebel ;  died  in  Canada  in  January,  1864. 


400 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


service  or  labor,  as  it  now  exists,  shall  not 
be  changed;  nor  shall  any  law  be  passed  by 
Congress  or  the  Territorial  Legislature  to 
hinder  or  prevent  the  taking  of  such  persons 
from  any  of  the  States  of  this  Union  to  said 
territory,  nor  to  impair  the  rights  arising 
from  said  relation;  but  the  same  shall  be 
subject  to  judicial  cognizance  in  the  federal 
courts,  according  to  the  course  of  the  com- 
mon law.  "When  any  territory  north  or 
south  of  said  line,  within  such  boundary  as 
Congress  may  prescribe,  shall  contain  a  pop- 
ulation equal  to  that  required  for  a  member 
of  Congress,  it  shall,  if  its  form  of  govern- 
ment be  republican,  be  admitted  into  the 
Union  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  original 
States,  with  or  without  involuntary  servi- 
tude, as  the  constitution  of  such  State  may 
provide." 

This  proposition  was  affirmed11  and 
recommended  by  the  following  vote  : 

Ays — Delaware,  Illinois,  Kentucky,  Ma- 
ryland, New  Jersey,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania, 
Ehode  Island,  Tennessee — 9. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Iowa,  Maine,  Massa- 
chusetts, North  Carolina,  New  Hampshire, 
Vermont,  Virginia — 8. 

New  York,13  Indiana,  and  Kansas 

were  equally  divided,  and  so  cast  no 

vote.     The   section   was  declared 

adopted. 

The  second  section  had  been  so 
amended  during  the  debates  as  to 
read  as  follows : 

"  Section  2.  No  territory  shall  be  acquired 
by  the  United  States,  except  by  discovery, 
and  for  naval  and  commercial  stations,  de- 
pots, and  transit-routes,  without  the  concur- 
rence of  a  majority  of  all  the  Senators  from 
States  which  allow  involuntary  servitude, 
and  a  majority  of  all  the  Senators  from 
States  which  prohibit  that  relation ;  nor 
shall  territory  be  acquired  by  treaty,  unless 
the  votes  of  a  majority  of  the  Senators  from 
each  class  of  States  hereinbefore  mentioned 
be  cast  as  a  part  of  the  two-thirds  majority 
necessary  to  the  ratification  of  such  treaty." 

This  was  likewise  adopted — ~New 
York  and  Kansas  being  still  divided 
— by  the  following  vote : 

Ays — Delaware,  Indiana,  Kentucky,  Mary- 
land, Missouri,  New  Jersey,  Ohio,  Pennsyl- 
vania, Rhode  Island,Tennessee,  Virginia — 11. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Illinois,  Iowa,  Maine, 


Massachusetts,  North  Carolina,  New  Hamp- 
shire, Vermont — 8. 

Mr.  Guthrie  next  moved  the  adop- 
tion of  the  third  section  of  his  Com- 
mittee's report ;  amended  by  the  Con- 
vention so  as  to  read  as  follows : 

"  Section  3.  Neither  the  Constitution  nor 
any  amendment  thereof  shall  be  construed 
to  give  Congress  power  to  regulate,  abolish, 
or  control,  within  any  State,  the  relation 
established  or  recognized  by  the  laws  there- 
of touching  persons  held  to  labor  or  involun- 
tary service  therein,  nor  to  interfere  with  or 
abolish  involuntary  service  in  the  District  of 
Columbia  without  the  consent  of  Maryland 
and  without  the  consent  of  the  owners,  or 
making  the  owners  who  do  not  consent  just 
compensation  ;  nor  the  power  to  interfere 
with  or  prohibit  representatives  and  others 
from  bringing  with  them  to  the  District  of 
Columbia,  retaining,  and  taking  away,  per- 
sons so  held  to  labor  or  service ;  nor  the 
power  to  interfere  with  or  abolish  involun- 
tary service  in  places  under  the  exclusive 
jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  within  those 
States  and  Territories  where  the  same  is  es- 
tablished or  recognized;  nor  the  power  to 
prohibit  the  removal  or  transportation  of 
persons  held  to  labor  or  involuntary  service 
in  any  State  or  Territory  of  the  United  States 
to  any  other  State  or  Territory  thereof 
where  it  is  established  or  recognized  by  law 
or  usage;  and  the  right  during  transporta- 
tion, by  sea  or  river,  of  touching  at  ports, 
shores,  and  landings,  and  of  landing  in  case 
of  distress,  shall  exist;  but  not  the  right  of 
transit  in  or  through  any  State  or  Territory, 
or  of  sale  or  traffic,  against  the  laws  thereof. 
Nor  shall  Congress  have  power  to  authorize 
any  higher  rate  of  taxation  on  persons  held 
to  labor  or  service  than  on  land. 

"  The  bringing  into  the  District  of  Colum- 
bia of  persons  held  to  labor  or  service  for 
sale,  or  placing  them  in  depots  to  be  after- 
wards transferred  to  other  places  for  sale  as 
merchandise,  is  prohibited." 

This  section  was  adopted  by  the 
following  vote — Xew  York  and  Kan- 
sas not  voting,  because  equally  di- 
vided : 

Ays — Delaware,  Illinois,  Kentucky,  Mary- 
land, Missouri,  New  Jersey,  North  Carolina, 
Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  Tennes- 
see, Virginia— 12. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Maine, 
Massachusetts,  New  Hampshire.  Vermont 
—7. 


11  February  27th.  12  Through  the  necessary 
absence  from  the  Conference  of  a  Republican 


Commissioner,  [Mr.  David  Dudley  Field]  leaving 
his  colleagues  five  to  five. 


ADOPTION"   OF   MR.    GUTHRIE'S  REPORT. 


401 


Mr.  Guthrie  next  moved  the  adop- 
tion of  the  fourth  section  of  the  re- 
port, which  had  been  so  amended  as 
to  read  thus : 

"  Section  4.  The  third  paragraph  of  the 
second  section  of  the  fourth  article  of  the 
Constitution  shall  not  be  construed  to  pre- 
vent any  of  the  States,  by  appropriate  legis- 
lation, and  through  the  action  of  their  judi- 
cial and  ministerial  officers,  from  enforcing 
the  delivery  of  fugitives  from  labor  to  the 
person  to  whom  such  service  or  labor  is 
due." 

This  also  was  carried,  by  the  fol- 
lowing vote — New  York  and  Kansas 
still  equally  divided : 

Ays — Connecticut,  Delaware,  Illinois,  In- 
diana, Kentucky,  Maryland,  Missouri,  New- 
Jersey,  North  Carolina,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania, 
Rhode  Island,  Tennessee,  Vermont,  Vir- 
ginia— 15. 

Noes — Iowa,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  New- 
Hampshire — 4. 

Mr.  Guthrie  next  moved  the  adop- 
tion of  the  fifth  section  of  the  report, 
so  amended  as  to  read  as  follows : 

u  Section  5.  The  foreign  slave  trade  is 
hereby  forever  prohibited ;  and  it  shall  be 
the  duty  of  Congress  to  pass  laws  to  prevent 
the  importation  of  slaves,  coolies,  or  persons 
held  to  service  or  labor,  into  the  United 
States  and  the  Territories  from  places  beyond 
the  limits  thereof." 

This  section  was  adopted,  as  follows : 
Ays — Connecticut,  Delaware,  Illinois,  In- 
diana, Kentucky,  Maryland,  Missouri,  New- 
Jersey,  New  York,  New  Hampshire,  Ohio, 
Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  Tennessee,  Ver- 
mont, Kansas — 16. 

Noes — Iowa,  Maine, Massachusetts,  North 
Carolina,  Virginia — 5. 

Mr.  Guthrie  next  moved  the  adop- 
tion of  the  sixth  section  of  the  report ; 
amended  thus : 

"  Section  6.  The  first,  third,  and  fifth 
sections,  together  with  this  section  of  these 
amendments,  and  the  third  paragraph  of  the 
second  section  of  the  first  article  of  the  Con- 
stitution, and  the  third  paragraph  of  the 
second  section  of  the  fourth  article  thereof, 
shall  not  be  amended  or  abolished  without 
the  consent  of  all  the  States." 

This  was  adopted  by  the  following 

vote — New  York  again  divided,  and 

not  voting ; 

26 


Ays — Delaware,  Illinois,  Kentucky,  Mary- 
land, Missouri,  New  Jersey,  Ohio,  Pennsyl- 
vania, Rhode  Island,  Tennessee,  Kansas — 11. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Maine, 
Massachusetts,  North  Carolina,  New  Hamp- 
shire, Vermont,  Virginia — 9. 

Mr.  Guthrie  next  moved  the  adop- 
tion of  the  seventh  section  of  the  re- 
port ;  amended  to  read  as  follows  : 

"Section  7.  Congress  shall  provide  by 
law  that  the  United  States  shall  pay  to  the 
owner  the  full  value  of  his  fugitive  from 
labor,  in  all  cases  where  the  marshal,  or 
other  officer,  whose  duty  it  was  to  arrest 
such  fugitive,  was  preyented  from  so  doing 
by  violence  or  intimidation  from  mobs  or 
riotous  assemblages,  or  when,  after  arrest, 
such  fugitive  was  rescued  by  like  violence 
or  intimidation,  and  the  owner  thereby  de- 
prived of  the  same ;  and  the  acceptance  of 
such  payment  shall  preclude  the  owner  from 
further  claim  to  such  fugitive.  Congress 
shall  provide  by  law  for  securing  to  the  citi- 
zens of  each  State  the  privileges  and  immu- 
nities of  citizens  in  the  several  States." 

This  section  was  adopted  by  the 
following  vote — New  York  still  di- 
vided : 

Ays — Delaware,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Ken- 
tucky, Maryland,  New  Jersey,  New  Hamp- 
shire, Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Ehode  Island, 
Tennessee,  Kansas — 12. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Iowa,  Maine,  Mis- 
souri, North  Carolina,  Vermont,  Vir- 
ginia— 7. 

The  report  having  been  thus  adopt- 
ed by  sections,  Gov.  Chase,  of  Ohio, 
demanded  a  vote  upon  the  entire 
plan  of  conciliation  together ;  which 
President  Tyler  decided  unnecessary, 
as  the  whole  plan  had  been  adopted 
by  sections. 

Mr.  T.  E.  Franklin,  of  Pennsylva- 
nia, moved  the  following  independent 
proposition : 

"  Resolved,  As  the  sense  of  this  Conven- 
tion, that  the  highest  political  duty  of  every 
citizen  of  the  United  States  is  his  allegiance 
to  the  Federal  Government  created  by  the. 
Constitution  of  the  United  States,  and  that 
no  State  of  this  Union  has  any  constitutional 
right  to  secede  therefrom,  or  to  absolve  the 
citizens  of  such  State  from  their  allegiance- 
to  the  Government  of  the  United  States." 

Mr.  Barringer,  of  North  Carolina,, 


402 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


moved  that  this  proposition  do  lie  on 
the  table;  which  was  defeated  by 
12  States  to  9  :  but,  on  motion  of 
Mr.  Puffin,  of  North  Carolina,  the 
consideration  of  Mr.  Franklin's  pro- 
position was  indefinitely  postponed, 
as  follows : 

Ays — Delaware,  Kentucky,  Maryland, 
Missouri,  New  Jersey,  North  Carolina,  Ohio, 
Khode  Island,  Tennessee,  Virginia — 10. 

Noes — Connecticut,  Illinois,  Indiana, 
Iowa,  Maine,  Massachusetts,  Pennsylva- 
nia— 7. 

Mr.  J.  A.  Seddon,  of  Yirginia,  moved 
once  more  his  proposition,  requiring 
an  amendment  of  the  Constitution, 
whereby  the  assent  of  a  majority  of 
the  Senators  from  the  slaveholding 
States  and  a  like  majority  of  the  Sena- 
tors from  the  non-slaveholding  States 
is  required  to  give  validity  to  any  act 
of  the  Senate,  as  also  recognizing  and 
legalizing  State-secession  from  the 
|  Union  ;  which  was  laid  on  the  table. 

Mr.  Guthrie  then  offered  the  fol- 
lowing preamble  to  the  propositions 
which  had  been  agreed  to : 

"  To  the  Congress  of  the  United  States: 

"The  Convention  assembled  upon  the  in- 
vitation of  the  State  of  Virginia,  to  adjust 
the  unhappy  differences  which  now  disturb 
the  peace  of  the  Union  and  threaten  its  con- 
tinuance, make  known  to  the  Congress  of 
the  United  States  that  their  body  convened 
in  the  city  of  Washington  on  the  4th  instant, 
and  continued  in  session  until  the  27th. 

"  There  were  in  the  body,  when  action 
was  taken  upon  that  which  is  here  submit- 
ted, one  hundred  and  thirty-three  Commis- 
sioners, representing  the  following  States: 
Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  Massa- 
chusetts, Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  New 
York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Delaware, 
Maryland,  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  Ten- 
nessee, Kentucky,  Missouri,  Ohio,  Indiana, 
Illinois,  Iowa,  Kansas. 

"  They  have  approved  what  is  herewith 
submitted,  and  respectfully  request  that 
your  honorable  body  will  submit  it  to  con- 
ventions in  the  States  as  an  article  of  amend- 
ment to  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States." 


This  was  adopted;  and  President 
Tyler  requested  to  present  the  '  plan 
of  adjustment'  to  Congress  forthwith. 

And  then  the  Convention  adjourned 
without  day. 

The  above  plan  of  conciliation  was 
immediately  communicated  by  Pre- 
sident Tyler  to  Vice-President  Breck- 
inridge, who  laid  it  before  the  Senate 
without  delay :  and,  on  motion  of 
Mr.  Crittenden,  it  was  referred  to  a 
Select  Committee  of  five,  to  be  re- 
ported to  the  Senate  next  day. 

Mr.  Crittenden  reported  it  accord- 
ingly.13 Gov.  Seward,  from  the  Re- 
publican minority  of  said  Committee, 
presented  a  substitute  for  that  pro- 
ject, as  follows : 

"  A  joint  resolution  concerning  a  National 
Contention  to  propose  amendments  to  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States. 

"  Whereas,  the  Legislatures  of  the  States 
of  Kentucky,  New  Jersey,  and  Illinois,  have 
applied  to  Congress  to  call  a  Convention  for 
proposing  amendments  to  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States  :  Therefore, 

"Be  it  resolved,  etc.,  That  the  Legisla- 
tures of  the  other  States  be  invited  to  take 
the  subject  into  consideration,  and  to  ex- 
press their  will  on  that  subject  to  Congress, 
in  pursuance  of  the  fifth  article  of  the  Con- 
stitution." 

Mr.  Hale,  of  New  Hampshire,  and 
others,  strenuously  objected  to  a  con- 
sideration  of  the  majority  report  at 
this  time ;  so  that  its  second  reading 
was  postponed  until  next  day :  when, 
on  motion  of  Mr.  Douglas,  it  was 
made  the  special  order  for  noon  of 
the  day  following;  when  Gen.  Jo- 
seph Lane,  of  Oregon,  made  a  long 
speech  against  £  coercion,'  and  in 
favor  of  the  Southern  view  of  State 
Rights.  Mr.  Andrew  Johnson,  of 
Tennessee,  followed,  speaking  very 
strongly  and  earnestly  in  favor  of 
maintaining  the  Union. 


13 February  28th. 


THE    FAILURE    TO  COMPROMISE. 


403 


At  length,  the  Senate,  on  motion 
of  Mr.  Douglas,  voted — Yeas  25; 
Nays  11 — to  postpone  the  considera- 
tion of  this,  in  favor  of  the  Honse 
proposition  of  amendment,  already 
referred  to,  and  which  had  passed  that 
body;  providing 

"  that  no  amendment  shall  be  made  to  the 
Constitution  which  will  authorize  or  give  to 
Congress  the  power  to  interfere,  within  any- 
State,  with  the  domestic  institutions  there- 
of," etc. 

This  proposed  amendment  was 
finally  concurred  in  by  the  Senate : 
Yeas  24 ;  Nays  12 :  as  follows : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Anthony,  Baker,  Bigler, 
Bright,  Crittenden,  Dixon,  Douglas,  Foster, 
Grimes,  Gwin,  Harlan,  Hunter,  Johnson,  of 
Tennessee,  Kennedy,  Latham,  Mason,  Mor- 
rill, Nicholson,  Polk,  Pugh,  Rice,  Sebastian, 
Ten  Eyck,  and  Thomson — 24. 

Nays — Messrs.  Bingham,  Chandler,  Clark, 
Doolittle,  Durkee,  Foot,  King,  Sumner, Trum- 
bull, Wade,  Wilkinson,  and  Wilson — 12. 

And  then  the  Senate  returned  to 
the  consideration  of  the  Crittenden 
proposition,  for  which  Mr.  Clark's 
proposition,  already  given,14  was  again 
offered  as  a  substitute,  and  voted 
down  :  Yeas  14 ;  Nays  22. 

Finally,  Mr.  Crittenden  moved 
that  the  Peace  Conference  proposi- 
tion be  substituted  for  his  own  origi- 
nal project  of  conciliation ;  which  the 
Senate  refused,  by  the  following  vote : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Crittenden,  Douglas,  Har- 
lan, Johnson,  of  Tennessee,  Kennedy,  Mor- 
rill, and  Thomson — 7. 

Nats — Messrs.  Bayard,  Bigler,  Bingham, 
Bright,  Chandler,  Clark,  Dixon,  Fessenden, 
Foot,  Foster,  Grimes,  Gwin,  Hunter,  Lane, 
Latham,  Mason,  Nicholson,  Polk,  Pugh,  Rice, 
Sebastian,  Sumner,  Ten  Eyck,  Trumbull, 
Wade,  Wigfall,  Wilkinson,  and  Wilson— 28. 

So  the  Senate,  by  four  to  one,  dis- 
posed of  the  scheme  of  the  Peace 
Commissioners,  and  proceeded  to 
vote,  directly  thereafter,  on  Mr.  Crit- 
tenden's original  proposition,  which 


was  defeated — Yeas  19  ,  Nays  20 — 
as  has  been  stated. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Peace  Con- 
ference were  likewise  presented  to 
the  House,15  but  not  acted  upon  in 
that  body — the  report  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  Thirty-three  being  held 
entitled  to  preference. 

Thus  ended  in  failure  the  more  or 
less  earnest  efforts  to  avert  the  gather- 
ing storm  of  war  by  some  project  of 
'  Compromise'  or  '  Conciliation,'  to 
be  enacted  by  Congress  preliminary  to 
its  being  ingrafted  on  the  Constitu- 
tion. And,  as  it  has  been  very  wide- 
ly asserted  and  believed  that  the  Re- 
publicans evinced  an  unbending  dis- 
position, stubbornly  refusing  to  make 
any  concession,  any  sacrifice,  for  the 
preservation  of  peace  and  National  in- 
tegrity, it  may  be  well  to  consider  what 
they  actually  did  and  proffered.  The 
foregoing  pages  show  that 

I.  They  were  at  all  times  willing, 
and  more  than  willing,  to  unite  in 
the  call  of  a  Convention  of  the 
States,  which  would  have  inherent 
power  to  deal  thoroughly  with  all 
the  questions  whereon  the  differences 
termed  'sectional'  had  arisen,  and 
wherein  their  opponents  were  mor- 
ally certain  to  have  a  large  majority 
of  votes.  President  Lincoln  at  an 
early  day,  Gov.  Morgan,  the  Repub- 
licans in  the  Peace  Conference,  etc., 
etc.,  had  indicated  their  concurrence 
in  the  call  of  a  Convention.  But  this 
resort,  though  originally  suggested  by 
the  Legislature  of  Kentucky,  was 
voted  down  in  the  Peace  Conference 
by  the  aid  of  all  the  Slave  States  re- 
presented— Kentucky  among  them. 

II.  The    Republicans  likewise 


14  See  page  382. 


15  March  1,  1861. 


404 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


evinced  a  willingness  to  pay  for 
slaves  who  should  be  lost  to  their 
owners  through  popular  interposi- 
tion to  defeat  their  return  to  bond- 
age from  the  Free  States  to  which 
they  had  escaped.  Mr.  Tuck's  prop- 
osition in  the  'Peace  Conference,' 
Gov.  Baldwin's,  and  nearly  every 
authentic  or  influential  utterance 
from  the  same  side,  admitted  the 
duty  of  the  North,  if  it  could  no 
longer  return  such  fugitives,  to  pay 
their  value  to  those  injured  or  ag- 
grieved by  this  failure  to  make  good 
the  constitutional  stipulation.  Had 


the  South  presented  as  her  ultima- 
tum— "  Pay  us  cash16  for  every  slave 
whom  we  shall  hereafter  lose  through 
your  repugnance  to  slave-hunting" — 
the  exaction  would  have  been  acce- 
ded to  as  reasonable  and  just. 

III.  The  North  could  not,  without 
shame  and  conscious  guilt,  consent  to 
diffuse  and  uphold  Slavery  on  terri- 
tory that  came  to  us  free.17  But  Gov. 
Anthony,  of  Rhode  Island,  formally 
offered,18  in  the  Senate,  to  unite  in 
the  immediate  admission  of  New 
Mexico  (which  then  included  Arizo- 
na) as  a  State,  under  such  Constitu- 


16  During  the  preceding  discussion  in  the  Con- 
ference, Gov.  S.  P.  Chase,  of  Ohio  (February  6th), 
after  stating  frankly  to  the  Southern  Commis- 
sioners that  those  from  the  Free  States  could  not 
surrender  the  principle  of  Slavery  Restriction  as 
to  the  territories,  and  that,  if  they  did,  it  would 
do  no  good,  as  their  constituents  would  disavow 
and  repudiate  them,  proceeded  as  follows: 

"Aside  from  the  Territorial  question — the 
question  of  Slavery  outside  of  Slave  States — I 
know  of  but  one  serious  difficulty.  I  refer  to 
the  question  concerning  fugitives  from  service. 
The  clause  in  the  Constitution  concerning  this 
class  of  persons  is  regarded  by  almost  all  men, 
North  and  South,  as  a  stipulation  for  the  surren- 
der to  their  masters  of  slaves  escaping  into  Free 
States.  The  people  of  the  Free  States,  however, 
who  believe  that  slaveholding  is  wrong,  cannot 
and  will  not  aid  in  the  reclamation,  and  the  stip- 
ulation becomes  therefore  a  dead  letter.  You 
complain  of  bad  faith;  and  the  complaint  is 
retorted  by  denunciations  of  the  cruelty  which 
would  drag  back  to  bondage  the  poor  slave  who 
has  escaped  from  it.  You,  thinking  Slavery 
right,  claim  the  fulfillment  of  the  stipulation; 
we,  thinking  Slavery  wrong,  cannot  fulfill  the 
stipulation  without  consciousness  of  participa- 
tion in  wrong.  Here  is  a  real  difficulty ;  but  it 
seems  to  me  not  insuperable.  It  will  not  do  for 
us  to  say  to  you,  in  justification  of  non-perform- 
ance, 'The  stipulation  is  immoral,  and  therefore 
we  cannot  execute  it ;'  for  you  deny  the  immor- 
ality, and  we  cannot  assume  to  judge  for  you.  On 
the  other  hand,  you  ought  not  to  exact  from  us 
the  literal  performance  of  the  stipulation  when 
you  know  that  we  cannot  perform  it  without 
conscious  culpability.  A  true  solution  of  the  dif- 
ficulty seems  to  be  attainable  by  regarding  it  as 
a  simple  case  where  a  contract,  from  changed 
circumstances,  cannot  be  fulfilled  exactly  as 
made.  A  court  of  equity  in  such  a  case  decrees 
execution  as  near  as  may  be.  It  requires  the  par- 
ty who  cannot  perform  to  make  a  compensation 
for  non-performance.  Why  cannot  the  same  prin- 


ciple be  applied  to  the  rendition  of  fugitives  from 
service?  We  cannot  surrender — but  we  can 
compensate.  Why  not,  then,  avoid  all  difficulties 
on  all  sides,  and  show  respectively  good  faith 
and  good  will,  by  providing  and  accepting  com- 
pensation where  masters  reclaim  escaping  ser- 
vants and  prove  their  right  of  reclamation  under 
the  Constitution  ?  Instead  of  a  judgment  for  ren- 
dition, let  there  be  a  judgment  for  compensation, 
determined  by  the  true  value  of  the  services,  and 
let  the  same  judgment  assure  freedom  to  the  fu- 
gitive. The  cost  to  the  National  Treasury  would 
be  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  evils  of  dis- 
cord and  strife.    All  parties  would  be  gainers." 

17  Mr  Webster,  in  one  of  his  latest  speeches 
—at  Buffalo,  May  22,  1851— said: 

u  If  the  South  wish  any  concession  from  me, 
they  won't  get  it — not  a  hair's  breadth  of  it.  If 
they  come  to  my  house  for  it,  they  will  not  find 
it.  I  concede  nothing.  *  *  *  No  matter  what 
may  be  said  at  the  Syracuse  Convention,  or  any 
other  assemblage  of  insane  persons.  I  never 
would  consent  that  there  should  be  one  foot  of 
Slave  Territory  beyond  what  the  old  Thirteen 
States  had  at  the  time  of  the  formation  of  the 
Union.  Never,  never!  The  man  can't  show 
his  face  to  me,  and  prove  that  I  ever  departed 
from  that  doctrine.  He  would  sneak  away,  or 
slink  away,  or  hire  a  mercenary  Heep,  that  he 
might  say  what  a  mercenary  apostate  from  lib- 
erty Daniel  Webster  has  become.  He  knows 
himself  to  be  a  hypocrite  and  a  falsifier.  *  *  *  All 
that  I  now  say  is,  that,  with  the  blessing  of  God, 
I  will  not  now  nor  hereafter,  before  the  country  or 
the  world,  consent  to  be  numbered  among  those  who 
introduced  new  Slave  Power  into  the  Union.  J 
will  do  all  in  my  power  to  prevent  it." 

Mr.  Clay's  deliberate  and  emphatic  declaration 
that  he  would  never  consent  nor  be  constrained 
"  to  vote  for  the  positive  introduction  of  Slavery 
either  south  or  north  of  that  line"  (36°  30'),  will 
be  found  on  page  205. 

18  See  page  381. 


REPUBLICAN  CONCESS 

tion  as  her  people  should  see  fit  to 
frame  and  adopt — New  Mexico  be- 
ing at  that  moment  a  Slave  Terri- 
tory by  act  of  her  Legislature — to 
say  nothing  of  the  Dred  Scott  decis- 
ion. That  would  have  given  the 
South  a  firm  hold  on  nearly  every 
acre  of  our  present  territory  whereon 
she  could  rationally  hope  ever  to  plant 
Slavery — provided  the  people  of 
New  Mexico  should  see  fit  to  ingraft 
Slavery  on  their  State,  as  they  seem- 
ed, under  Democratic  training,  to 
have  done  on  their  Territory. 

IY  The  House — which  had  be- 
come strongly  Republican  through 
the  withdrawal  of  most  of  the  rep- 
resentatives from  Cotton  States — 
passed  the  conciliatory  and  practical 
resolves  reported  by  Mr.  Corwin 
from  the  Committee  of  Thirty-three 
— passed  them  by  an  overwhelming 
majority.  The  Senate  would  have 
promptly  concurred,  had  it  been  inti- 
mated or  probable  that  such  concur- 
rence would  have  arrested  and  rolled 
back  the  surge  of  Secession. 

V.  Both  Houses  united  in  passing 
the  Joint  Resolve  from  said  Commit- 
tee which,  being  ratified  by  the  re- 
quired proportion  of  the  States,  would 
have  precluded  forever  any  action  of 
Congress  adverse  to  the  perpetuation 
of  Slavery  in  such  States  as  should 
desire  such  perpetuation.  This,  too, 
would  have  been  readily  perfected, 
had  1  the  South'  evinced  any  inclina- 
tion to  be  satisfied  and  pacified  there- 
by. But  it  was  very  generally  treat- 
ed by  them  as  of  no  value.  Senator 
Mason,  of  Yirginia,  spoke  of  it  deri- 
sively as,  in  substance,  one  of  the 
planks  of  the  Chicago  [Republican] 
Platform.  And  the  artillery  of  Se- 
cession soon  dispelled  all  desire  of, 
or  motive  for,  ratifying  it. 


IONS    AND    PROFFERS.  405 

YI.  There  were  very  many  Repub- 
licans— and  those  by  no  means  with- 
out consideration  or  influence — who 
would  have  cheerfully  consented  to  a 
peaceful  withdrawal  from  the  Union 
of  the  Cotton  States,  with  such  others 
as  might  have  chosen  to  accompany 
them,  had  these  accorded  time  for 
decently  effecting  and  assenting  to 
such  a  separation,  after  first  allow- 
ing the  Free  States  a  fair  opportunity 
to  'submit  to  and  urge  upon  the  peo- 
ple of  the  South  their  reasons  for 
deprecating  it.  To  this  end,  the 
calling  of  a  National  Convention  and 
the  election  of  delegates  thereto  were 
deemed  indispensable  prerequisites. 
Such  a  Convention  could  have  acted 
decisively  on  the  main  question  and 
all  subordinate  points — such  as  the 
rightful  disposal,  by  apportionment 
or  otherwise,  of  the  public  lands 
and  other  property  belonging  to  the 
Union, with  the  public  debt  owed  by  it. 

VII.  The  North  did,  as  we  have 
seen,  organize  three  new  Territories 
at  this  Session,  in  utter  silence  re- 
specting Slavery,  and  in  such  man- 
ner as  left  '  the  South'  in  full  posses- 
sion of  all  the  rights  accruing  to  her 
from  the  Federal  Constitution,  as  ex- 
pounded in  the  Dred  Scott  decision. 
This  was  done,  not  in  accordance 
with  the  views  and  feelings  of  the 
Republicans,  who  reported  and  pass- 
ed the  bills,  but  as  a  peace-offering 
and  a  concession  to  those  Southern 
Unionists  who  were  constantly  pro- 
testing that  they  cared  nothing  for  the 
extension  of  Slavery — in  fact,  were 
rather  opposed  to  it — but  would 
not  tamely  submit  to  see  a  stigma 
placed  on  their  section  and  her  £  insti- 
tution' by  Northern  votes. 

Yet  all  this  was  fruitless,  because 
the  North,  in  the  full  flush  of  a  long- 


406  THE  AMERICA 

awaited  and  fairly  achieved  triumph, 
did  not  see  tit  to  repudiate  the  cher- 
ished and  time-honored  principle  for 
which  it  had  patiently,  ardently  strug- 
gled. No  other  successful  party  was 
ever  before  required,  at  such  a  mo- 
ment, to  surrender  its  principle,  its 
consistency,  its  manhood,  on  peril  of 
National  disruption  and  overthrow. 
There  was  no  concession  from  the 
other  side — no  real  compromise — but 
a  simple,  naked  exaction  that  the 
Republicans  should  stultify  and  dis- 
grace themselves,  by  admitting  that 
they  were  fundamentally  wrong,  and 
that,  instead  of  electing  their  Presi- 
dent,they  should  have  been  defeated.19 
What  '  the  South'  and  its  friends 
really  required  of  the  North  was  part- 
nership, cooperation,  complicity,in  the 
work  of  extending,  diffusing,  and  forti- 
fying Slavery,  such  as  it  had  secured  in 
the  annexation  of  Texas.  That  Slave- 
ry was  a  great  National  interest — the 
broad  and  solid  base  of  our  industrial 
economy  and  commercial  prosperity 
— the  slaves  confined,  indeed,  to  one 
section  of  the  Union,  because  there 
most  profitably  employed,  but  labor- 
ins:  for  the  benefit  of  Northern50  man- 
ufacturers  and  merchants  as  much 
as  for  that  of  Southern  planters  and 
factors — that  we  must  all  watch  and 
work  to  give  that  interest  wider  scope 

19  The  Cincinnati  Enquirer  of  January  15, 1861, 
has  a  letter  from  '  A  Citizen  of  Highland  Coun- 
ty,' which  puts  the  case  squarely  thus: 

M  There  is  only  one  possible  remedy  which  can 
save  the  country, and  restore  harmony  and  peace ; 
and  that  is  a  total  abandonment  of  the  dogmas 
of  Lincoln,  and  the  adoption  of  another  and  op- 
posite object — 1  the  recognition  of  the  equality  of 
all  the  States  in  the  territories  of  the  United 
States,  and  the  strict  enforcement  of  all  the  laws 
protecting  and  securing  slave  property  under  the 
Constitution.'  This  principle  is  recognized  in  the 
proposition  of  Senator  Crittenden ;  and  when  the 
madness  and  violence  of  such  men  as  John  Sher- 
man, Ben.  Wade,  and  Horace  Greeley  shall  be 
humbled,  and  when  wise  and  patriotic  statesmen 
shall  be  looked  for  and  found  as  guides  and  coun- 


N  CONFLICT. 

by  the  conquest  of  more  territory, 
and  by  the  maintenance.at  all  hazards 
of  Slavery  in  Cuba,  etc.  —  and  that 
all  anti-Slavery  discussion  or  expos- 
tulation must  be  systematically  sup- 
pressed, as  sedition,  if  not  treason — 
such  was  the  gist  of  the  Southern 
requirement.  A  long-haired,  raving 
Abolitionist  in  the  furthest  North, 
according  to  1  conservative'  ideas,  not 
merely  disturbed  the  equilibrium  of 
Southern  society,  but  undermined  the 
fabric  of  our  National  prosperity.  lie 
must  be  6quelched,ai  or  there  could 
be  no  further  Union.  Haman,  sur- 
rounded by  the  power  and  pomp  of 
his  dazzling  exaltation,  bitterly  says, 
"All  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so 
long  as  I  see  Mordecai,  the  Jew,  sit- 
ting at  the  king's  gate."38 

Hence  1  the  South'  would  accord  no 
time,  allow  no  canvass  by  Northern 
men  of  the  Slave  States  in  the  hope 
of  disabusing  their  people  of  the 
prejudice  that  we  were  their  natural, 
implacable  enemies."  They  gave 
us  but  this  alternative — "  Consent  to 
Disunion — let  us  wrest  from  the  Re- 
public such  portion  of  it  as  we  choose 
to  have — or  meet  us  in  the  shock  of 
battle!  Your  country  or  your 
life !" 

— And  so  we  were  plunged  into 
the  horrors  of  Civil  War. 

selors  for  the  peace  of  the  nation,  then  may  we 
rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  restoring  our  country 
to  that  prosperity  and  happiness  which  we  had 
before  the  spirit  of  Abolitionism  and  of  hate 
blasted  this  fair  heritage  of  our  fathers.  Let 
the  entire  South  to  the  border,  including  Ken- 
tucky, Maryland,  Virginia,  and  Missouri,  take  a 
bold,  dignified,  and  patriotic  position,  and  de- 
mand as  a  right  that  which  the  North — redeemed 
from  the  curse  of  Abolitionism — will  have  the 
magnanimity  and  patriotism  to  yield." 

20  See  Judge  Woodward's  speech,  page  364. 

21  See  Mayor  Henry's  speech;  also  his  letter 
forbidding  G.  W.  Curtis's  lecture,  pages  363-7. 

22  Esther  v.,  13. 

83  See  Senator  Clingman,  page  3  T  3. 


FIRST   EFFECTS   OF  SECESSION. 


407 


XXVI. 

THE  UNION— THE  CONFEDEEACY. 


If  Hudibras  was  right  in  his  as- 
sumption, that  there  is  and  can  be  no 
fighting  where  one  party  gives  all  the 
blows — the  other  being  content  with 
meekly  and  patiently  receiving  them — 
then  it  might  be  plausibly  contended 
that  our  great  Civil  War  was  initia- 
ted by  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter, or  by  the  attempt  to  supply  its 
famishing  garrison,  some  weeks  after 
Mr.  Lincoln's  inauguration.  But  Wit 
stands  opposed  to  Reason  in  this  case, 
as  in  many  others.  The  first  at- 
tempt in  the  interest  of  Secession  to 
dispossess  the  Union,  by  force,  of  any 
property  or  position  held  by  it,  even 
though  not  seriously  opposed,  was  as 
truly  an  act  of  war  as  though  it  had 
been  desperately  resisted,  at  the  cost 
of  hundreds  of  lives. 

The  Secession  of  South  Carolina1 
was  hailed  with  instant  and  general 
exultation  by  the  plotters  of  Disunion 
in  nearly  every  Slave  State.  There 
were  celebrations,  with  parades,  mu- 
sic, cannon-firing,  speeches,  etc.,  on 
that  evening  or  the  following  day,  at 
New  Orleans,  Mobile,  Memphis,  etc. 
Even  at  Wilmington,  Del.,  where  the 
Secessionists  were  few  indeed,  the 
event  was  honored  by  a  salute  of 
a  hundred  guns.  Senator  Andrew 
Johnson  was  still  more  honored,  on 
the  22d,  by  being  burned  in  effigy  by 
the  Secessionists  of  Memphis.  While 
the  Northern  cities  were  anxious, 

1  December  20,  1860. 

2  The  Charleston  Mercury  of  the  2 2d  said: 

"The  garrison  in  our  harbor  will  not  be 
strengthened.    The  reenforcement  of  the  forts, 


apprehensive,  and  paralyzed,  it  was 
noted  that  at  Baltimore,  though  no 
formal  celebration  was  had,  people 
seemed  relieved  and  cheerful;  the 
streets  were  gayly  crowded,  and  busi- 
ness was  better.  At  Washington,  Mr. 
Garnett,  of  Virginia,  exultingly  an- 
nounced the  fact  of  South  Carolina's 
secession  in  the  House ;  whereupon, 
three  or  four  Southrons  clapped  their 
hands.  There  was  no  further  public 
manifestation  in  Congress ;  and  none 
north  of  the  Virginia  line,  save  in 
Wilmington,  as  aforesaid. 

A  mere  handful  of  Federal  troops, 
under  Maj.  Robert  Anderson,  watch- 
ed rather  than  garrisoned  the  forts  in 
Charleston  harbor.  Of  these,  Fort 
Moultrie,  though  the  older  and  weak- 
er, was  mainly  tenanted  by  the  sol- 
diers, being  the  more  convenient  to 
the  city ;  but  it  could  not  have  been 
held  a  day  against  a  serious  assault. 
Its  garrison  found  themselves  sud- 
denly surrounded  by  scowling,  dead- 
ly foes,2  too  numerous  to  be  resisted. 
During  the  night  of  the  26th,  Maj. 
Anderson  properly  and  prudently 
transferred  his  entire  command  to 
Fort  Sumter,  taking  with  them,  or 
after  them,  all  provisions,  munitions, 
etc.,  that  could  conveniently  be  trans- 
ported. The  removal  was  effected  by 
means  of  two  schooners,  which  made 
several  trips  during  the  night,  pass- 
ing directly  by  the  harbor  guard-boat 

at  this  time  and  under  present  circumstances, 
means  coercion — war.  When  the  forts  are  de- 
manded and  refused  to  be  delivered  up  to  those  in 
whom  is  invested  the  title  of  eminent  domain, 
and  for  whose  defense  and  protection  alone  they 


408  THE  AMERICA 

Nina,  and  affecting  no  concealment.  I 
A  full  moon  was  shining  in  a  clear 
sky.  When  all  that  could  be  had 
been  removed,  the  remaining  gun- 
carriages,  etc.,  were  burnt,  so  as  to 
prevent  their  use  in  any  'future  at- 
tack upon  Sumter.  No  resistance 
was  offered ;  perhaps  none  of  a  seri- 
ous nature  could  have  been  ;  for  Maj. 
Anderson's  act  was  evidently  unan- 
ticipated in  Charleston  ;  but  it  was 
gravely  complained  of  as  a  breach  of 
faith — President  Buchanan,  it  was 
implied,  rather  than  distinctly  al- 
leged,3 having  promised  that  the  mil- 
itary status  should  not  be  changed, 
without  due  notice.  The  news  of 
Anderson's  movement  sent  a  thrill 
through  the  hearts  of  many,  who  felt 
that  we  were  silently  drifting  toward 
a  sea  of  fraternal  blood. 

Almost  simultaneously  with  this 
transfer,  a  popular  excitement  was 
aroused  in  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  by  infor- 
mation that  an  order  had  been  re- 
ceived from  the  War  Department  for 

were  ceded  and  built  up;  and  when,  the  Fed- 
eral Government  showing  a  hostile  purpose,  it 
shall  become  necessary  and  proper  for  us  to  ob- 
tain possession,  then  it  will  be  right  for  the 
world  and  Black  Republicanism  to  expect  that 
the  State,  by  her  authorities,  will  move  in  the 
premises.  The  people  will  obey  the  call  for  war, 
and  take  the  forts.1 1 

The  Charleston  Courier  of  December  4,  1860, 
has  a  speech  by  Mr.  Edward  M'Crady  at  a  Se- 
cession meeting  in  that  city  a  few  days  pre- 
viously, which  concludes  as  follows  : 

"  I  do  not  counsel  any  precipitate  action  ;  nor 
do  I  fear  anything  from  the  forts — they  are 
ours,  not  merely  in  part.  They  were  placed 
there  on  our  soil  for  our  protection ;  and,  when- 
ever the  separation  comes,  they  must  fall  into 
our  possession.  They  will  be  ours  as  surely  as 
we  secede  ;  and  we  will  secede  as  surely  as  the 
sun  will  rise  to-morrow." 

3  The  Charleston  Courier  of  the  29th  said: 
"  Major  Robert  Anderson,  United  States  Army, 
has  achieved  the  unenviable  distinction  of  opening 
civil  war  between  American  citizens  by  an  act  of 
gross  breach  of  faith.  He  has,  under  counsels 
of  a  panic,  deserted  his  post  at  Fort  Moultrie, 
and,  under  false  pretexts,  has  transferred  his 


N  CONFLICT. 

an  extensive  transfer  of  arms,  espe- 
cially of  heavy  ordnance,  from  the 
Alleghany  Arsenal  near  that  place  to 
the  South  and  South- West.4  That 
such  transfers  had  been  quietly  going 
on  for  months,  did  not  reconcile  the 
stanch  Republicans  of  our  Ameri- 
can Birmingham  to  further  opera- 
tions of  the  kind,  now  palpably  in 
the  interest  of  Southern  treason.  A 
public  meeting  was  called ;  dispatches 
sent  to  Washington ;  and  an  order  ob- 
tained suspending  the  meditated  trans- 
fer. The  citizens'  meeting  was  held 
on  the  evening  of  the  27th;  and  its 
resolves,  while  they  deprecated  any 
lawless  resistance  to  official  orders, 
called  urgently  on  the  President  to 
purge  his  Cabinet  of  every  one  known 
to  be  in  complicity  with  treason  or 
rebellion  against  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment and  Union. 

John  B.  Floyd,  Secretary  of  War, 
resigned  his  post  on  the  29th,  alleging 
the  course  of  the  President,  in  refus- 
ing to  order  Major  Anderson  back  to 

garrison  and  military  stores  and  supplies  to  Fort 
Sumter." 

And  The  Charleston  Mercury  said : 

°  Major  Anderson  alleges  that  the  movement 
was  made  without  orders,  and  upon  his  own  re- 
sponsibility, and  that  he  was  not  aware  of  such 
an  understanding.  He  is  a  gentleman,  and  we 
will  not  impugn  his  word  or  his  motives.  But  it 
is  due  to  South  Carolina  and  to  good  faith  that 
the  act  of  this  officer  should  be  repudiated  by 
the  Government,  and  that  the  troops  be  removed 
forthwith  from  Fort  Sumter." 

4  The  order  was  as  follows: 

"  Send  immediately  to  Ship  Island,  near  Balize, 
(mouth  of  Mississippi),  46  cannon,  and  to  Gal- 
veston 78  cannon,"  naming  the  kinds. 

The  schedule  was  as  follows : 
21  ten-inch  Columbiads,  15,2001bs.=319,2001bs. 
21  eight-inch     ditto       9,240  "  =194,040  u 
4  32-pounders  (iron),     7,250  "  ==  29,000  " 

46  to  Ship  Island. 

Total  weight  of  metal,    542, 240  lbs. 

23  ten-inch  Columbiads,  15,200 lbs.  =349,600 lbs. 
48  eight-inch    ditto        9,240  "  =443.520  " 
_7_  32-pounders  (iron),      7,250  »  =  50,750  " 

7  8  to  Galveston. 

Total  weight  of  metal,    843,870  lbs. 


SOUTH   CAROLINA  0 


N   THE  OFFENSIVE. 


409 


Fort  Moultrie,  as  his  reason.  He  as- 
serted that  he  had  promised  South 
Carolina  that  no  change  should  be 
made  in  the  disposition  of  our  forces 
in  Charleston  harbor — which  is  ex- 
ceedingly probable.  He  asked  per- 
mission to  "  vindicate  our  honor,  and 
prevent  civil  war"  by  "  withdrawing 
the  Federal  garrison  altogether  from 
the  harbor  of  Charleston."  This  not 
being  accorded,  he  declared  that  he 
could  no  longer  hold  his  office, 
"  under  my  convictions  of  patriotism, 
nor  with  honor."  The  President 
mildly  accepted  his  resignation,  and 
appointed  Joseph  Holt,  of  Kentucky, 
to  succeed  him. 

By  the  middle  of  December,  Hon. 
Caleb  Cushing,  of  Mass.,  was  dis- 
patched to  Charleston  by  President 
Buchanan  as  a  Commissioner  or  con- 
fidential agent  of  the  Executive.  His 
errand  was  a  secret  one.  But,  so 
far  as  its  object  was  allowed  to  tran- 
spire, he  was  understood  to  be  the 
bearer  of  a  proffer  from  Mr.  Buchanan 
that  he  would  not  reenforce  Major 
Anderson,  nor  initiate  any  hostilities 
against  the  Secessionists,  provided 
they  would  evince  a  like  pacific  spi- 
rit, by  respecting  the  Federal  author- 
ity down  to  the  close  of  his  Adminis- 
tration— now  but  a  few  weeks  distant. 
Gen.  Cushing  had  been  in  Charleston 
a  few  months  earlier  as  an  anti- 
Douglas  delegate  to,  and  President 
of,  the  Democratic  National  Conven- 
tion, and  then  stood  in  high  favor 
with  her  aristocracy :  on  this  occa- 
sion, however,  he  was  soon  given  to 
understand  that  he  had  fallen  from 
grace;  that  his  appearance  in  the 
character  of  an  advocate  or  represen- 
tative of  Federal  authority  had  cast 
a  sudden  mildew  on  his  popularity  in 
that  stronghold  of  Secession.  He 


remained  but  five  hours  in  Charles- 
ton ;  having  learned  within  that  time 
that  the  rulers  of  South  Carolina 
would  make  no  promises  and  enter 
into  no  arrangements  which  did  not 
recognize  or  imply  the  independence 
of  their  State.  He  returned  directly 
to  Washington,  where  his  report  was 
understood  to  have  been  the  theme 
of  a  stormy  and  protracted  Cabinet 
meeting. 

Directly  after  Major  Anderson's 
removal  to  Fort  Sumter,  the  Federal 
arsenal  in  Charleston,  containing 
many  thousand  stand  of  arms  and  a 
considerable  quantity  of  military 
stores,  was  seized  by  the  volunteers, 
now  flocking  to  that  city  by  direc- 
tion of  the  State  authorities ;  Castle 
Pinckney,  Fort  Moultrie,  and  Sulli- 
van's Island,  were  likewise  occupied 
by  them,  and  their  defenses  vigor- 
ously enlarged  and  improved.  The 
Custom-House,  Post-Office,  etc.,  were 
likewise  appropriated,  without  resist- 
ance or  commotion ;  the  Federal  offi- 
cers having  them  in  charge  being 
original,  active,  and  ardent  Secession- 
ists. The  lights  in  the  light-houses 
were  extinguished,  and  the  buoys  in 
the  intricate  channel  of  the  harbor 
were  removed,  so  that  no  ocean  craft 
could  enter  or  depart  without  the 
guidance  of  a  special  pilot.  Addi- 
tional fortifications,  defending  the 
city  and  commanding  the  harbor  ap- 
proaches, were  commenced  and  push- 
ed rapidly  forward ;  some  of  them 
having  direct  reference,  offensive  and 
defensive,  to  Fort  Sumter.  And  still 
the  volunteers  came  pouring  in; 
nearly  all  from  the  interior  of  South 
Carolina;  though  abundant  proffers 
of  military  aid  were  received  from 
all  parts  of  the  South.  The  first 
company  from  another  State,  con- 


410  THE  AMERICA 

sisting  of  eighty  men,  was  organized 
in  Savannah,  and  reached  Charleston 
December  23d.  Capt.  N.  L.  Coste, 
of  the  U.  S.  revenue  service,  in  com- 
mand of  the  cutter  William  Aiken, 
in  Charleston  harbor,  turned  her  over 
to  the  State  authorities,  and  enlisted, 
with  his  crew,  in  the  service  of  South 
Carolina.  This  day,  the  Palmetto, 
or  South  Carolina,  nag  was  formally 
raised  over  the  Custom-House  and 
the  Post-Office  at  Charleston;  and 
it  was  announced  next  morning  that 
Gov.  Pickens  had  been  tendered  the 
services  of  volunteers  from  Georgia 
and  Alabama,  as  well  as  from  all 
parts  of  South  Carolina. 

Mr.  Jacob  Thompson,  Secretary  of 
the  Interior,  having  left  his  post  to 
visit  North  Carolina  in  the  character 
of  a  Secession  Commissioner  from 
Mississippi,  a  heavy  defalcation  was 
discovered 5  in  his  Department.  A 
South  Carolina  clerk  named  Godard 
Bailey,  who  was  custodian  of  a  large 
amount  of  State  bonds  belonging  to 
the  Indian  Trust  Fund,  had  abstract- 
ed therefrom  bonds  and  coupons 
amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  $870,- 
000,  and  had  disappeared.  Mr. 
Thompson  was  notified  by  letter  of 
the  fraud,  and,  returning, 6  called  at 
once  upon  the  President  to  announce 
it.  An  investigation  was  forthwith 
ordered ;  but  neither  the  key  of  the 
safe  nor  the  clerk  who  had  charge  of 
it  could  be  found.  Mr.  Bailey  was 
at  length  discovered,  but  could  not 
or  would  not  produce  the  key.  The 
Department  was  then  surrounded  by 
a  police  force,  which  no  clerk  was 
allowed  to  pass,  the  safe  broken  open, 
and  the  extent  of  the  robbery  dis- 
covered. An  examination  of  Mr. 
Bailey  elicited  the  following  facts : 


N  CONFLICT. 

The  firm  of  Russell,  Majors  & 
Waddell  held  a  very  large  contract 
for  the  transportation  of  army  sup- 
plies from  Leavenworth  and  other 
points  on  the  Missouri  river  to  the 
army  stationed  at  Camp  Floyd,  in 
Utah ;  under  which  they  were  to  re- 
ceive from  the  Treasury  about  one 
million  dollars  per  annum.  The  con- 
tractors being  pressed  for  funds,  Mr. 
Floyd  had  been  induced  to  accept 
their  drafts  on  his  department,  in  an- 
ticipation of  future  service,  to  the 
amount  of  nearly  or  quite  a  million 
of  dollars.  These  acceptances,  being 
manifestly  irregular,  could  with  diffi- 
culty, and  but  to  a  moderate  extent, 
be  negotiated  ;  so  that  the  embarrass- 
ment of  the  contractors  was  thereby 
scarcely  mitigated.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances, it  appears,  Mr.  Russell 
had  been  made  acquainted  with  Mr. 
Bailey,  and  had,  by  some  means,  in- 
duced the  latter  to  supply  him  with 
a  large  amount  of  bonds  from  the 
safe  under  his  control,  substituting 
therefor  Mr.  Floyd's  acceptances 
aforesaid.  The  bonds  he  had  hypo- 
thecated in  Wall-street  and  raised 
money  thereon.  As  our  national  sky 
darkened,  the  bonds  depreciated,  and 
the  lenders  called  on  Mr.  Russell  for 
additional  security,  which  he  fur- 
nished in  the  shape  of  more  bonds, 
supplied  by  Bailey;  who,  finding 
himself  inextricably  involved,  ad- 
dressed, on  the  18th,  a  letter  to  Secre- 
tary Thompson,  disclosing  the  more 
material  facts,  and  pleading  that  he 
had  taken  the  bonds  only  to  save  the 
honor  of  Secretary  Floyd,  which,  he 
was  assured,  had  been  compromised 
by  his  advances  to  Russell  &  Co. 
He  did  this  on  the  faith  of  promises 
that  all  should  be  made  right  in  due 


5  December  24th. 


6  December  25th. 


THE   UNION    GOING   TO  WRECK. 


411 


season:  but,  being  called  upon  by 
the  Indian  Bureau  for  the  coupons, 
payable  January  1st,  on  the  abstracted 
securities,  he  found  himself  unable  to 
respond,  and  was  driven  to  a  confes- 
sion. The  Government  being  at 
that  moment  penniless,  the#revenue 
shrunk  to  less  than  half  its  ordinary 
dimensions  by  the  stoppage  of  im- 
portations, and  the  necessity  for  bor- 
rowing urgent,  this  development, 
casting  doubt  on  the  integrity  of 
men  high  in  authority,  gave  a  stag- 
gering blow  to  the  public  credit. 
The  Grand  Jury  at  Washington  in- 
dicted 7  Floyd  on  two  counts :  first, 
for  malfeasance;  second,  for  conspi- 
racy with  Bailey  and  Russell  to  de- 
fraud the  Government ;  but  he  was 
by  this  time  far  from  that  city,  ab- 
sorbed in  the  work  of  luring  Yirginia 
into  the  toils  of  treason. 

The  disintegration  of  the  Cabinet 
had  commenced  so  early  as  December 
10th,  when  Mr.  Howell  Cobb,  thor- 
oughly in  the  counsels  of  the  seces- 
sionists, resigned  the  control  of  the 
Treasury,  whereof  the  bankrupt  and 
hopeless  condition  supplied  him  with 
an  excuse,  though  not  the  reason,  for 
his  retirement.  Mr.  Philip  Francis 
Thomas,  of  Md.,  previously  Commis- 
sioner of  Patents,  was  appointed  in 
his  stead.  Gen.  Lewis  Cass  resigned 
the  post  of  Secretary  of  State  on  the 
14th,  directly  after  a  long  and  ex- 
citing Cabinet  session.  He  did  so 
because  he  could  not  consent  to  ren- 
der himself  responsible  for,  or  be  im- 
plicated in,  the  President's  refusal  to 
reenforce,  provision,  and  sustain  Maj. 
Anderson  and  his  little  force,  holding 
the  forts  in  Charleston  harbor.  He 
did  not  rush  into  the  newspapers ; 
yet  he  made  no  secret  of  his  convic- 


tion that  the  course  on  which  the 
President  had  decided  was  a  fatally 
mistaken  one,  and  led  directly  to 
National  subversion  and  ruin.  At- 
torney-General Black — a  lifelong  and 
intimate  personal  friend  of  the  Presi- 
dent— took  charge,  by  his  direction, 
of  the  State  Department. 

Messrs.  P.  W.  Barnwell,  James  L. 
Orr,  and  ex-Gov.  Adams,  Commis- 
sioners from  the  State  of  South  Caro- 
lina, reached  "Washington  on  the 
26th,  under  instructions  to  negotiate 
with  the  Federal  Executive  a  parti- 
tion of  all  the  properties  and  inter- 
ests of  the  sovereign  and  independent 
State  of  South  Carolina  in  the  Union 
from  which  she  had  seceded.  Every 
one  of  them  knew  perfectly  that  the 
President  had  no  more  constitutional 
power  or  right  to  enter  upon  such  a 
negotiation  than  he  had  to  cede  the 
country  bodily  to  Russia,  France,  or 
Great  Britain.  They  were,  of  course, 
received  civilly,  and  treated  respect- 
fully, but  informed  that  the  President 
could  only  regard  and  meet  them  as 
citizens  of  the  United  States.  They 
left,  on  their  return,  nine  days  after- 
ward ;  sending  farewell  letters  to  the 
President,  which  are  scarcely  average 
samples  of  diplomatic  suavity. 

Georgia  having  given8  a  large  popu- 
lar majority  for  Secession,  her  au- 
thorities immediately  took  military 
possession  of  the  Federal  arsenal  at 
Augusta,  as  also  of  Forts  Pulaski  and 
Jackson,  commanding  the  approaches 
by  sea  to  Savannah. 

North  Carolina  had  not  voted  to 
secede,  yet  Gov.  Ellis  simultaneously 
seized  the  U.  S.  Arsenal  at  Fayette- 
ville,  with  Fort  Macon,  and  other 
fortifications  commanding  the  ap- 
proaches to  Beaufort  and  Wilming- 


7  On  the  30th. 


I 


8  January  2,  1861. 


412 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ton.  Having  done  so,  Gov.  E. 
coolly  wrote  to  the  War  Department 
that  he  had  taken  the  step  to,  pre- 
serve the  forts  from  seizure  by  mobs ! 

In  Alabama,  the  Federal  arsenal 
at  Mobile  was  seized  on  the  4th,  by 
order  of  Gov.  Moore.  It  contained 
large  quantities  of  arms  and  muni- 
tions. Fort  Morgan,  commanding 
the  approaches  to  Mobile,  was  like- 
wise seized,  and  garrisoned  by  State 
troops. 

The  steamer  Star  of  the  "West  left 
New  York  unannounced,  during  the 
night  of  January  5th,  laden  with  re- 
enforcements  and  supplies  for  Fort 
Sumter.  A  dispatch  from  that  city 
reached  the  South  Carolina  authori- 
ties next  day,  advising  them  of  her 
destination  and  objects.  Secretary 
Thompson  likewise  sent  a  dispatch 
from  Washington  to  the  same  effect, 
directly  after  leaving  the  Cabinet 
council  in  which  he  had  ascertained 
the  facts.  He  resigned  his  office  on 
the  8th,  asserting  that  the  attempt  to 
reenforce  Fort  Sumter  was  a  viola- 
tion of  the  promises  of  the  Executive. 
The  Star  of  the  West,  having  250 
soldiers  and  ample  provisions  on 
board,  appeared  off  the  bar  at  Charles- 
ton on  the  9  th.  Attempting  to 
steam  up  the  harbor  to  Fort  Sumter, 
she  was  fired  upon  from  Fort  Moul- 
trie and  a  battery  on  Morris  Island, 
and,  being  struck  by  a  shot,  put 
about,  and  left  for  New  York,  with- 
out even  communicating  with  Major 
Anderson. 

In  Louisiana,  the  Federal  arsenal 
at  Baton  Rouge  was  seized  by  order 
of  Gov.  Moore  on  the  11th.  Forts 
Jackson  and  St.  Philip,  commanding 
the  passage  up  the  Mississippi  to 
New  Orleans,  and  Fort  Pike,  at  the 
entrance  of  Lake  Pontchartrain,  were 


likewise  seized  and  garrisoned  by 
State  troops.  The  Federal  Mint  and 
Custom-House  at  New  Orleans  were 
left  untouched  until  February  1st, 
when  they,  too,  were  taken  possession 
of  by  the  State  authorities. 

In  St.  Louis,  the  Custom-House, 
Sub-Treasury,  and  Post  Offi.ce  were 
garrisoned  by  a  handful  of  Federal 
soldiers  as  a  protection  against  a 
similar  movement. 

Mr.  Thomas,  after  a  very  few  days' 
service,  resigned  control  of  the  Trea- 
sury, and  was  succeeded  by  Gen. 
John  A.  Dix,  of  New  York. 

In  Florida,  Fort  Barrancas  and  the 
Navy  Yard  at  Pensacola  were  seized 
by  Florida  and  Alabama  forces  on 
the  13th;  Commander  Armstrong 
surrendering  them  without  a  strug- 
gle. He  ordered  Lieut.  Slemmer, 
likewise,  to  surrender  Forts  Pickens 
and  McRae ;  but  the  intrepid  subor- 
dinate defied  the  order,  and,  with- 
drawing his  small  force  from  Fort 
McPae  to  the  stronger  and  less  ac- 
cessible Fort  Pickens,  announced  his 
determination  to  hold  out  to  the  last. 
He  was  soon  after  besieged  therein 
by  a  formidable  volunteer  force  ;  and 
a  dispatch  from  Pensacola  announced 
that  "  Fort  McRae  is  being  occupied 
and  the  guns  manned  by  the  allied 
forces  of  Florida,  Alabama,  and  Mis- 
sissippi." 

Col.  Hayne,  as  agent  of  Gov. 
Pickens,  reached  Washington  on  the 
12th ;  and  on  the  16th  demanded  the 
surrender  of  Fort  Sumter,  as  essen- 
tial to  a  good  understanding  between 
the  two  nations  of  South  Carolina 
and  the  United  States.  The  Legis- 
lature of  the  former  had,  on  the  14th, 
formally  resolved,  that  "  any  attempt 
by  the  Federal  Government  to  reen- 
force Fort  Sumter  will  be  regarded 


REBEL    SEIZURES    OF  S 


OUTHERN   FORTS,  ETC. 


413 


as  an  act  of  open  hostility,  and  a  de- 
claration of  war." 

The  revenue  cntter  Cass,  stationed 
at  Mobile,  was  turned  over  by  Capt. 
J.  J.  Morrison  to  the  authorities  of 
Alabama  at  the  end  of  January.  The 
McClellan,  Capt.  Breshwood,  station- 
ed on  the  Mississippi  below  New  Or- 
leans, was,  in  like  manner,  handed 
over  to  those  of  Louisiana.  Gen.  Dix 
had  sent  down  a  special  agent  to  se- 
cure them,  but  he  was  too  late.  The 
telegraph  dispatch  whereby  Gen.  Dix 
directed  him,  "  If  any  person  attempts 
to  haul  down  the  American  flag,  shoot 
him  on  the  spot,"  sent  an  electric 
thrill  through  the  loyal  heart  of  the 
country. 

Finally,  tidings  reached  "Washing- 
ton, about  the  end  of  February,  that 
Brig.-Gen.  Twiggs,  commanding  the 
department  of  Texas,  had  disgrace- 
fully betrayed  his  trust,  and  turned 
over  his  entire  army,  with  all 9  the 
posts  and  fortifications,  arms,  muni- 
tions, horses,  equipments,  etc.,  to  Gen. 
Ben.  M'Culloch,  representing  the  au- 
thorities of  Texas,  now  fully  launched 
upon  the  rushing  tide  of  treason. 
The  Union  lost  by  that  single  act  at 
least  half  its  military  force,  with  the 
State  of  Texas,  and  the  control  of  our 
Mexican  frontier ;  while  two  millions 

9  The  following  is  a  list  of  the  property  given 
up  to  the  State  of  Texas  by  Gen.  Twiggs: 


1,800  mules,  valued  at  $50  each  .    .  $90,000 

500  wagons,    "     "    140    "     .    .  70,000 

950  horses,     "     "   150    "     .    .  142,500 

500  harness,  "  "  50  "  .  .  25,000 
Tools,  wagon  materials,  iron,  nails, 

horse  and  mule-shoes     .    .    .    .  250,000 

Corn  (at  this  port)   1,000 

Clothing   150,000 

Commissary  stores   75,000 

Ordnance  stores   400,000 


Total   $1,209,500 


exclusive  of  public  buildings  to  which  the  Fed- 
eral Government  has  a  title.  Much  of  the  prop- 
erty is  estimated  at  the  original  cost,  its  value  in 
Texas  being  much  greater,  and  worth  to  the 


of  dollars  could  hardly  have  replaced, 
in  that  crisis,  the  property  thus  filched 
from  the  Republic.  And,  to  add  to 
the  extent  of  the  disaster,  the  ship 
Star  of  the  West,  which,  after  its  re- 
turn from  its  abortive  mission  to  Fort 
Sumter,  was  dispatched,  laden  with 
munitions  and  supplies,  for  the  army 
of  the  frontier,  went  into  the  harbor 
of  Indianola  utterly  unsuspicious  of 
the  transformation  which  had  been 
there  effected,  and  became10  an  easy 
prey  to  the  exultant  Rebels. 

The  defensive  fortifications  located 
within  the  seceding  States  were  some 
thirty  in  number,  mounting  over  three 
thousand  guns,  and  having  cost  at 
least  Twenty  Millions  of  dollars. 
Nearly  all  these  had  been  seized  and 
appropriated  by  the  Confederates  be- 
fore Mr.  Lincoln's  inauguration,  with 
the  exception  of  Fortress  Monroe  (Vir- 
ginia), Fort  Sumter  (South  Carolina), 
Fort  Pickens  (Florida),  and  the  fort- 
resses on  Key  West  and  the  Tortu- 
gas,  off  the  Florida  coast.  To  offset 
these,  they  had  full  possession  of  Fort 
Macon,  North  Carolina,  though  that 
State  had  utterly  refused  to  unite  in 
the  conspiracy,  with  the  extensive  and 
costly  Navy  Yard  at  Pensacola,  and 
the  Southern  Arsenals,  which  their 
Floyd    had  crammed11  with  arms 

State  at  least  a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars. — 
San  Antonio  Herald,  Feb.  23d. 

10  April  20,  1861. 

11  Mr.  Edward  A.  Pollard,  in  his  "Southern 
[Kebel]  History  of  the  War,"  page  40,  thus  sums 
up  the  cheap  initial  conquests  of  the  Confederacy : 

"On  the  incoming  of  the  Administration  of 
Abraham  Lincoln,  on  the  4th  of  March,  the  rival 
government  of  the  South  had  perfected  its  organi- 
zation ;  the  separation  had  been  widened  and  en- 
venomed by  the  ambidexterity  and  perfidy  of  Pres- 
ident Buchanan;  the  Southern  people,  however, 
still  hoped  for  a  peaceful  accomplishment  of  their 
independence,  and  deplored  war  between  the  two 
sections,  as  1  a  policy  detrimental  to  the  civilized 
world.'  The  revolution,  in  the  mean  time,  had 
rapidly  gathered,  not  only  in  moral  power,  but  in 


414 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT 


and  munitions  with  direct  reference 
to  this  contingency.13  Add  to  these 
the  Army  of  the  Frontier,  with  all 
its  arms,  munitions,  trains,  animals, 
and  provisions,  with  the  Southern 
revenue-cutters,  Mints,  Custom-Hous- 
es,  Sub-Treasuries,  etc.  (over  half  a 
million  of  dollars  in  gold  having  been 
seized  in  that  at  New  Orleans  alone) ; 
and  it  may  be  safely  estimated  that 
the  Rebellion  had  possessed  itself  of 
Thirty  Millions'  worth  of  Federal 
property  before  Mr.  Buchanan  left 
the  White  House;  which  was  in- 
creased to  Forty  Millions  by  the  sei- 
zure of  Harper's  Ferry  Arsenal,  and 
the  Norfolk  Navy  Yard,  with  its 
ships  of  war,  munitions,  and  two 
thousand  cannon,  before  a  single  blow 
was  struck  on  the  side  of  the  Union. 

The  Convention  of  South  Carolina 
called,18  on  motion  of  Mr.  R.  Barn- 
well Rhett,  a  Convention  of  such 
slaveholding  States  as  should,  mean- 
time, have  seceded  from  the  Union, 
to  meet  at  Montgomery,  Alabama, 
February  4th,  which  was  acceded  to. 


The  Convention  took  place  accord- 
ingly, and  a  provisional  framework 
of  government  was  adopted  for  "  the 
Confederate  States  of  America"  on 
the  9th ;  which  was  superseded  by  a 
permanent  Constitution,14  substantial- 
ly a  copy  of  the  Federal  Constitution, 
except  in  these  particulars :  The 
President  and  Yice-President  are 
chosen  for  six  years  ;  and  the  Presi- 
dent may  not  be  reelected  while  in 
office.  He  may  not  remove  from 
office  any  functionaries,  but  members 
of  his  Cabinet,  without  referring  the 
same,  with  his  reasons  therefor,  to 
the  Senate.  The  heads  of  depart- 
ments may  each,  by  law,  be  accorded 
a  seat  on  the  floor  of  either  House, 
with  the  privilege  of  discussing  any 
measures  pertaining  to  his  depart- 
ment. This  Constitution  further 
provides  that 

"  No  bounties  shall  be  granted  from  the 
Treasury,  nor  shall  any  duties  or  taxes  on 
importations  be  levied  to  promote  or  foster 
any  branch  of  industry." 

"  The  citizens  of  each  State  *  *  *  *  shall 
have  the  right  of  transit  and  sojourn  in  any 


the  means  of  "war  and  muniments  of  defense. 
Fort  Moultrie  and  Castle  Pinckney  bad  been  cap- 
tured by  the  South  Carolina  troops ;  Fort  Pulaski, 
the  defense  of  the  Savannah,  had  been  taken ;  the 
Arsenal  at  Mount  Vernon,  Alabama,  with  20,000 
stand  of  arms,  had  been  seized  by  the  Alabama 
troops;  Fort  Morgan,  in  Mobile  Bay,  had  been 
taken;  Forts  Jackson,  St.  Philip,  and  Pike,  near 
New  Orleans,  had  been  captured  by  the  Louisi- 
ana troops ;  the  New  Orleans  Mint  and  Custom- 
House  had  been  taken;  the  Little  Rock  Arsenal  had 
been  seized  by  the  Arkansas  troops  [though  Ar- 
kansas had  refused  to  secede]  ;  and,  on  the  16th 
of  February,  Gen.  Twiggs  had  transferred  the 
public  property  in  Texas  to  the  State  authorities. 
All  of  these  events  had  been  accomplished  with- 
out bloodshed.  Abolitionism  and  Fanaticism  had 
not  yet  lapped  blood.  But  reflecting  men  saw 
that  the  peace  was  deceitful  and  temporizing; 
that  the  temper  of  the  North  was  impatient  and 
dark ;  and  that,  if  all  history  was  not  a  lie,  the 
first  incident  of  bloodshed  would  be  the  pre- 
lude to  a  war  of  monstrous  proportions." 

12  Mr.  E.  Pollard,  aforesaid,  writing  his  1  South- 
ern' History  of  the  struggle  at  Richmond,  after 
having  been  in  public  employment  at  "Washing- 


ton throughout  Buchanan's  Administration,  him- 
self one  of  the  original  traitors,  and  always  in 
their  counsels,  says : 

"  It  had  been  supposed  that  the  Southern  peo- 
ple, poor  in  manufactures  as  they  were,  and  in  the 
haste  for  the  mighty  contest  that  was  to  ensue, 
would  find  themselves  but  illy  provided  with 
arms  to  contend  with  an  enemy  rich  in  the 
means  and  munitions  of  war.  This  disadvantage 
had  been  provided  against  by  the  timely  act  of 
one  man.  Mr.  Floyd,  of  Virginia,  when  Secre- 
tary of  War  under  Mr.  Buchanan's  Administra- 
tion, had,  by  a  single  order,  effected  the  transfer 
of  115,000  improved  muskets  and  rifles  from  the 
Springfield  Armory  and  Watervliet  Arsenal  to 
different  Arsenals  at  the  South.  Adding  to  these 
the  number  of  arms  distributed  by  the  Federal 
Government  to  the  States  in  preceding  years  of 
our  history,  and  those  purchased  by  the  States 
and  citizens,  it  was  safely  estimated  that  the 
South  entered  upon  the  war  with  one  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  small  arms  of  the  most  ap- 
proved modern  pattern  and  the  best  in  the 
world." 

13  December  27th.     "Adopted  March  11th. 


MR.    JEFFERSON   DAVIS'S  INAUGURAL. 


415 


State  of  this  Confederacy  with  their  slaves 
and  other  property ;  and  the  right  of  pro- 
perty in  said  slaves  shall  not  thereby  be  im- 
paired." 

"  No  slave  or  other  person  held  to  service 
or  labor  in  any  State  or  territory  of  the 
Confederate  States,  under  the  laws  thereof, 
escaping  or  lawfully  carried  into  another, 
shall,  in  consequence  of  any  law  or  regula- 
tion therein,  be  discharged  from  such  ser- 
vice or  labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on 
claim  of  the  party  to  whom  such  slave  be- 
longs, or  to  whom  such  service  or  labor  may 
be  due." 

"The  Confederate  States  may  acquire 
new  territory  *  *  *  *  in  all  such  territory 
the  institution  of  negro  Slavery,  as  it  now 
exists  in  the  Confederate  States,  shall  be 
recognized  and  protected  by  Congress  and 
by  the  territorial  government ;  and  the  in- 
habitants of  the  several  Confederate  States 
and  territories  shall  have  the  right  to  take 
to  such  territory  any  slaves  lawfully  held 
by  them  in  any  of  the  States  or  territories 
of  the  Confederate  States." 

Jefferson  Davis,  of  Mississippi,  was, 
by  the  Congress,  unanimously  elected 
President,  and  Alexander  H.  Ste- 
phens, of  Georgia,  Vice-President,  of 
the  Confederacy  for  the  current  year  ; 
and  they,  too,  were  reelected,  without 
dissent,  for  a  full  term  of  six  years,  by 
a  popular  vote  in  the  ensuing  Au- 
tumn. 

Mr.  Davis  reached  Montgomery 
on  the  17th  by  a  special  train  from 
Jackson,  his  progress  being  one  con- 

15  The  True  Delta  (New  Orleans)  of  February 
16,  contains  the  following  telegraphic  synopsis 
of  Mr.  Davis's  speech  on  leaving  Jackson  for 
Montgomery: 

u  He  alluded  to  the  difficulties  of  constructing 
a  new  government,  and  how  these  difficulties  are 
enhanced  by  the  threatening  elements  in  the 
North.  It  may  be  that  we  will  be  confronted  by 
war,  that  the  attempt  will  be  made  to  blockade 
our  ports,  to  starve  us  out;  but  they  know  little 
of  the  Southern  heart,  of  Southern  endurance. 
No  amount  of  privation  could  force  us  to  remain 
in  a  Union  on  unequal  terms.  England  and 
France  would  not  allow  our  great  staple  to  be 
dammed  up  within  our  present  limits ;  the  starv- 
ing thousands  in  their  midst  would  not  allow  it. 
We  have  nothing  to  apprehend  from  blockade. 
But,  if  they  attempt  invasion  by  land,  we  must 
take  the  war  out  of  our  territory.  If  war  must 
come,  it  must  be  upon  Northern,  and  not  upon 
Southern,  soil.   In  the  mean  time,  if  they  were 


tinual  ovation.  He  made  twenty- 
five  speeches 15  on  the  route  to  enthu- 
siastic crowds,  and  was  welcomed  on 
his  arrival  at  Montgomery  by  a  vast 
concourse.  He  was  inaugurated  next 
day  with  most  imposing  ceremonies. 

Mr.  Davis's  Inaugural  was  a  tem- 
perate and  carefully  studied  docu- 
ment. Assuming  the  right  of  Seces- 
sion as  inherent  in  "the  sovereign 
States  now  composing  this  Confede- 
racy," to  be  exercised  whenever,  in 
their  judgment,  the  compact  by 
which  they  acceded  to  the  Union 
"has  been  perverted  from  the  pur- 
poses for  which  it  was  ordained,  and 
ceased  to  answer  the  ends  for  which 
it  was  established,"  and  that  its  exer- 
cise "  merely  asserted  the  right  which 
the  Declaration  of  Independence  of 
1776  defined  to  be  inalienable,"  he 
avers  of  their  recent  action  that  "  it 
is,  by  the  abuse  of  language,  that 
their  act  has  been  denominated  revo- 
lution." "  They  formed  a  new  alli- 
ance^ he  continues,  [ignoring  their 
solemn  compact  in  the  Federal  Con- 
stitution by  which  they  had  cove- 
nanted with  each  other  that  "  ~No 
State  shall  enter  into  any  treaty,  al- 

prepared  to  grant  us  peace,  to  recognize  our 
equality,  all  is  well." 

And  the  following  extract  from  one  of  those 
speeches,  made  at  Stevenson,  Alabama,  faithfully 
embodies  the  joyous  anticipations  with  which 
the  struggle,  then  imminent,  was  commenced 
by  the  Confederates : 

"  Your  Border  Stages  will  gladly  come  into 
the  Southern  Confederacy  within  sixty  days,  as 
we  will  be  their  only  friends.  England  will  re- 
cognize us,  and  a  glorious  future  is  before  us. 
The  grass  will  grow  in  the  Northern  cities, 
where  the  pavements  have  been  worn  oft'  by  the 
tread  of  commerce.  We  will  carry  war  where 
it  is  easy  to  advance — where  food  for  the  sword 
and  torch  await  our  armies  in  the  densely  popu- 
lated cities;  and  though  they  [the  enemy]  may 
come  and  spoil  our  crops,  we  can  raise  them  as 
before ;  while  they  cannot  rear  the  cities  which 
took  years  of  industry  and  millions  of  money  to 
build?' 


416 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


liance,  or  confederation"]  The  Fede- 
ral Government  is  termed  by  him 
"  the  agent  through  whom  they  com- 
municated with  foreign  nations," 
which  they  have  now  "  changed" — 
that  is  all.  In  short,  the  chief  of  the 
Confederacy  talks  as  though  his  peo- 
ple had  acted  in  a  very  natural  and 
common-place  manner  in  voting  for 
President  of  the  United  States,  and 
then,  being  beaten  in  the  contest,  se- 
ceding from  the  Union,  framing  a 
new  Confederacy,  and  electing  him 
President  for  the  ensuing  term,  for 
which  they  had  failed  to  elect  Major 
Breckinridge.  And,  as  they  had 
cotton  to  sell,  which  the  North,  with 
nearly  all  other  civilized  countries, 
wished  to  buy,  their  policy  was  ne- 
cessarily one  of  peace ;  and  he  argued 
that  the  old  Union  would  inevitably 
and  gladly,  for  cotton's  sake,  if  for 
no  other,  cultivate  peace  with  them. 

There  was  an  undertone  in  this 
Inaugural,  however,  which  plainly 
evinced  that  the  author  expected 
nothing  of  the  sort.  "  If  we  may  not 
hope  to  avoid  war,"  says  Mr.  Davis, 
"  we  may  at  least  expect  that  poster- 
ity will  acquit  us  of  having  needlessly 
engaged  in  it."  "  We  have  entered 
upon  a  career  of  independence,  and 
it  must  be  inflexibly  pursued  through 
many  years  of  controversy  with  our 
late  associates  of  the  Northern 
States."  Hence,  he  very  properly 
called  upon  his  Congress,  in  addition 
to  the  services  of  the  Militia,  to  pro- 
vide for  a  Navy,  and  "  a  well-instruct- 
ed, disciplined  Army,  more  numer- 
ous than  would  usually  be  required 
as  a  peace  establishment" — which 
was  putting  quite  as  fine  a  point  on 
it  as  the  truth  would  warrant. 

Mr.  Davis  carefully  refrained  from 


any  other  allusion  to  Slavery,  or  the 
causes  of  estrangement  between  the 
North  and  the  South,  than  the  fol- 
lowing : 

u  With  a  Constitution  differing  only  from 
that  of  our  fathers  in  so  far  as  it  is  explana- 
tory of  their  well-known  intent,  freed  from 
sectional  conflicts,  which  have  interfered 
with  the  pursuit  of  the  general  welfare,  it  is 
not  unreasonable  to  expect  that  the  States 
from  which  we  have  parted  may  seek  to 
unite  their  fortunes  to  ours,  under  the  Gov- 
ernment which  we  have  instituted.  For 
this,  your  Constitution  makes  adequate  pro- 
vision ;  but  beyond  this,  if  I  mistake  not, 
the  judgment  and  will  of  the  people  are,  that 
union  with  the  States  from  which  they  have 
separated  is  neither  practicable  nor  desirable. 
To  increase  the  power,  develop  the  resources, 
and  promote  the  happiness  of  the  Confede- 
racy, it  is  requisite  there  should  be  so  much 
homogeneity  that  the  welfare  of  every  por- 
tion should  be  the  aim  of  the  whole.  Where 
this  does  not  exist,  antagonisms  are  engen- 
dered, which  must  and  should  result  in  sepa- 
ration." 

Mr.  Stephens,  the  Yice-President 
of  the  '  Confederacy,'  proved  far  less 
reticent  and  more  candid.  On  his 
return  from  the  Convention  or  Con- 
gress whereby  the  '  Confederacy'  had 
been  cemented,  and  he  chosen  its 
Yice-President,  he  was  required  to 
address  a  vast  assemblage  at  Savan- 
nah,18 and  did  so  in  elaborate  exposi- 
tion and  defense  of  the  new  Confede- 
rate Constitution.  After  claiming 
that  it  preserved  all  that  was  dear 
and  desirable  of  the  Federal  Consti- 
tution, wrhile  it  embodied  very  essen- 
tial improvements  on  that  document, 
in  its  prohibition  of  Protective  Duties 
and  Internal  Improvements  by  Con- 
federate authority;  ifi  its  proffer  to 
Cabinet  Ministers  of  seats  in  either 
House  of  Congress,  with  the  right  of 
debate ;  and  in  forbidding  the  reelec- 
tion of  a  President  while  in  office, 
Mr.  Stephens  proceeded : 

"  But,  not  to  be  tedious  in  enumerating 
the  numerous  changes  for  the  better,  allow 


16  March  21,  1860. 


ME.    A.    H.    STEPHENS    ON    THE    'CORNER-STONE.'  417 


me  to  allude  to  one  other — though  last,  not 
least :  the  new  Constitution  has  put  at  rest 
forever  all  the  agitating  questions  relating  to 
our  peculiar  institution — African  Slavery  as 
it  exists  among  us — the  proper  status  of  the 
negro  in  our  form  of  civilization.  This  was 
the  immediate  cause  of  the  late  rupture  and 
the  present  revolution.  Jefferson,  in  his 
forecast  had  anticipated  this,  as  the  '  rock 
upon  which  the  old  Union  would  split.'  He 
was  right.  AVhat  was  conjecture  with  him 
is  now  a  realized  fact.  But  whether  he 
comprehended  the  great  truth  upon  which 
that  rock  stood  and  stands,  may  be  doubted. 
The  prevailing  ideas  entertained  by  him  and 
most  of  the  leading  statesmen  at  the  time  of 
the  formation  of  the  old  Constitution  were, 
that  the  enslavement  of  the  African  was  in 
violation  of  the  laws  of  nature  ;  that  it  was 
wrong  in  principle,  socially,  morally,  and 
politically.  It  was  an  evil  they  knew  not 
well  how  to  deal  with ;  but  the  general 
opinion  of  the  men  of  that  day  was,  that, 
somehow  or  other,  in  the  order  of  Provi- 
dence, the  institution  would  be  evanescent 
and  pass  away.  This  idea,  though  not  in- 
corporated in  the  Constitution,  was  the  pre- 
vailing idea  at  the  time.  The  Constitution, 
it  is  true,  secured  every  essential  guarantee 
to  the  institution  while  it  should  last;  and 
hence  no  argument  can  be  justly  used  against 
the  constitutional  guarantees  thus  secured, 
because  of  the  common  sentiment  of  the 
day.  Those  ideas,  however,  were  fundamen- 
tally wrong.  They  rested  upon  the  assump- 
tion of  the  equality  of  races.  This  icas  an 
error.  It  was  a  sandy  foundation  ;  and  the 
idea  of  a  Government  built  upon  it — when 
the  storm  came  and  the  wind  .blew,  it  fell. 

"  Our  new  government  is  founded  upon 
exactly  the  opposite  ideas;  its  foundations 
are  laid,  its  corner-stone  rests  upon,  the  great 
truth  that  the  negro  is  not  equal  to  the  white 
man;  that  Slavery,  subordination  to  the 
superior  race,  is  his  natural  and  normal 
condition.  [Applause.]  This,  our  new  Gov- 
ernment, is  the  first  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  based,  upon  this  great  physical,  philo- 
sophical, and  moral  truth.  This  truth  has 
been  slow  in  the  process  of  its  development, 
like  all  other  truths  in  the  various  depart- 
ments of  science.  ,Jt  is  so,  even  amongst 
us.  Many  who  hear  me,  perhaps,  can  re- 
collect well  that  this  truth  was  not  generally 
admitted,  even  within  their  day.  The  er- 
rors of  the  past  generation  still  clung  to 
many,  so  late  as  twenty  years  ago.  Those 
at  the  North  who  still  cling  to  these  errors 
with  a  zeal  above  knowledge, we  justly  de- 
nominate fanatics.  All  fanaticism  springs 
from  an  aberration  of  the  mind ;  from  a  de- 
fect in  reasoning.  It  is  a  species  of  insanity. 
One  of  the  most  striking  characteristics  of 
insanity,  in  many  instances,  is,  forming  cor- 

27 


rect  conclusions  from  fancied  or  erroneous 
premises ;  so  with  the  anti-Slavery  fanatics : 
their  conclusions  are  right  if  their  premises 
are.  They  assume  that  the  negro  is  equal, 
and  hence  conclude  that  he  is  entitled  to 
equal  privileges  and  rights,  with  the  white 
man.  If  their  premises  were  correct,  their 
conclusions  would  be  logical  and  just ;  but, 
their  premises  being  wrong,  their  whole 
argument  fails.  I  recollect  once  of  having 
heard  a  gentleman  from  one  of  the  Northern 
States,  of  great  power  and  ability,  announce 
in  the  House  of  Representatives,  with  im- 
posing effect,  that  we  of  the  South  would 
be  compelled,  ultimately,  to  yield  upon  this 
subject  of  Slavery ;  that  it  was  impossible 
to  war  successfully  against  a  principle  in 
politics,  as  it  was  in  physics  or  mechanics — 
that  the  principle  would  ultimately  prevail — 
that  we,  in  maintaining  Slavery,  as  it  now 
exists  with  us,  were  warring  against  a  prin- 
ciple— a  principle  founded  in  nature — the 
principle  of  the  equality  of  man.  The  reply 
I  made  to  him  was,  that,  upon  his  own 
grounds,  we  should  succeed;  that  he  and  his 
associates  in  their  crusade  against  our  insti- 
tutions would  ultimately  fail.  The  truth 
announced,  that  it  was  as  impossible  to  war 
successfully  against  a  principle  in  politics  as 
in  physics  and  mechanics,  1  admitted ;  but 
told  him  it  was  he,  and  those  acting  with 
him,  who  were  warring  against  a  principle. 
They  were  attempting  to  make  things  equal 
which  the  Creator  had  made  unequal. 

"  In  the  conflict  thus  far,  success  has  been 
on  our  side  complete,  throughout  the  length 
and  breadth  of  the  Confederate  States.  It  is 
upon  this,  as  I  have  stated,  our  social  fabrio 
is  firmly  planted ;  and  I  cannot  permit  my- 
self to  doubt  the  ultimate  success  of  a  full 
recognition  of  this  principle  throughout  the 
civilized  and  enlightened  wrorld. 

"As  I  have  stated,  the  truth  of  this  prin- 
ciple may  be  slow  in  development,  as  all 
truths  are,  and  ever  have  been,  in  the  vari- 
ous branches  of  science.  It  was  so  with  the 
principles  announced  by  Galileo — it  was  so 
with  Adam  Smith,  and  his  principles  of  po- 
litical economy.  .It  was  so  with  Harvey,  and 
his  theory  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood. 
It  is  stated  that  not  a  single  one  of  the 
medical  profession,  living  at  the  time  of  the 
announcement  of  the  truths  made  by  him, 
admitted  them.  Now,  they  are  universally 
acknowledged.  May  we  not,  therefore,  look 
with  confidence  to  the  ultimate  universal 
acknowledgment  of  the  truths  upon  which 
our  system  rests  ?  It  is  the  first  government 
ever  instituted  upon  principles  in  strict  con- 
formity with  nature,  and  the  ordination  of 
Providence,  in  furnishing  the  materials  of 
human  society.  Many  governments  have 
been  founded  upon  the  principle  of  ensla- 
ving certain  classes ;  but  the  classes  thus  en- 


418 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT 


slaved  were  of  the  same  race,  and  their  en- 
slavement in  violation  of  the  laws  of  nature. 
Our  system  commits  no  such  violation  of 
nature's  laws.  The  negro,  by  nature,  or  by 
the  curse  against  Canaan,  is  fitted  for  that 
condition  which  he  occupies  in  our  system. 
The  architect,  in  the  construction  of  build- 
ings, lays  the  foundation  with  the  proper 
material — the  granite — then  comes  the  brick 
or  the  marble.  The  substratum  of  our  soci- 
ety is  made  of  the  material  fitted  by  nature 
for  it ;  and  by  experience  we  know  that  it  is 
the  best,  not  only  for  the  superior,  but  for 
the  inferior  race,  that  it  should  be  so.  It  is, 
indeed,  in  conformity  with  the  Creator.  It 
is  not  for  us  to  inquire  into  the  wisdom  of  His 
ordinances,  or  to  question  them.  For  His  own 
purposes,  He  has  made  one  race  to  differ  from 
another,  as  He  has  made  '  one  star  to  differ 
from  another  in  glory.' 

"The  great  objects  of  humanity  are  best 
attained  when  conformed  to  His  laws  and 
decrees,  in  the  formation  of  governments  as 
well  as  in  all  things  else.  Our  Confederacy 
is  founded  upon  principles  in  strict  confor- 
mity with  these  laws.  This  stone,  which  was 
rejected  by  the  first  builders,  kis  become  the 
chief  stone  of  the  corner''  in  our  now  edifice. 
[Applause.] 

"  I  have  been  asked,  What  of  the  future  ? 
It  has  been  apprehended  by  some  that  we 
would  have  arrayed  against  us  the  civilized 
world.  I  care  not  who  or  how  many  they 
may  be ;  when  we  stand  upon  the  eternal 
principles  of  truth,  we  are  obliged  to  and 
must  triumph.    [Immense  applause.]" 

"With  regard  to  future  accessions 
to  the  Confederacy,  Mr.  Stephens 
said : 

"  Our  growth  by  accessions  from  other 
States  will  depend  greatly  upon  whether  we 
present  to  the  world,  as  I  trust  we  shall,  a 
better  government  than  that  to  which  they 
belong.  If  we  do  this,  North  Carolina,  Ten- 
nessee, and  Arkansas,  cannot  hesitate  long ; 
neither  can  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and  Mis- 
souri. They  will  necessarily  gravitate  to  us 
by  an  imperious  law.  We  made  ample  pro- 
vision in  our  Constitution  for  the  admission 
of  other  States.  It  is  more  guarded — and 
wisely  so,  I  think — than  the  old  Constitution 
on  the  same  subject ;  but  not  too  guarded  to 
receive  them  so  fast  as  it  may  be  proper. 
Looking  to  the  distant  future — and  perhaps 
not  very  distant  either — it  is  not  beyond  the 
range  of  possibility,  and  even  probability, 
that  all  the  great  States  of  the  North-West 
shall  gravitate  this  way,  as  well  as  Ten- 
nessee, Kentucky,  Missouri,  Arkansas,  etc. 
Should  they  do  so,  our  doors  are  wTide 


enough  to  receive  them;  hut  not  until  they 
are  ready  to  assimilate  with  us  in  principle. 

"  The  process  of  disintegration  in  the  old 
Union  may  be  expected  to  go  on  with  almost 
absolute  certainty.  We  are  now  the  nucleus 
of  a  growing  power ;  which,  if  we  are  true  to 
ourselves,  our  destiny,  and  our  high  mission, 
will  become  the  controlling  power  on  this 
continent.  To  what  extent  accessions  will  go 
on,  in  the  process  of  time,  or  where  it  will 
end,  the  future  will  determine.  So  far  as  it 
concerns  States  of  the  old  Union,  they  will 
be  upon  no  such  principle  of  reconstruction 
as  is  now  spoken  of,  but  upon  reorganiza- 
tion and  new  assimilation.  [Loud  applause.] 
Such  are  some  of  the  glimpses  of  the  future 
as  I  catch  them." 


Mr.  Abraham  Lincoln,  on  the  11th 
of  February,  left  his  home  at  Spring- 
field, Illinois,  for  Washington,  receiv- 
ing on  the  way  advices  that  he  had 
been,  upon  a  careful  canvass  and  com- 
parison of  the  Electoral  votes  by  Con- 
gress, proclaimed 17  by  Vice-President 
Breckinridge  the  duly  elected  Presi- 
dent of  the  United  States,  for  four 
years  from  the  4th  of  March  en- 
suing. Immense  crowds  surrounded 
the  stations  at  which  the  special  train 
halted  wherein  he,  with  his  family  and 
a  few  friends,  was  borne  eastward 
through  Indianapolis,  Cincinnati,  Co- 
lumbus, Pittsburgh,  Cleveland,  Erie, 
Buffalo,  Albany,  New  York  City, 
Trenton,  Newark,  Philadelphia,  Lan- 
caster, and  Harrisburg,  on  his  way  to 
the  White  House.  He  was  every- 
where received  and  honored  as  the 
chief  of  a  free  people ;  and  his  un- 
studied remarks  in  reply  to  the  com- 
plimentary addresses  which  he  day 
by  day  received  indicated  his  decided 
disbelief  in  any  bloody  issue  of  our 
domestic  complications. 

Thus,  at  Indianapolis,  where  he 
spent  the  first  night  of  his  journey, 
he  replied  to  an  address  of  welcome 
from  Gov.  Morton,  as  follows : 


17  February  13th. 


MR.   LINCOLN   ON  HIS 


WAT   TO  WASHINGTON. 


410 


"Fellow-citizens  of  the  State  of  Indi- 
ana :  I  am  here  to  thank  you  much  for  this 
magnificent  welcome,  and  still  more  for  the 
very  generous  support  given  by  your  State 
to  that  political  cause  which,  I  think,  is  the 
true  and  just  cause  of  the  whole  country  and 
the  whole  world.  Solomon  says,  'There  is 
a  time  to  keep  silence;'  and,  when  men  wran- 
gle by  the  month  with  no  certainty  that  they 
mean  the  same  thing  while  using  the  same 
word,  it  perhaps  were  as  well  if  they  would 
keep  silence.  The  words  '  coercion'  and  '  in- 
vasion' are  much  used  in  these  days,  and 
often  with  some  temper  and  hot  blood.  Let 
us  make  sure,  if  we  can,  that  we  do  not  mis- 
understand the  meaning  of  those  who  use 
them.  Let  us  get  the  exact  definitions  of 
these  words,  not  from  dictionaries,  but  from 
the  men  themselves,  who  certainly  depre- 
cate the  things  they  would  represent  by  the 
use  of  the  words.  What,  then,  is  '  coercion'  ? 
What  is  'invasion'?  Would  the  marching 
of  an  army  into  South  Carolina  without  the 
consent  of  her  people,  and  with  hostile  in- 
tent toward  them,  be  invasion  ?  I  certainly 
think  it  would  be  'invasion,'  and  'coercion' 
also,  if  the  South  Carolinians  were  forced  to 
submit.  But,  if  the  United  States  should 
merely  liold  and  retake  her  own  forts  and 
other  property,  and  collect  the  duties  on  for- 
eign importations,  or  even  withhold  the  mails 
from  places  where  they  were  habitually  vio- 
lated, would  any  or  all  these  things  be  '■inva- 
sion' or  '■coercion'  ?  Do  our  professed  lovers 
of  the  Union,  but  who  spitefully  resolve  that 
they  will  resist  coercion  and  invasion,  un- 
derstand that  such  things  as  these  on  the 
part  of  the  United  States  would  be  'coer- 
cion' or  'invasion'  of  a  State?  If  so,  their 
idea  of  means  to  preserve  the  object  of  their 
great  affection  would  seem  to  be  exceedingly 
thin  and  airy.  If  sick,  the  little  pills  of  the 
homoeopathist  would  be  much  too  large  for 
it  to  swallow.  In  their  view,  the  Union,  as 
a  family  relation,  would  seem  to  be  no  regu- 
lar marriage,  but  rather  a  sort  of  free-love 
arrangement,  to  be  maintained  on  'passional 
attraction.'  By  the  way,  in  what  consists 
the  special  sacredness  of  a  State  ?  I  speak 
not  of  the  posit  ion  assigned  to  a  State  in  the 
Union  by  the  Constitution ;  for  that  is  the 
bond  we  all  recognize.  That  position,  how- 
ever, a  State  cannot  carry  out  of  the  Union 
with  it.  I  speak  of  that  assumed  primary 
right  of  a  State  to  rule  all  which  is  less  than 
itself,  and  to  ruin  all  which  is  larger  than 
itself.  If  a  State  and  a  County,  in  a  given 
case,  should  be  equal  in  extent  of  territory 
and  equal  in  number  of  inhabitants,  in  what, 
as  a  matter  of  principle,  is  the  State  better 
than  the  County  ?  Would  an  exchange  of 
names  be  an  exchange  of  rights?  Upon 
principle,  on  what  rightful  ground  may  a 
State,  being  no  more  than  one-fiftieth  part 


of  the  nation  in  soil  and  population,  break 
up  the  nation,  and  then  coerce  a  proportion- 
ally larger  subdivision  of  itself  in  the  most 
arbitrary  way  ?  What  mysterious  right  to 
play  tyrant  is  conferred  on  a  district  of 
country,  with  its  people,  by  merely  calling 
it  a  State  ? 

"Fellow-citizens,  I  am  not  asserting  any- 
thing. I  am  merely  asking  questions  for  you 
to  consider.  And  now,  allow  me  to  bid  you 
farewell." 

At  Columbus,  Ohio,  lie  said : 
"  I  have  not  maintained  silence  from  any 
want  of  real  anxiety.  It  is  a  good  thing 
that-  there  is  no  more  than  anxiety;  for 
there  is  nothing  going  wrong.  It  is  a  con- 
soling circumstance  that,  when  we  look  out, 
there  is  nothing  that  really  hurts  anybody. 
We  entertain  different  views  upon  political 
questions :  but  nobody  is  suffering  anything. 
This  is  a  most  consoling  circumstance;  and 
from  it  we  may  conclude  that  all  we  want  is 
time,  patience,  and  a  reliance  on  that  God 
who  has  never  forsaken  this  people." 

At  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  on 
the  15th,  he  said : 

"Notwithstanding  the  troubles  across  the 
river  [the  speaker  pointing  southwardly 
across  the  Monongahela,  and  smiling],  there 
is  no  crisis  but  an  artificial  one.  What  is 
there  now  to  warrant  the  condition  of 
affairs  presented  by  our  friends  over  the 
river?  Take  even  their  own  views  of  the 
questions  involved,  and  there  is  nothing  to 
justify  the  course  they  are  pursuing.  I  re- 
peat, then,  there  is  no  crisis,  except  such  a 
one  as  may  be  gotten  up  at  any  time  by  tur- 
bulent men,  aided  by  designing  politicians. 
My  advice  to  them,  under  the  circumstan- 
ces, is  to  keep  cool.  If  the  great  American 
people  only  keep  their  temper  both  sides  of 
the  line,  the  trouble  will  come  to  an  end,  and 
the  question  which  now  distracts  the  coun- 
try be  settled,  just  as  surely  as  all  other  dif- 
ficulties, of  a  like  character,  which  have 
originated  in  this  Government,  have  been 
adjusted.  Let  the  people  on  both  sides  keep 
their  self-possession,  and,  just  as  other  clouds 
have  cleared  away  in  due  time,  so  will  this 
great  nation  continue  to  prosper  as  hereto- 
fore." 

At  Philadelphia,  being  required  to 
assist  at  the  solemn  raising  of  the 
United  States  flag  over  Independence 
Hall,  Mr.  Lincoln,  in  reply  to  an  ad- 
dress of  welcome  by  Mr.  Theodore 
Cuyler,  said : 

"I  have  often  pondered  over  the  dangers 
incurred  by  the  men  who  assembled  here, 
and  framed  and  adopted  that  Declaration  of 


420 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Independence.  I  have  pondered  over  the 
toils  that  were  endured  by  the  officers  and 
soldiers  of  the  army  who  achieved  that  In- 
dependence. I  have  often  inquired  of  my- 
self, what  great  principle  or  idea  it  was  that 
kept  this  confederacy  so  long  together.  It 
was  not  the  mere  matter  of  the  separation 
of  the  Colonies  from  the  mother-land ;  but 
that  sentiment  in  the  Declaration  of  Inde- 
pendence which  gave  Liberty,  not  alone  to  the 
people  of  this  country,  out,  I  hope,  to  the 
world,  for  all  future  time.  It  was  that 
which  gave  promise  that,  in  due  time,  the 
weight  would  be  lifted  from  the  shoulders 
of  all  men.  This  is  a  setitiment  embodied 
in  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  Now, 
my  friends,  can  this  country  be  saved  on 
that  basis?  If  it  can,  I  will  consider  myself 
one  of  the  happiest  men  in  the  world,  if  I 
can  help  to  save  it.  If  it  cannot  be  saved 
on  that  basis,  it  will  be  truly  awful.  But, 
if  this  country  cannot  be  saved  without 
giving  up  that  principle,  I  was  about  to  say 
that  I  would  rather  be  assassinated  on  this 
spot  than  surrender  it.  Now,  in  my  view 
of  the  present  aspect  of  affairs,  there  need 
be  no  bloodshed  or  war.  There  is  no  neces- 
sity for  it.  I  am  not  in  favor  of  such  a 
course;  and  I  may  say,  in  advance,  that 
there  will  be  no  bloodshed,  unless  it  be 
forced  upon  the  Government,  and  then  it 
will  be  compelled  to  act  in  self  defense." 

Arrived  at  Harrisburg,  however, 
on  the  22d,  Mr.  Lincoln,  looking 
across  the  slave  line,  experienced  sud- 
denly a  decided  change  in  the  politi- 
cal barometer.  It  had  been  arranged 
that  he  should  next  day  pass  through 
Baltimore,  the  center  of  a  grand  pro- 
cession— a  cynosure  of  admiring  eves 
— the  object  of  enthusiastic  acclama- 
tions— as  he  had,  thus  far,  passed 
through  nearly  all  the  great  cities  of 
the  Free  States.  But  Baltimore  was 
a  slaveholding  city,  and  the  spirit  of 
Slavery  was  nowhere  else  more  ram- 
pant and  ferocious.  The  mercantile 
and  social  aristocracy  of  that  city  had 
been  sedulously,  persistently,  plied 
by  the  conspirators  for  disunion  with 
artful  suggestions  that,  in  a  confede- 

18  The  Baltimore  Exchange  of  February  23d, 
significantly  said: 

"Mr.  Lincoln,  the  President  elect  of  the 
United  States,  will  arrive  in  this  city  with  his 


racy  composed  exclusively  of  the  fif- 
teen Slave  States,  Baltimore  would 
hold  the  position  that  New  York  en- 
joys in  the  Union,  being  the  great 
ship-building,  shipping,  importing 
and  commercial  emporium,  whiten- 
ing the  ocean  with  her  sails,  and 
gemming  Maryland  with  the  palaces 
reared  from  her  ample  and  ever- 
expanding  profits.  That  aristocracy 
had  been,  for  the  most  part,  thor- 
oughly corrupted  by  these  insidious 
whispers,  and  so  were  ready  to  rush 
into  treason.  At  the  other  end  of 
the  social  scale  was  the  mob — reck- 
less and  godless,  as  mobs  are  apt  to 
be,  especially  in  slaveholding  com- 
munities— and  ready  at  all  times  to 
do  the  bidding  of  the  Slave  Power. 
Between  these  was  the  great  middle 
class,  loyal  and  peacefully  inclined, 
as  this  class  usually  is — outnumber- 
ing both  the  others,  but  hitherto  divi- 
ded between  the  old  pro- Slavery  par- 
ties, and  having  arrived,  as  yet,  at  no 
common  understanding  with  regard  to 
the  novel  circumstances  of  the  coun- 
try and  the  events  visibly  impending. 

The  city  government  was  in  the 
hands  of  the  Breckinridge  Democ- 
racy, who  had  seized  it  under  a  cry 
of  reform;  and  the  leaders  of  that 
Democracy  were  deep  in  the  counsels 
of  treason.  It  had  been  proclaimed, 
in  many  quarters,  and  through  vari- 
ous channels,  that  Mr.  Lincoln  should 
never  live  to  be  inaugurated ;  and 
The  Baltimore  Republican  of  the 
22d  had  a  leading  article  directly 
calculated  to  incite  tumult  and  vio- 
lence on  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Lincoln's 
passage  through  the  city.18  The  police 

suite  this  afternoon  by  special  train  from  Ilarris- 
burgh,  and  will  proceed,  we  learn,  directly  to 
Washington.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  no  oppor- 
tunity will  be  afforded  him — or  that,  if  it  be  af- 
forded, he  will  not  embrace  it — to  repeat  in  our 


• 


MR.  -LINCOLN'S 

was  directed  by  Marshal  George  P. 
Kane,  who,  after  a  sojourn  in  Fort 
McHenry,  fled  in  1863  to  the  conge- 
nial associations  of  Richmond  and 
the  Confederate  Army.  It  being 
considered  certain  that  an  attempt 
to  assassinate  the  President  would 
be  made,  under  cover  of  mob  vio- 
lence, should  he  pass  through  the 
city  as  was  originally  intended,  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  persuaded  to  take  the 
cars  secretly,  during  the  evening  of 
the  22d,  and  so  passed  through  Bal- 
timore, unknown  and  unsuspected, 
early  on  the  morning  of  the  23d — 
reaching  Washington  about  the  hour 
that  he  was  expected  to  leave  Har- 
risburg.  The  prudence  of  this  step 
has  since  been  abundantly  demon- 
strated ;  but  it  wounded,  at  the  time, 
the  sensibilities  of  many  friends,  who 
would  have  much  preferred  to  form 
an  escort  of  one  hundred  thousand 
armed  men  to  see  him  safely  through 
Baltimore,  than  to  have  him  pass 
through  it  clandestinely  and  like  a 
hunted  fugitive. 

The  4th  of  March,  1861,  though 
its  early  morning  had  been  cloudy 
and  chilly,  was  a  remarkably  bright 
and  genial  day  at  Washington.  To 
the  children  of  harsh  New  England, 
it  seemed  more  like  May  than  March. 
Expectations  and  threats  of  convul- 
sion had  rather  increased  than  les- 
sened the  throng,  wherein  all  sections 
of  the  unseceded  States  were  liberally 
represented,  though  the  Federal  Dis- 
trict and  the  adjacent  counties  of  Ma- 
ryland and  Virginia  doubtless  sup- 
plied by  far  the  larger  share  of  it. 
Menaces  that  the  President  elect 
would  never  be  permitted  to  take  the 

midst  the  sentiments  which  he  is  reported  to 
have  expressed  yesterday  in  Philadelphia." 

[The  "sentiments"  thus  deprecated  are  those 


INAUGURATION.  421 

oath  of  office — that  he  would  be  as- 
sassinated in  the  act,  if  no  other  mode 
of  preventing  it  should  promise  suc- 
cess— had  been  so  freely  and  loudly 
made,19  that  apprehensions  of  some 
concerted  attempt  at  violence  or  tu- 
mult were  widely  entertained  and 
fully  justified.  Lieut.-Gen.  Scott  had 
taken  the  fullest  military  precautions 
that  his  limited  force  of  regulars — 
perhaps  one  thousand  in  all — would 
permit ;  and  there  was  a  considerable 
muster  of  uniformed  Militia.  The 
procession,  partly  civic,  which  es- 
corted the  retiring  and  incoming 
Presidents,  who  rode  in  the  same 
carriage,  to  the  Capitol,  was  quite 
respectable — unusually  so  for  that 
non-enthusiastic,  and,  as  yet,  strongly 
pro-Slavery,  metropolis. 

The  Senate  had  been  sitting 
through  most  of  the  preceding  for- 
ty-eight hours,  though  this  was  Mon- 
day, and  barely  concluded  the  labors 
of  the  session  in  time  to  allow  Vice- 
President  Breckinridge  to  resign  the 
Chair  in  a  few  courteous  words,  and 
take  his  seat  on  the  floor  as  a  mem- 
ber, while  Yice-President  Hamlin  left 
the  floor  to  take  the  Chair  with  as 
little  parade — the  two  thus  exchang- 
ing places.  This  done,  and  several 
other  new  Senators  beside  Mr.  Breck- 
inridge having  been  sworn  in,  the 
space  in  the  Chamber  allotted  for 
this  occasion  to  the  Embassadors  of 
Foreign  Powers  ('Dixie'  not  inclu- 
ded) was  promptly  filled  by  the  dip- 
lomatic body  in  full  dress ;  the  mag- 
nates blazing  with  stars  and  orders. 
Soon,  the  Justices  of  the  Supreme 
Court  entered  in  a  body,*and  the  as- 
semblage rose  in  silent  homage,  and 

uttered  in  reply  to  Mr.  Cuyler,  and  quoted  oa 
the  preceding  page.] 

19  In  Richmond  and  other  journals. 


422 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


stood  till  they  were  seated.  The  re- 
maining space  on  the  floor  was  now 
filled  to  its  utmost  capacity  by  mem- 
bers of  the  House,  just  adjourned; 
and  it  was  soon  afterward  announced 
that  the  Presidential  party  had  en- 
tered the  edifice.  On  its  appearance, 
the  whole  assemblage  proceeded  to  the 
magnificent  and  spacious  Eastern  por- 
tico of  the  Capitol,  on  which  a  platform 
had  been  erected, and  in  front  of  which 
a  considerable  space  had  been  clear- 
ed, and  was  held,  by  the  Military. 
The  President  elect  was  barely  intro- 
duced to  the  vast  concourse  by  Col. 
Edward  D.  Baker,  Senator  from  Ore- 
gon, and  received  with  cheers  from 
perhaps  a  fourth  of  the  thirty  thou- 
sand persons  confronting  him.  Si- 
lence having  succeeded,  Mr.  Lincoln 
unrolled  a  manuscript,  and,  in  a  firm, 
clear,  penetrating  voice,  read  the  fol- 
lowing 

INAUGURAL  ADDRESS. 

Fellow- Citizens  of  the  United  States : 

In  compliance  with  a  custom  as  old  as 
the  Government  itself,  I  appear  before  you 
to  address  you  briefly,  and  to  take,  in  your 
presence,  the  oath  prescribed  by  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  United  States  to  be  taken 
by  the  President,  before  he  enters  on  the 
execution  of  his  office. 

I  do  not  consider  it  necessary,  at  present, 
for  me  to  discuss  those  matters  of  adminis- 
tration about  which  there  is  no  special  anxi- 
ety or  excitement.  Apprehension  seems  to 
exist  among  the  people  of  the  Southern 
States,  that,  by  the  accession  of  a  Republi- 
can Administration,  their  property  and  their 
peace  and  personal  security  are  to  be  en- 
dangered. There  has  never  been  any  rea- 
sonable cause  for  such  apprehension.  Indeed, 
the  most  ample  evidence  to  the  contrary 
has  all  the  while  existed,  and  been  open  to 
their  inspection.  It  is  found  in  nearly  all 
the  published  speeches  of  him  who  now 
addresses  you.  I  do  but  quote  from  one  of 
those  speeches,  when  I  declare  that  "  I  have 
no  purpose,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  inter- 
fere with  the  institution  of  Slavery  in  the 
States  where  it  exists."  I  believe  I  have  no 
lawful  right  to  do  so ;  and  I  have  no  inclina- 
tion to  do  so.    Those  who  nominated  and 


elected  me,  did  so  with  the  full  knowledge 
that  I  had  made  this,  and  many  similar 
declarations,  and  had  never  recanted  them. 
And,  more  than  this,  they  placed  in  the  plat- 
form, for  my  acceptance,  and  as  a  law  to 
themselves  and  to  me,the  clear  and  emphatic 
resolution  which  I  now  read  : 

"Resolved,  That  the  maintenance  inviolate  of 
the  rights  of  the  States,  and  especially  the  right 
of  each  State  to  order  and  control  its  own  do- 
mestic institutions  according  to  its  own  judg- 
ment exclusively,  is  essential  to  that  balance  of 
power  on  which  the  perfection  and  endurance 
of  our  political  fabric  depend ;  and  we  denounce 
the  lawless  invasion  by  armed  force  of  the  soil 
of  any  State  or  Territory,  no  matter  under  what 
pretext,  as  among  the  gravest  of  crimes." 

I  now  reiterate  these  sentiments  ;  and,  in 
doing  so,  I  only  press  upon  the  public  atten- 
tion the  most  conclusive  evidence  of  which 
the  case  is  susceptible,  that  the  property, 
peace,  and  security,  of  no  section  are  to  bo 
in  anywise  endangered  by  the  now  incoming 
Administration. 

I  add,  too,  that  all  the  protection  which, 
consistently  with  the  Constitution  and  the 
laws,  can  be  given,  will  be  cheerfully  given 
to  all  the  States,  when  lawfully  demanded, 
for  whatever  cause,  as  cheerfully  to  one  sec- 
tion as  to  another. 

There  is  much  controversy  about  the 
delivering  up  of  fugitives  from  service  or 
labor.  The  clause  I  now  read  is  as  plainly 
written  in  the  Constitution  as  any  other  of 
its  provisions : 

"No  person  held  to  service  or  labor  in  one 
State  under  the  laws  thereof,  escaping  into 
another,  shall,  in  consequence  of  any  law  or  reg- 
ulation therein,  be  discharged  from  such  ser- 
vice or  labor,  but  shall  be  delivered  up  on  claim 
of  the  party  to  whom  such  service  or  labor  may 
be  due." 

It  is  scarcely  questioned  that  this  pro- 
vision was  intended  by  those  who  made  it 
for  the  reclaiming  of  what  we  call  fugitive 
slaves  ;  and  the  intention  of  the  lawgiver  is 
the  law. 

All  members  of  Congress  swear  their 
support  to  the  whole  Constitution — to  this 
provision  as  well  as  any  other.  To  the 
proposition,  then,  that  slaves  whose  cases 
come  within  the  terms  of  this  clause  "  shall 
be  delivered  up,"  their  oaths  are  unanimous. 
Now,  if  they  would  make  the  effort  in 
good  temper,  could  they  not,  with  nearly 
equal  unanimity,  frame  and  pass  a  law  by 
means  of  which  to  keep  good  that  unani- 
mous oath? 

There  is  some  difference  of  opinion 
whether  this  clause  should  be  enforced  by 
National  or  by  State  authority ;  but  surely 
that  difference  is  not  a  very  material  one. 
If  the  slave  is  to  be  surrendered,  it  can  be 
of  but  little  consequence  to  him  or  to  others 


MR.    LINCOLN   AGAINST  SECESSION. 


423 


by  which  authority  it  is  done;  and  should 
any  one,  in  any  case,  be  content  that  this 
oath  shall  go  unkept  on  a  merely  unsub- 
stantial controversy  as  to  how  it  shall  be 
kept? 

Again,  in  any  law  upon  this  subject,  ought 
not  all  the  safeguards  of  liberty  known  in 
civilized  and  humane  jurisprudence  to 
be  introduced,  so  that  a  free  man  be  not,  in 
any  case,  surrendered  as  a  slave  ?  And 
might  it  not  be  well  at  the  same  time  to 
provide  by  law  for  the  enforcement  of  that 
clause  in  the  Constitution  which  guarantees 
that  "the  citizens  of  each  State  shall  be 
entitled  to  all  the  privileges  and  immunities 
of  citizens  in  the  several  States  ?" 

I  take  the  official  oath  to-day  with  no 
mental  reservations,  and  with  no  purpose  to 
construe  the  Constitution  or  laws  by  any 
hypercritical  rules ;  and,  while  I  do  not 
choose  now  to  specify  particular  acts  of 
Congress  as  proper  to  be  enforced,  I  do  sug- 
gest that  it  will  be  much  safer  for  all,  both 
in  official  and  private  stations,  to  conform 
to  and  abide  by  all  those  acts  which  stand 
unrepealed,  than  to  violate  any  of  them, 
trusting  to  find  impunity  in  having  them 
held  to  be  unconstitutional. 

It  is  seventy-two  years  since  the  first 
inauguration  of  a  President  under  our  Na- 
tional Constitution.  During  that  period, 
fifteen  different  and  very  distinguished  citi- 
zens have  in  succession  administered  the 
executive  branch  of  the  government.  They 
have  conducted  it  through  many  perils,  and 
generally  with  great  success.  Yet,  with  all 
this  scope  for  precedent,  I  now  enter  upon 
the  same  task,  for  the  brief  constitutional 
term  of  four  years,  under  great  and  peculiar 
difficulties. 

A  disruption  of  the  Federal  Union,  here- 
tofore only  menaced,  is  now  formidably 
attempted.  I  hold  that,  in  the  contemplation 
of  universal  law  and  of  the  Constitution, 
the  Union  of  these  States  is  perpetual. 
Perpetuity  is  implied,  if  not  expressed,  in 
the  fundamental  law  of  all  national  govern- 
ments. It  is  safe  to  assert  that  no  govern- 
ment proper  ever  had  a  provision  in  its 
organic  law  for  its  own  termination.  Con- 
tinue to  execute  all  the  express  provisions 
of  our  national  Constitution,  and  the  Union 
will  endure  forever,  it  being  impossible  to 
destroy  it  except  by  some  action  not  pro- 
vided for  in  the  instrument  itself. 

Again,  if  the  United  States  be  not  a 
government  proper,  but  an  association  of 
States  in  the  nature  of  a  contract  merely, 
can  it,  as  a  contract,  be  peaceably  unmade 
by  less  than  all  the  parties  who  made  it? 
One  party  to  a  contract  may  violate  it — 
break  it,  so  to  speak ;  but  does  it  not  require 
all  to  lawfully  rescind  it?  Descending 
from  these  general  principles,  we  find  the 


proposition  that  in  legal  contemplation  the 
Union  is  perpetual,  confirmed  by  the  history 
of  the  Union  itself. 

The  Union  is  much  older  than  the  Con- 
stitution. It  was  formed,  in  fact,  by  the 
Articles  of  Association  in  1774.  It  was 
matured  and  continued  in  the  Declaration 
of  Independence  in  1776.  It  was  further 
matured,  and  the  faith  of  all  the  then  thir- 
teen States  expressly  plighted  and  engaged 
that  it  should  be  perpetual,  by  the  Articles 
of  Confederation,  in  1778  ;  and,  finally,  in 
1787,  one  of  the  declared  objects  for  ordain- 
ing and  establishing  the  Constitution  was 
to  form  a  more  perfect  union.  But,  if  the 
destruction  of  the  Union  by  one  or  by  a 
part  only  of  the  States  be  lawfully  possible, 
the  Union  is  less  than  before,  the  Constitu- 
tion having  lost  the  vital  element  of  per- 
petuity. 

It  follows  from  these  views  that  no  State, 
upon  its  own  mere  motion,  can  lawfully  get 
out  of  the  Union ;  that  resolves  and  ordi- 
nances to  that  effect,  are  legally  void  ;  and 
that  acts  of  violence  within  any  State  or 
States  against  the  authority  of  the  United 
States,  are  insurrectionary  or  revolutionary, 
according  to  circumstances. 

I  therefore  consider  that,  in  view  of  the 
Constitution  and  the  laws,  the  Union  is 
unbroken,  and,  to  the  extent  of  my  ability, 
I  shall  take  care,  as  the  Constitution  itself 
expressly  enjoins  upon  me,  that  the  laws  of 
the  Union  shall  be  faithfully  executed  in  all 
the  States.  Doing  this,  which  I  deem  to 
be  only  a  simple  duty  on  my  part,  I  shall 
perfectly  perform  it,  so  far  as  is  practicable, 
unless  my  rightful  masters,  the  American 
people,  shall  withhold  the  requisite  power, 
or  in  some  authoritative  manner  direct  the 
contrary. 

I  trust  this  will  not  be  regarded  as  a 
menace,  but  only  as  the  declared  purpose  of 
the  Union  that  it  will  constitutionally  defend 
and  maintain  itself. 

In  doing  this,  there  need  be  no  bloodshed 
or  violence,  and  there  shall  be  none  unless 
it  is  forced  upon  the  national  authority. 

The  power  confided  to  me  will  be  used  to 
hold,  occupy,  and  possess  the  property  and 
places  belonging  to  the  Government,  and  col- 
lect the  duties  and  imposts ;  but,  beyond 
what  may  be  necessary  for  these  objects, 
there  will  be  no  invasion,  no  using  of  force 
against  or  among  the  people  anywhere. 

Where  hostility  to  the  United  States  shall 
be  so  great  and  so  universal  as  to  prevent 
competent  resident  citizens  from  holding 
the  Federal  offices,  there  will  be  no  attempt 
to  force  obnoxious  strangers  among  the 
people  for  that  object.  While  the  strict  legal 
right  may  exist  of  the  Government  to  en- 
force the  exercise  of  these  offices,  the  at- 
tempt to  do  so  would  be  so  irritating,  and 


424 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


so  nearly  impracticable  withal,  that  I  deem 
it  better  to  forego  for  the  time  the  uses  of 
such  offices. 

The  mails,  unless  repelled,  will  continue 
to  be  furnished  in  all  parts  of  the  Union. 

So  far  as  possible,  the  people  everywhere 
shall  have  that  sense  of  perfect  security 
which  is  most  favorable  to  calm  thought 
and  reflection. 

The  course  here  indicated  will  be  fol- 
lowed, unless  current  events  and  experience 
shall  show  a  modification  or  change  to  be 
proper ;  and  in  every  case  and  exigency  my 
best  discretion  will  be  exercised  according 
to  the  circumstances  actually  existing,  and 
with  a  view  and  hope  of  a  peaceful  solution 
of  the  national  troubles,  and  the  restoration 
of  fraternal  sympathies  and  affections. 

That  there  are  persons,  in  one  section  or 
another,  who  seek  to  destroy  the  Union  at 
all  event3,  and  are  glad  of  any  pretext  to  do 
it,  I  will  neither  affirm  nor  deny.  But,  if  there 
be  such,  I  need  address  no  word  to  them. 

To  those,  however,  who  really  love  the 
Union,  may  I  not  speak?  Before  entering 
upon  so  grave  a  matter  as  the  destruction  of 
our  national  fabric,  with  all  its  benefits,  its 
memories,  and  its  hopes,  would  it  not  be 
well  to  ascertain  why  we  do  it  ?  Will  you 
hazard  so  desperate  a  step,  while  any  por- 
tion of  the  ills  you  fly  from,  have  no  real 
existence  ?  Will  you,  while  the  certain  ills 
you  fly  to  are  greater  than  all  the  real  ones 
you  fly  from  I  Will  you  risk  the  commis- 
sion of  so  fearful  a  mistake  ?  All  profess 
to  be  content  in  the  Union  if  all  constitu- 
tional rights  can  be  maintained.  Is  it  true, 
then,  that  any  right,  plainly  written  in  the 
Constitution,  has  been  denied  ?  I  think  not. 
Happily,  the  human  mind  is  so  constituted; 
that  no  party  can  reach  to  the  audacity  of 
doing  this. 

Think,  if  you  can,  of  a  single  instance  in 
which  a  plainly-written  provision  of  the 
Constitution  has  ever  been  denied.  If,  by 
the  mere  force  of  numbers,  a  majority  should 
deprive  a  minority  of  any  clearly-written 
constitutional  right,  it  might,  in  a  moral 
point  of  view,  justify  revolution;  it  cer- 
tainly would,  if  such  right  were  a  vital  one. 
But  such  is  not  our  case. 

All  the  vital  rights  of  minorities  and  of 
individuals  are  so  plainly  assured  to  them 
by  affirmations  and  negations,  guaranties 
and  prohibitions,  in  the  Constitution,  that 
controversies  never  arise  concerning  them. 
But  no  organic  law  can  ever  be  framed  with 
a  provision  specifically  applicable  to  every 
question  which  may  occur  in  practical  ad- 
ministration. No  foresight  can  anticipate, 
nor  any  document  of  reasonable  length  con- 
tain, express  provisions  for  all  possible  ques- 
tions. Shall  fugitives  from  labor  be  surren- 
dered by  National  or  by  State  authority? 


The  Constitution  does  not  expressly  say. 
Must  Congress  protect  Slavery  in  the  Terri- 
tories? The  Constitution  does  not  express- 
ly say.  From  questions  of  this  class  spring 
all  our  constitutional  controversies,  and  we 
divide  upon  them  into  majorities  and  minor- 
ities. 

If  the  minority  will  not  acquiesce,  the 
majority  must,  or  the  government  must 
cease.  There  is  no  alternative  for  contin- 
uing the  government  but  acquiescence  on 
the  one  side  or  the  other.  If  a  minority  in 
such  a  case  will  secede  rather  than  acquiesce, 
they  make  a  precedent  which  in  turn  will 
ruin  and  divide  them  ;  for  a  minority  of  their 
own  will  secede  from  them  whenever  a  ma- 
jority refuses  to  be  controlled  by  such  a 
minority.  For  instance,  why  not  any  por- 
tion of  a  new  confederacy,  a  year  or  two 
hence,  arbitrarily  secede  again,  precisely  as 
portions  of  the  present  Union  now  claim  to 
secede  from  it?  All  who  cherish  disunion 
sentiments  are  now  being  educated  to  the 
exact  temper  of  doing  this.  Is  there  such 
perfect  identity  of  interests  among  the 
States  to  compose  a  new  Union  as  to  pro- 
duce harmony  only,  and  prevent  renewed 
secession?  Plainly,  the  central  idea  of 
secession  is  the  essence  of  anarchy. 

A  majority  held  in  restraint  by  constitu- 
tional check  and  limitation,  and  always 
changing  easily  with  deliberate  changes  of 
popular  opinions  and  sentiments,  is  the  only 
true  sovereign  of  a  free  people.  Whoever 
rejects  it,  does,  of  necessity,  fly  to  anarchy 
or  to  despotism.  Unanimity  is  impossible ; 
the  rule  of  a  minority,  as  a  permanent  ar- 
rangement, is  wholly  inadmissible.  So  that, 
rejecting  the  majority  principle,  anarchy  or 
despotism  in  some  form  is  all  that  is  left. 

I  do  not  forget  the  position  assumed  by 
some  that  constitutional  questions  are  to  be 
decided  by  the  Supreme  Court,  nor  do  I 
deny  that  such  decisions  must  be  binding  in 
any  case  upon  the  parties  to  a  suit,  as  to  the 
object  of  that  suit,  while  they  are  also  en- 
titled to  very  high  respect  and  consideration 
in  all  parallel  cases  by  all  other  departments 
of  the  government;  and,  while  it  is  obvious- 
ly possible  that  such  decision  may  be  erro- 
neous in  any  given  case,  still,  the  evil  effect 
following  it,  being  limited  to  that  particular 
case,  with  the  chance  that  it  may  be  over- 
ruled and  never  become  a  precedent  for 
other  cases,  can  better  be  borne  than  could 
the  evils  of  a  different  practice. 

At  the  same  time,  the  candid  citizen  must 
confess  that,  if  the  policy  of  the  government 
upon  the  vital  questions  affecting  the  wholo 
people  is  to  be  irrevocably  fixed  by  the  de- 
cisions of  the  Supreme  Court,  the  instant 
they  aro  made,  as  in  ordinary  litigation 
between  parties  in  personal  actions,  the 
people  will  have  ceased  to  be  their  own, 


PRESIDENT  LINCO 


LN'S  INAUGURAL. 


425 


masters,  having  to  that  extent  practically 
resigned  their  government  into  the  hands 
of  that  eminent  tribunal. 

Nof  is  there  in  this  view  any  assault  upon 
the  court  or  the  judges.  It  is  a  duty  from 
which  they  may  not  shrink,  to  decide  cases 
properly  brought  before  them  ;  and  it  is  no 
fault  of  theirs  if  others  ,seek  to  turn  their 
decisions  to  political  purposes.  One  section 
of  our  country  believes  Slavery  is  right  and 
ought  to  be  extended,  while  the  other  be- 
lieves it  is  wrong  and  ought  not  to  be  ex- 
tended ;  'and  this  is  the  only  substantial  dis- 
pute; and  the  fugitive  slave  clause  of  the 
constitution,  and  the  law  for  the  suppression 
of  the  foreign  slave-trade,  are  each  as  well 
enforced,  perhaps,  as  any  law  can  ever  be  in 
a  community  where  the  moral  sense  of  the 
people  imperfectly  supports  the  law  itself. 
The  great  body  of  the  people  abide  by  the 
dry  legal  obligation  in  both  cases,  and  a  few 
break  over  in  each.  This,  I  think,  cannot 
be  perfectly  cured,  and  it  would  be  worse  in 
both  cases  after  the  separation  of  the  sec- 
tions than  before.  The  foreign  slave-trade, 
now  imperfectly  suppressed,  would  be  ulti- 
mately revived,  without  restriction,  in  one 
section  ;  while  fugitive  slaves,  now  only 
partially  surrendered,  would  not  be  surren- 
dered at  all,  by  the  other. 

Physically  speaking,  we  cannot  separate 
— we  cannot  remove  our  respective  sections 
from  each  other,  nor  build  an  impassable 
wall  between  them.  A  husband  and  wife 
may  be  divorced,  and  go  out  of  the  presence 
and  beyond  the  reach  of  each  other ;  but  the 
different  parts  of  our  country  cannot  do 
this.  They  cannot  but  remain  face  to  face ; 
and  intercourse,  either  amicable  or  hostile, 
must  continue  between  them.  Is  it  possi- 
ble, then,  to  make  that  intercourse  more 
advantageous  or  more  satisfactory  after 
separation  than  before  ?  Can  aliens  make 
treaties  easier  than  friends  can  make  laws? 
Can  treaties  be  more  faithfully  enforced 
between  aliens  than  laws  can  among  friends  ? 
Suppose  you  go  to  war,  you  cannot  fight 
always;  and  when,  after  much  loss  on  both 
sides  and  no  gain  on  either,  you  cease  fight- 
ing, the  identical  questions  as  to  terms  of 
intercourse  are  again  upon  you. 

This  country,  with  its  institutions,  belongs 
to  the  people  who  inhabit  it.  Whenever 
they  shall  grow  weary  of  the  existing  gov- 
ernment, they  can  exercise  their  constitu- 
tional right  of  amending,  or  their  revolu- 
tionary right  to  dismember  or  overthrow  it. 
I  cannot  be  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  many 
worthy  and  patriotic  citizens  are  desirous  of 
having  the  national  Constitution  amended. 
While  I  make  no*recommendation  of  amend- 
ment, I  fully  recognize  tho  full  authority  of 
the  people  over  the  whole  subject,  to  be 
exercised  in  either  of  tho  modes  prescribed 


in  the  instrument  itself ,  and  I  should,  under 
existing  circumstances,  favor,  rather  than 
oppose,  a  fair  opportunity  being  afforded  the 
people  to  act  upon  it. 

I  will  venture  to  add,  that  to  me  the  Con- 
vention mode  seems  preferable,  in  that  it 
allows  amendments  to  originate  with  tho 
people  themselves,  instead  of  only  permit- 
ting them  to  take  or  reject  propositions 
originated  by  others  not  especially  chosen 
for  the  purpose,  and  which  might  not  be 
precisely  such  as  they  would  wrish  either  to 
accept  or  refuse.  I  understand  that  a  pro- 
posed amendment  to  the  Constitution  (which 
amendment,  however,  I  have  not  seen)  has 
passed  Congress,  to  the  effect  that  the  Fed- 
eral Government  shall  never  interfere  with 
the  domestic  institutions  of  States,  including 
that  of  persons  held  to  service.  To  avoid 
misconstruction  of  what  I  have  said,  I  de- 
part from  my  purpose  not  to  speak  of  par- 
ticular amendments,  so  far  as  to  say  that, 
holding  such  a  provision  to  now  be  implied 
constitutional  law,  I  have  no  objection  to  its 
being  made  express  and  irrevocable. 

The  chief  magistrate  derives  all  his  author- 
ity from  the  people,  and  they  have  con- 
ferred none  upon  him  to  fix  the  terms  for 
the  separation  of  the  States.  The  peoplo 
themselves,  also,  can  do  this  if  they  choose ; 
but  tho  Executive,  as  such,  has  nothing  to 
do  with  it.  His  duty  is  to  administer  the 
present  government  as  it  came  to  his  hands, 
and  to  transmit  it  unimpaired  by  him  to  his 
successor.  Why  should  there  not  be  a 
patient  confidence  in  the  ultimate  justice  of 
the  people?  Is  there  any  better  or  equal 
hope  in  the  world  ?  In  our  present  differ- 
ences, is  either  party  without  faith  of  being 
in  the  right?  If  the  Almighty  Ruler  of 
nations,  with  His  eternal  truth  and  justice, 
be  on  your  side  of  the  North,  or  on  yours  of 
the  South,  that  truth  and  that  justice  will 
surely  prevail  by  the  judgment  of  this  great 
tribunal,  the  American  jjeople.  By  tho 
frame  of  the  Government  under  which  wo 
live,  this  same  people-  have  wisely  given 
their  public  servants  but  little  power  for 
mischief,  and  have  with  equal  wisdom  pro- 
vided for  the  return  of  that  little  to  their 
own  hands  at  very  short  intervals.  While 
the  people  retain  their  virtue  and  vigilance, 
no  administration,  by  any  extreme  wicked- 
ness or  folly,  can  very  seriously  injure  tho 
Government  in  the  short  space  of  four 
years. 

My  countrymen,  one  and  all,  think  calmly 
and  w^ell  upon  this  whole  subject.  Nothing 
valuable  can  be  lost  by  taking  time. 

If  there  be  an  object  to  hurry  any  of  you, 
in  hot  haste,  to  a  step  which  you  would 
never  take  deliberately,  that  object  will  bo 
frustrated  by  taking  time ;  but  no  good 
object  can  be  frustrated  by  it. 


426 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Such  of  you  as  arc  now  dissatisfied  still 
have  the  old  Constitution  unimpaired,  and, 
on  the  sensitive  point,  the  laws  of  your  own 
framing  under  it ;  while  the  new  adminis- 
tration will  have  no  immediate  power,  if  it 
•would,  to  change  either. 

If  it  were  admitted  that  you  who  are  dis- 
satisfied hold  the  right  side  in  the  dispute, 
there  is  still  no  single  reason  for  precipitate 
action.  Intelligence,  patriotism,  Christian- 
ity, and  a  firm  reliance  on  Him  who  has 
never  yet  forsaken  this  favored  land,  are 
still  competent  to  adjust,  in  the  best  way, 
all  our  present  difficulties. 

In  your  hands,  my  dissatisfied  fellow- 
countrymen,  and  not  in  mine,  is  the  momen- 
tous issue  of  civil  war.  The  Government 
will  not  assail  you. 

You  can  have  no  conflict  without  being 
yourselves  the  aggressors.  You  can  have  no 
oath  registered  in  Heaven  to  destroy  the 
Government;  while  I  shall  have  the  most 
solemn  one  to  "  preserve,  protect,  and  de- 
fend" it. 

I  am  loath  to  close.  We  are  not  enemies, 
but  friends.  "We  must  not  be  enemies. 
Though  passion  may  have  strained,  it  must 
not  break,  our  bonds  of  affection. 

The  mystic  chords  of  memory,  stretching 
from  every  battle-field  and  patriot  grave  to 
every  living  heart  and  hearthstone  all  over 
this  broad  land,  will  yet  swell  the  chorus  of 
the  Union,  when  again  touched,  as  surely 
they  will  be,  by  the  better  angels  of  our 
nature. 

The  habitual  tone  of  this  remarka- 
ble paper  is  deprecatory,  not  to  say 
apologetic.  Mr.  Lincoln  evidently 
composed  it  under  the  fixed  impres- 
sion that  '  the  South'  needed  but  to 
be  disabused  of  her  impressions  and 
apprehensions  of  Northern  hostility 
to  restore  her  to  loyalty  and  the 
whole  land  to  peace.  If  she  can  be 
made  to  feel  that  the  new  rule  does 
not  desire  to  meddle  with  Slavery  in 
the  States  which  cherish  it,  but  will 
hunt  and  return  fugitive  slaves  to  the 
extent  of  its  ability,  then  Secession 
will  be  given  up,  and  the  country  re- 
stored to  peace  and  harmony  !  That, 
certainly,  is  an  amiable  view  of  the 
situation  ;  but  it  was  not  justified  by 

19  See  pages  105-6. 

20  See  Mr.  John  Van  Buren  on  this  point,  page 


a  close  study  and  thorough  compre- 
hension of  our  recent  political  his- 
tory. 

Mr.  Lincoln's  suggestion  that  the 
dictum  of  the  Supreme  Court,  though 
law  to  the  suitor  whom  it  bore  hard 
upon,  does  not  bind  the  people  not  to 
entertain  and  vote  in  conformity  to 
an  adverse  conviction,  though  in  full 
accordance  with  the  action  of  'the 
South'  in  regard  to  the  Alien  and 
Sedition  laws,  the  Creek  and  Chero- 
kee treaties,19  etc.,  and,  in  fact,  to  the 
action  of  all  parties  when  overruled 
by  that  Court,  was  not  calculated  to 
please  and  conciliate  'the  South.' 
Yet  no  adversary  of  a  United  States 
Bank  ever  felt  himself  restrained 
from  opposing  and  voting  against 
such  a  Bank  as  unconstitutional  by 
the  fact  that  the  Court  had  adjudged 
it  otherwise.  "No  one  imagines  that 
a  decision  by  that  Court  that  Slavery 
had  no  right  to  enter  the  territories 
would  have  been  regarded  and  treat- 
ed by  '  the  South'  as  the  end  of  con- 
troversy on  that  point.20  But,  having 
obtained,  in  the  Dred  Scott  case,  an 
opinion  that  slaveholders  might  take 
their  human  chattels  to  any  territory, 
and  there  hold  them,  claiming  ample 
protection  from  the  Government  in 
so  doing,  they  were  fully  resolved  to 
make  the  most  of  it,  and  not  at  all  dis- 
posed to  acquiesce  in  the  suggestion 
that,  on  questions  essentially  polit- 
ical, the  American  People  are  a 
higher  authority  than  even  their  Su- 
preme Court. 

The  weakest  portion  of  this  docu- 
ment is  its  inconsiderate  talk  about 
an  "invasion"  of  the  States  by  the 
Federal  Government,  and  its  quasi 
pledge  not  to  appoiat  Federal  offi- 

213.  For  Mr.  Jefferson's  views,  see  pages  83-4; 
for  Gen.  Jackson's,  see  pages  104-6. 


THE    UNION  NOT 


A   ME  EE  LEAGUE. 


427 


cers  for  communities  unanimously 
hostile  to  the  authority  of  the  Union. 
A  surgeon  who  should  volunteer  a 
pledge  not  to  disturb  or  meddle  with 
any  proud  flesh  he  might  find  in  his 
patient's  wounds,  would  hardly  expect 
to  augment  thereby  that  patient's  con- 
fidence in  his  skill ;  nor  could  a  priest 
who  should  stipulate  never  to  assail 
any  other  than  unpopular  and  repudi- 
ated sins,  expect  to  win  a  high  regard 
either  for  his  authority  or  his  sanc- 
tity. The  fact  that  the  sovereignty 
of  the  Union  is  coextensive,  and,  at 
least,  coordinate  with  that  of  the 
States,  is  here  clearly  lost  sight  of. 
To  say,  in  effect,  to  rebels  against  the 
National  authority,  "  You  may  expel 
that  authority  wholly  from  your  vicin- 
age by  killing  a  few  of  its  leading  up- 
holders, and  thus  terrifying  the  resi- 
due into  mute  servility  to  your  will," 
is  not  the  way  to  suppress  a  rebellion. 

The  strong  point  of  this  Inaugural 
is  its  frank  and  plump  denial  of  the 
fundamental  Secession  dogma  that 
our  Union  is  a  league,21  formed  in 
1787.  "The  Union  is  much  older 
than  the  Constitution,"  says  Mr.  Lin- 
coln, truly  and  pertinently.  Had  the 
Constitution  been  rejected  by  the 
States,  the  Union  would  nevertheless 
have  subsisted.    Ours  is  1  one  coun- 

21  The  New  York  Herald  of  November  9th, 
contained  an  instructive  letter  dated  Charleston, 
November  5th,  18G0,  from  which  the  following 
is  an  extract : 

'  "  It  must  be  understood  that  there  is  a  radi- 
cal difference  in  the  patriotism  of  a  Northerner 
and  a  Southerner.  The  Northerner  invariably 
considers  himself  as  a  citizen  of  the  Union ;  he 
regards  the  Federal  army  and  navy  as  his  coun- 
try's army  and  navy,  and  looks  upon  the  Gov- 
ernment at  Washington  as  a  great  consolidated 
organization,  of  which  he  forms  an  integral  part, 
and  to  which  whatever  love  of  country  he  may 
possess  is  directed.  Beyond  paying  the  State 
taxes,  voting  for  State  officers,  and  seeking  re- 
dress primarily  in  the  State  courts,  he  has  very 
little  idea  of  any  special  fealty  being  due  to  his 
own  particular  State. 


try' — made  so  by  God  and  His  Pro- 
vidence, revealed  through  the  whole 
of  its  recorded  history;  its  c  more  per- 
fect Union'  is  but  a  step  in  its  deve- 
lopment— not  the  cause  of  its  exist- 
ence. Hence,  Secession  is  not  "  the 
dissolution  of  a  league,"  as  Mr.  Jef- 
ferson Davis  asserts,  but  a  treason- 
able, though  futile,  effort  to  disorgan- 
ize and  destroy  a  nation. 

Mr.  Lincoln's  rejection  of  Disunion 
as  physically  impossible — as  forbidden 
by  the  geography  and  topography  of 
our  country — is  a  statesmanlike  con- 
ception that  had  not  before  been  so 
clearly  apprehended  or  so  forcibly  set 
forth.  And,  in  truth,  not  one-tenth 
of  the  then  active  Secessionists  ever 
meditated  or  intended  Disunion  as 
permanent.  They  proposed  to  de- 
stroy the  Union  in  order  to  reconsti- 
tute it  according  to  their  own  ideas, 
with  Slavery  as  its  corner-stone.  To 
kick  out  the  New  England  States, 
rural  JSTew  York,  and  that  '  fanatical' 
section  of  the  West  that  is  drained 
by  the  Great  Lakes  and  the  St.  Law- 
rence— such  was  the  constant  incul- 
cation of  pro-Slavery  journalists  and 
politicians  throughout  that  eventful 
Winter  and  Spring.  Free  States 
were  to  be  admitted  into  the  Con- 
federacy, on  condition  of  their  fully 

"The  Southerner,  on  the  other  hand,  gene- 
.  rally  (and  the  South  Carolinian  always)  repudi- 
ates this  theory  of  consolidation.  He  feels  that 
he  owes  allegiance  to  his  own  State,  and  to  her 
alone ;  he  is  jealous  of  her  rights  and  honor,  and 
will  never  admit  that  any  step  taken  in  obedi- 
ence to  her  mandate  can  involve  the  idea  of  trea- 
son. The  Federal  Government  is,  in  his  eyes, 
but  the  embodiment  of  certain  powers  delegated 
by  the  States  from  motives  of  policy.  Let  those 
motives  be  once  removed  or  counterbalanced, 
and  he  holds  that  the  State  has  no  longer  any 
reason  for  maintaining  a  connection  which  it 
was  her  right,  at  any  time,  to  have  dissolved. 
These  being  the  views  of  the  people  of  South 
Carolina,  the  threats  of  Douglas  and  the  Black 
Republicans  have  only  served  to  confirm  the 
wavering  and  knit  together  the  citizens  of  the 
various  sections  of  the  State." 


428  THE  AMERICA 

abjuring  all  manner  of  anti-Slavery  | 
sentiment  and  inculcation  evermore, 
and  becoming  Slave  States.  A  few 
Southern  fanatics,  who  deemed  no- 
thing needed  but  the  reopening  of 
the  African  Slave-Trade  to  render 
'  the  South'  the  mistress  of  the  world, 
wished  to  be  rid  of  all  '  Yankee'  as- 
sociation and  contamination  ever^ 
more ;  but  the  great  mass,  even  in 
the  Cotton  States,  regarded  Secession 
but  as  a  device  for  bringing  the  North 
to  its  knees,  and  binding  it  over  to 
future  docility  to  every  exaction  of 
the  Slave  Power. 

Mr.  Lincoln  fondly  regarded  his 
Inaugural  as  a  resistless  proffering  of 


conflict. 

I  the  olive-branch  to  f  the  South' ;  the 
conspirators  everywhere  interpreted 
it  as  a  challenge  to  war.54  And  when 
the  former  had  taken  the  oath,  sol- 
emnly administered  to  him  by  Chief 
Justice  Taney,  the  two  Presidents 
wended  their  way  back,  duly  es- 
corted, to  the  White  House,  at  whose 
door  Mr.  Buchanan  bade  Mr.  Lin- 
coln a  cordial  good-by,  retiring  to 
the  residence  of  his  friend  and  benefi- 
ciary, Robert  Ould,  whom  he  had 
made  U.  S.  District  Attorney,  and 
who,  though  from  Maryland,  soon 
after  fled  to  Richmond,  and  entered 
at  once  the  military  service  of  the 
Confederacy. 


XXVII. 
OMINOUS  PAUSE. 


President  Lincoln,  on  the  day  after 
his  inauguration,  submitted  to  the 
new  Senate  the  names  of  those  whom 
he  had  chosen  to  preside  over  the 
several  Departments,  and  who  thus 
became,  by  a  usage  which  has  no  ex- 


press warrant  in  the  Constitution,  his 
official  counselors.    They  were 

William  H.  Seward,  of  New  York,  Secr'y  of  State; 
Salmon  P.  Chase,  of  Ohio,  Secretary  of the  Treasury; 
Simon  Cameron,  of  Pennsylvania,  Secretary  of  War; 
Gideon  Welles,  of  Connecticut,  Secr'y  of  the  Navy; 
Caleb  B.  Smith,  of  Indiana,  Secretary  of  the  Interior  ; 
Edward  Bates,  of  Missouri.  Attorney-General; 
Montgomery  Blair,  of  Maryland,  Postmaster-  General. 


22  It  were  idle  to  quote  the  Disunion  press, 
even  of  the  yet  unseceded  States,  to  prove  this ; 
since  tlieir  strictures  may  well  be  imagined. 
The  following,  from  professedly  loyal  journals, 
are  worth  recording : 

"The  Inaugural,  as  a  whole,  breathes  the 
spirit  of  mischief.  It  has  only  a  conditional 
conservatism — that  is,  the  lack  of  ability  or 
some  inexpediency  to  do  what  it  would.  It  as- 
sumes despotic  authority,  and  intimates  the  de- 
sign to  exercise  that  authority  to  any  extent  of 
war  and  bloodshed,  qualified  only  by  the  with- 
holding of  the  requisite  means  to  the  end  by  the 
American  people.  The  argumentation  of  the 
address  is  puerile.  Indeed,  it  has  no  quality 
entitled  to  the  dignity  of  an  argument.  It  is  a 
shaky  specimen  of  special  pleading,  by  way  of 
justifying  the  unrighteous  character  and  deeds 
of  the  fanaticism  which,  lifted  into  power,  may 
be  guilty,  as  it  is  capable,  of  any  atrocities. 


There  is  no  Union  spirit  in  the  address ,  it  is 
sectional  and  mischievous,  and  studiously  with- 
holds any  sign  of  recognition  of  that  equality 
of  the  States  upon  which  the  Union  can  alone 
be  maintained.  If  it  means  what  it  says,  it  is 
the  knell  and  requiem  of  the  Union,  and  the 
death  of  hope." — Baltimore  Sun. 

u  Mr.  Lincoln  stands  to-day  where  he  stooq". 
on  the  6th  of  November  last,  on  the  Chicago 
Plat/arm.  He  has  not  receded  a  single  hair's 
breadth.  He  has  appointed  a  Cabinet  in  which 
there  is  no  slaveholder — a  thing  that  has  never 
before  happened  since  the  formation  of  the  Govern- 
ment ;  and  in  which  there  are  but  two  nominally 
Southern  men,  and  both  bitter  Black  Republic- 
ans of  the  radical  dye.  Let  the  Border  States 
ignominiously  submit  to  the  Abolition  rule  of  this 
Lincoln  Administration,  if  they  like ;  but  don't 
let  the  miserable  submissionists  pretend  to  be  de- 
ceived. Make  any  base  or  cowardly  excuse  but 
this. " — Philadelphia  Pennsylvanian. 


CIVIL    "WAR  NOT 


APPREHENDED. 


429 


Mr.  Jefferson  Davis,  ruling  at 
Montgomery,  had  already  constituted 
his  Cabinet,  which  consisted  of 

Robert  Toombs,  of  Georgia,  Secretary  of  State  ; 
Charles  G.  Memminger,  of  South  Carolina,  Secretary 

of  the  Treasury ; 
Lerot  Pope  Walker,  of  Alabama,  Secretary  of  War; 

to  which  were  afterward  added 

Stephen  R.  Mallort,  of  Florida,  Sec'ry  of  the  Navy; 
John  H.  Reagan,  of  Texas,  Postmaster-  General. 

Thus  the  two  Governments  stood 
face  to  face,  holding  positions  and 
maintaining  assumptions  so  palpably, 
utterly  incompatible  as  to  necessitate 
an  early  collision ;  and  that  collision 
must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  produce 
a  crash  that  would  shake  the  conti- 
nent. Still,  there  was  great  and  wise 
reluctance,  at  least  on  this  side,  to 
precipitate  or  to  initiate  hostilities. 
In  spite  of  appearances,  President 
Lincoln,1  and  the  advisers  in  whom 
he  most  trusted,  seemed  still  incredu- 
lous as  to  the  inevitability  and  immi- 
nence of  a  clash  of  arms.  Gov.  Sew- 
ard, the  new  Secretary  of  State,  had 
for  months  been  apparently  the  most 
resolute  of  optimists  with  regard  to  a 
happy  issue  from  our  internal  com- 
plications. At  the  New  England 
Dinner 2  in  New  York,  he  had  confi- 
dently predicted  a  settlement  of  all 
our  troubles  within  the  ensuing  sixty 
days.  That  term  had  sped ;  yet  his 
faith  in  a  peaceful  solution  of  our 
differences  appeared  as  buoyant  as 
ever,  and  seemed  to  be  shared  by  the 
President,  whose  "Nobody  hurt  as 
yet"  had  become  a  watchword  among 
the  obstinate  believers  in  '  Manifest 

1  The  writer  revisited  Washington  for  a  day 
or  two,  some  two  weeks  or  more  after  Mr.  Lin- 
coln's inauguration,  and  was  surprised  to  see 
and  hear  on  every  hand  what  were,  to  him, 
convincing  proofs  that  an  early  collision  with 
the  'Confederates'  was  not  seriously  appre- 
hended in  the  highest  quarters. 

2  Anniversary  of  the  Landing  of  the  Pilgrims, 
December  22,  1860.  3 In  1786-7. 


Destiny'  and  the  unparalleled  ration- 
ality, wisdom,  intelligence,  and  self- 
control,  of  the  peerless  American 
People. 

Does  this  look  like  infatuation  % 
If  the  wisdom  that  comes  to-morrow 
were  the  genuine  article,  every  man 
would  be  a  Solomon.  Remember 
that,  for  more  than  seventy  years,  no 
man  had  seen  an  American  hand 
lifted  against  the  symbol  of  our 
Nationality.  Neither  Shays's  Re- 
bellion,3 in  Massachusetts,  nor  the 
Whisky  Rebellion,4  so  called,  in  west- 
ern Pennsylvania,  had  really  purposed 
aught  beyond  the  removal  or  redress 
of  temporary  grievances  which  were 
deemed  intolerable.  Even  old  John 
Brown — fanatic  as  he  was ;  madman 
as  many  held  him — never  dreamed 
of  dividing  the  country  which  he 
sought  to  purge  of  its  most  flagrant 
wrong;  his  Canada  Constitution  ex- 
pressly stipulated5  that  the  Union 
should  be  preserved,  and  its  flag  re- 
tained and  cherished  by  his  adherents. 
Since  the  close  of  our  Revolutionary 
struggle,  no  man  had  seen,  in  the 
Free  States,  any  other  banner  float- 
ing over  a  regiment  of  our  people 
than  the  Stars  and  Stripes ;  though 
the  waves  of  party  spirit  had  often 
run  mountain  high,6  and  we  had 
seemed  just  on  the  brink  of  disrup- 
tion and  civil  war,  yet  the  dreaded 
collision  had  always  been  somehow 
averted,  and  the  moment  of  fiercest 
excitement,  of  widest  alienation,  had 

4In  1795.  5  See  pages  287-8. 

6  During  the  War  of  1812,  it  was  common  in 
New  England  for  the  antagonist  parties  to  take 
opposite  sides  of  the  '  broad  aisle'  of  the  '  meeting- 
house' wherein  their  respective  'town meetings' 
were  held,  and  so  remain  during  the  day,  con- 
ferring and  counseling  among  themselves,  but 
rarely  mingling  with  or  speaking  civilly  to  mem- 
bers of  the  adverse  party. 


430 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


often  been  the  immediate  precursor 
of  a  halcyon  era  of  reconciliation, 
peace,  and  fraternal  harmony.  _  It 
was  not  easy  for  Northern  men,  espe- 
cially those  who  had  never  visited 
and  sojourned  at  the  South,  to  com- 
prehend and  realize  the  wide  preva- 
lence and  intensity  of  anti-National 
sentiment  and  feeling  in  those  locali- 
ties whose  social  order,  industry,  and 
business,  were  entirely  based  on 
Slavery.  Neither  envying  nor  hating 
the  Southerners,  while  lamenting 
their  delusions  and  resisting  their  ex- 
actions, it  was  hard  indeed  for  many, 
if  not  most,  of  the  citizens  of  the 
Free  States  to  realize  that  we  stood 
on  the  brink  of  a  volcano  whose  rum- 
blings preluded  an  eruption  of  blood 
as  well  as  ashes. 

Scarcely  a  week  after  Mr.  Lincoln's 
inauguration,  his  Secretary  of  State 
was  served  with  the  following : 

"Washington,  March  12, 1861. 
"Hon.  "William  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State  of  the  United  States : 

"Sir: — The  undersigned  have  been  duly 
accredited  by  the  Government  of  the  Con- 
federate States  of  America  as  Commission- 
ers to  the  Government  of  the  United  States, 
and,  in  pursuance  of  their  instructions,  have 
now  the  honor  to  acquaint  you  with  that 
fact,  and  to  make  known,  through  you,  to 
the  President  of  the  United  States,  the  ob- 
jects of  their  presence  in  this  Capital. 

"  Seven  States  of  the  late  Federal  Union 
having,  in  the  exercise  of  the  inherent  right 
of  every  free  people  to  change  or  reform 
their  political  institutions,  and  through  Con- 
ventions of  their  people,  withdrawn  from 
the  United  States,  and  reussumed  the  attri- 
butes of  sovereign  power,  delegated  to  it, 
have  formed  a  Government  of  their  own. 
The  Confederate  States  constitute  an  inde- 
pendent nation,  de facto  and  dejure,  and  pos- 
sess a  Government  perfect  in  all  its  parts  and 
endowed  with  all  the  means  of  self-support. 

"With  a  view  to  a  speedy  adjustment  of 
all  questions  growing  out  of  this  political 


separation,  upon  such  terms  of  amity  and 
good-will  as  the  respective  interests,  geo- 
graphical contiguity,  and  future  welfare,  of 
the  two  nations  may  render  necessary,  the 
undersigned  are  instructed  to  make  to  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  overtures 
for  the  opening  of  negotiations,  assuring  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  that  the 
President,  Congress,  and  people  of  the  Con- 
federate States  earnestly  desire  a  peaceable 
solution  of  these  great  questions ;  that  it  is 
neither  their  interest  nor  their  wish  to  make 
any  demand  which  is  not  founded  in  strict 
justice,  nor  do  any  act  to  injure  their  late 
confederates. 

"  The  undersigned  have  now  the  honor,  in 
obedience  to  the  instructions  of  their  Gov- 
ernment, to  request  you  to  appoint  as  early 
a  day  as  possible,  in  order  that  they  may  pre- 
sent to  the  President  of  the  United  States  the 
credentials  which  they  bear  and  the  objects 
of  the  mission  with  which  they  are  charged. 
"  We  are,  very  respectfully, 

"  Your  obedient  servants, 
"John  Forsyth, 
"Martin  J.  Crawford." 

To  this  virtual  Declaration  of  War, 
under  the  guise  of  an  overture  look- 
ing to  negotiation,  settlement,  and 
amity,  Gov.  Seward  responded  as  fol- 
lows :7 

"  Memorandum. 
"Department  of  State,  ) 
"Washington,  March  15, 1861.  J 

"Mr.  John  Forsyth,  of  the  State  of  Ala- 
bama, and  Mr.  Martin  J.  Crawford,  of  the 
State  of  Georgia,  on  the  11th  inst.,  through 
the  kind  offices  of  a  distinguished  Senator, 
submitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  their  de- 
sire for  an  unofficial  interview.  This  request 
was,  on  the  12th  inst.,  upon  exclusively 
public  considerations,  respectfully  declined. 

"  On  the  13th  inst.,  while  the  Secretary  was 
preoccupied,  Mr.  A.  D.  Banks,  of  Virginia, 
called  at  this  Department,  and  was  received 
by  the  Assistant  Secretary,  to  whom  he  de- 
livered a  sealed  communication,  which  he 
had  been  charged  by  Messrs.  Forsyth  and 
Crawford  to  present  to  the  Secretary  in 
person. 

"  In  that  communication,  Messrs.  Forsyth 
and  Crawford  inform  the  Secretary  of  State 
that  they  have  been  duly  accredited  by  the 
Government  of  the  Confederate  States  of 
America  as  Commissioners  to  the  Govern- 


7  This  reply  was  withheld,  upon  consultation 
with  John  A.  Campbell,  of  Alabama,  (then  and 
till  May  2d  thereafter  a  Justice  of  the  U.  S. 
Supreme  Court,)  until  twenty-three  days  subse- 


quent to  its  date.  Judge  C.  would  seem  to  have 
been,  even  then,  acting  as  a  Confederate,  despite 
his  oath  of  office,  though  misunderstood  by  Gov. 
S.  as  laboring  to  preserve  the  Union. 


GOV.    SEWARD'S    REPLY  TO 


CONFEDERATE    ENTOTS.  431 


ment  of  the  United  States,  and  they  set  forth 
the  objects  of  their  attendance  at  Washing- 
ton. They  observe  that  seven  States  of  the 
American  Union,  in  exercise  of  a  right  inhe- 
rent in  every  free  people,  have  withdrawn, 
through  conventions  of  their  people,  from 
the  United  States,  reassumed  the  attributes 
of  sovereign  power,  and  formed  a  govern- 
ment of  their  own,  and  that  those  Confeder- 
ate States  now  constitute  an  independent 
nation  de  facto  and  de  jure,  and  possess  a 
government  perfect  m  all  its  parts  and  fully 
endowed  with  all  the  means  of  self-support. 

"Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford,  in  their 
aforesaid  communication,  thereupon  proceed- 
ed to  inform  that,  with  a  view  to  a  speedy  ad- 
justment of  all  questions  growing  out  of  the 
political  separation  thus  assumed,  upon  such 
terms  of  amity  and  good-will  as  the  respec- 
tive interests,  geographical  contiguity,  and 
the  future  wTelfare  of  the  supposed  two  na- 
tions might  render  necessary,  they  are  in- 
structed to  make  to  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  overtures  for  the  opening  of 
negotiations,  assuring  this  Government  that 
the  President,  Congress,  and  people  of  the 
Confederate  States  earnestly  desire  a  peace- 
ful solution  of  these  great  questions,  and 
that  it  is  neither  their  interest  nor  their 
wish  to  make  any  demand  which  is  not 
founded  in  strictest  justice,  nor  do  any  act 
to  injure  their  late  confederates. 

"After  making  these  statements,  Messrs. 
Forsyth  and  Crawford  close  their  communi- 
cation, as  they  say,  in  obedience  to  the  in- 
structions of  their  Government,  by  request- 
ing the  Secretary  of  State  to  appoint  as  early 
a  day  as  possible,  in  order  that  they  may 
present  to  the  President  of  the  United  States 
the  credentials  which  they  bear  and  the  ob- 
jects of  the  mission  with  which  they  are 
charged. 

"  The  Secretary  of  State  frankly  confesses 
that  he  understands  the  events  which  have 
recently  occurred,  and  the  condition  of  po- 
litical affairs  which  actually  exists  in  the 
part  of  the  Union  to  which  his  attention 
has  thus  been  directed,  very  differently  from 
the  aspect  in  which  they  are  presented  by 
Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford.  He  sees  in 
them,  not  a  rightful  and  accomplished  revo- 
lution and  an  independent  nation,  with  an 
established  government,  but  rather  a  perver- 
sion of  a  temporary  and  partisan  excitement 
to  the  inconsiderate  purposes  of  an  unjustifi- 
able and  unconstitutional  aggression  upon 
the  rights  and  the  authority  vested  in  the 
Federal  Government,  and  hitherto  benignly 
exercised,  as  from  their  very  nature  they 
always  must  be  exercised,  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  Union  and  the  preservation 
of  liberty,  and  the  security,  peace,  wel- 
fare, happiness,  and  aggrandizement  of  the 
American  People.    The  Secretary  of  State 


therefore  avowTs  to  Messrs.  Forsyth  and 
Crawford  that  he  looks  patiently  but  confi- 
dently for  the  cure  of  evils  which  have 
resulted  from  proceedings  so  unnecessary, 
so  unwise,  so  unusual,  and  so  unnatural,  not 
to  irregular  negotiations,  having  in  view  new 
and  untried  relations  with  agencies  unknown 
to  and  acting  in  derogation  of  the  Constitu- 
tion and  laws,  but  to  regular  and  consider- 
ate action  of  the  people  of  those  States,  in 
cooperation  with  their  brethren  in  the  other 
States,  through  the  Congress  of  the  United 
States,  and  such  extraordinary  Conventions, 
if  there  be  any  need  thereof,  as  the  Federal 
Constitution  contemplates  and  authorizes  to 
be  assembled. 

"It  is,  however,  the  purpose  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  State  not  to  engage  in  any  discussion 
of  these  subjects,  but  simply  to  set  forth  his 
reasons  for  declining  to  comply  with  the  re- 
quest of  Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford. 

"  On  the  4th  of  March  inst.,  the  newly 
elected  President  of  the  United  States,  in 
view  of  all  the  facts  bearing  upon  the  pres- 
ent question,  assumed  the  executive  Ad- 
ministration of  the  Government,  first  deliv- 
ering, in  accordance  with  an  early,  honored 
custom,  an  Inaugural  Address  to  the  people 
of  the  United  States.  The  Secretary  of 
State  respectfully  submits  a  copy  of  this 
address  to  Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford. 

"  A  simple  reference  will  be  sufficient  to 
satisfy  those  gentlemen  that  the  Secretary 
of  State,  guided  by  the  principles  therein 
announced,  is  prevented  altogether  from 
admitting  or  assuming  that  the  States  re- 
ferred to  by  them  have,  in  law  or  in  fact, 
withdrawn  from  the  Federal  Union,  or  that 
they  could  do  so  in  the  manner  described  by 
Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford,  or  in  any 
other  manner  than  writh  the  consent  and 
concert  of  the  people  of  the  United  States, 
to  be  given  through  a  National  Convention, 
to  be  assembled  in  conformity  with  the  pro- 
visions of  the  Constitution  of  the  United 
States.  Of  course,  the  Secretary  of  State 
cannot  act  upon  the  assumption,  or  in  any 
way  admit,  that  the  so  called  Confederate 
States  constitute  a  foreign  Power,  with 
whom  diplomatic  relations  ought  to  be  estab- 
lished. 

"  Under  these  circumstances,  the  Secretary 
of  State,  whose  official  duties  are  confined, 
subject  to  the  direction  of  the  President,  to 
the  conducting  of  the  foreign  relations  of 
the  country,  and  do  not  at  all  embrace  do- 
mestic questions,  or  questions  arising  be- 
tween the  several  States  and  the  Federal 
Government,  is  unable  to.  comply  with  the 
request  of  Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford,  to 
appoint  a  day  on  which  they  may  present 
the  evidences  of  their  authority  and  the  ob- 
jects of  their  visit  to  the  President  of  the 
United  States.    On  the  contrary,  he  is  ob- 


432  THE  AMERICA 

liged  to  state  to  Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Craw- 
ford that  he  lias  no  authority,  nor  is  he  at 
liberty,  to  recognize  them  as  diplomatic 
agents,  or  hold  correspondence  or  other 
communication  with  them. 

"Finally,  the  Secretary  of  State  would 
observe  that,  although  he  has  supposed  that 
he  might  safely  and  with  propriety  have 
adopted  these  conclusions  without  making 
any  reference  of  the  subject  to  the  Execu- 
tive, yet,  so  strong  has  been  his  desire  to 
practice  entire  directness,  and  to  act  in  a 
spirit  of  perfect  respect  and  candor  toward 
Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford,  and  that  por- 
tion of  the  Union  in  whose  name  they  present 
themselves  before  him,  that  he  has  cheer- 
fully submitted  this  paper  to  the  President, 
who  coincides  generally  in  the  views  it  ex- 
presses, and  sanctions  the  Secretary's  decis- 
ion declining  official  intercourse  with  Messrs. 
Forsyth  and  Crawford." 

These  memorable  papers  are  too 
lucid  to  require  or  justify  extended 
comment.  The  Commissioners,  it 
will  be  seen,  place  the  alleged  Seces- 
sion of  the  Cotton  States  expressly 
and  exclusively  on  the  true  and  pro- 
per ground — "  the  inherent  right  of 
every  free  people  to  change  or  reform 
their  political  institutions" — in  other 
words,  the  Eight  of  Revolution — 
thus  precluding  all  discussion  as  to 
the  pretended  constitutional  right, 
or  reservation  of  right,  to  secede  at 
will  from  the  Union.  But  this  posi- 
tion, however  wisely  and  honorably 
taken,  does  not  at  all  preclude  the 
question  which  Mr.  Lincoln  was 
bound  to  ask,  and,  in  some  way,  to 
answer — "What  right  have  7,  the 
fairly  chosen  Chief  Magistrate  of  the 
Union — chosen,  too,  at  an  election 
wherein  the  seven  States  now  alleged 
to  have  seceded  fully  participated — 
to  recognize  those  States  as  a  foreign 
nation,  as  independent  of  the  remain- 
ing States  as  Russia  or  Peru  ?  How 
will  such  recognition,  and  the  action 
necessarily  consequent  thereon,  accord 
with  my  solemn  oath  of  office,  and  the 
weighty  obligations  it  imposes  \  How 


N  CONFLICT. 

with  my  duty  to  those  loyal  citizens 
of  the  United  States  who  are  also 
citizens  or  residents  of  the  States 
which  acknowledge  Mr.  Jefferson 
Davis  as  their  political  Chief?"  To 
these  questions,  inevitably  presenting 
themselves  to  every  intelligent  mind, 
Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford  indi- 
cate no  reply  whatever.  They  re- 
presented a  power  which  had  de- 
clined cooperation  with  even  a  ma- 
jority of  the  Slave  States — which  had 
not  even  considered  the  propriety  of 
calling  a  National  Convention — and 
which  now  proffered  to  the  Union 
no  compromise,  no  middle  ground, 
but  the  naked  alternative  of '  Surren- 
der or  fight !' 

Gov.  Seward's  reply,  though  pacific 
in  temper,  and  evidently  animated  by 
a  hope  that  hostilities  may  yet  be 
avoided,  is  eminently  frank  and  ex- 
plicit. That  the  Executive  could  rec- 
ognize Messrs.  Forsyth  and  Crawford 
only  as  citizens  of  the  United  States, 
not  as  plenipotentiaries  of  an  inde- 
pendent and  foreign  power — that  the 
alleged  secession  and  confederation  of 
the  seven  States  in  question  was  not, 
and  could  not  be,  recognized  by  the 
Government  as  valid;  their  seces- 
sion being  impliedly,  and  their  con- 
federation expressly,  forbidden  by 
the  Federal  Constitution — that  there 
could  be  no  secession  save  through 
the  agency  of  a  National  Convention, 
which  those  States  had  declined  to 
invoke,  and  were  now  unwilling  to 
submit  to — that  their  alleged  griev- 
ances could  be  redressed  only  through 
such  Convention,  or  by  the  Congress 
of  the  United  States,  wherein  the  right 
of  those  States  to  an  equal  representa- 
tion had  been,  and  still  was,  unques- 
tioned— and  that  the  President  had 
been  consulted  respecting,  and  fully 


JUDGE    CAMPBELL    TO    GOV.  SEWARD. 


433 


concurred  in,  these  views  of  his  Sec- 
retary of  State  —  so  much  seems 
plainly  set  forth  in  this  '  memoran- 
dum,' with  all  the  perspicuity  which 
can  be  attained  through  the  employ- 
ment of  our  mother  tongue.  How  is 
it  possible,  then,  that  complaint  should 
nevertheless  be  made  that  the  Con- 
federates were  deluded  by  Gov.  Sew- 
ard into  anticipations  of  an  early  and 
easy  concession  of  their  independ- 
ence? 

Yet  that  charge  is  made ;  and, 
since  it  rests  wholly  on  the  testimony 
of  a  Confederate  who  once  held,  and 
had  not  then  resigned,  the  exalted 
position  of  a  Justice  of  the  United 
States  Supreme  Court,  it  may  be  well 
to  consider  it  fully.  The  testimony 
is  that  of  Judge  Campbell  aforesaid,  (a 
prominent  disciple  of  Mr.  Calhoun), 
who,  about  the  time  of  his  taking 
final  leave  of  Washington  to  enter 
more  openly  into  the  service  of  the 
Confederacy,  wrote  to  Gov.  Seward 
as  follows : 

""Washington  City,  ) 
"Satttkday,  April  13,  1861.  \ 
"Sir:— On  the  15th  March  ult.,  I  left 
with  Judge  Crawford,  one  of  the  Commis- 
sioners of  the  Confederate  States,  a  note  in 
writing  to  the  following  effect  : 

'I  feel  entire  confidence  that  Fort  Sumter  will  be  evac- 
uated in  the  next  ten  days.  And  this  measure  is  felt  as 
imposing  great  responsibility  on  the  Administration. 

'  I  feel  an  entire  confidence  that  no  measure  changing 
the  existing  status,  prejudicious  to  the  Southern  Confed- 
erate States,  is  at  present  contemplated. 

'I  feel  an  entire  confidence  that  an  immediate  demand 
for  an  answer  to  the  communication  of  the  Commission- 
ers will  be  productive  of  evil,  and  not  of  good.  I  do  not 
believe  that  it  ought,  at  this  time,  to  be  pressed.' 

"  The  substance  of  this  statement  I  com- 
municated to  you  the  same  evening  by  let- 
ter. Five  days  elapsed,  and  I  called  with  a 
telegram  from  Gen.  Beauregard,  to  the  effect 
that  Sumter  was  not  evacuated,  but  that 
Maj.  Anderson  was  at  work  making  repairs. 

"The  next  day,  after  conversing  with  you, 
I  communicated  to  Judge  Crawford,  in  wri- 
ting, that  the  failure  to  evacuate  Sumter 
was  not  the  result  of  bad  faith,  but  was 
attributable  to  causes  consistent  with  the 
intention  to  fulfill  the  engagement;  and  that, 
as  regarded  Pickens,  I  should  have  notice  of 
any  design  to  alter  the  existing  status  there. 
28 


Mr.  Justice  Nelson  was  present  at  these  con- 
versations, three  in  number,  and  I  submitted 
to  him  each  of  my  communications  to  Judge 
Crawford,  and  informed  Judge  C.  that  they 
had  his  (Judge  Nelson's)  sanction.  I  gave 
you,  on  the  22d  March,  a  substantial  copy  of 
the  statement  I  had  made  on  the  15th. 

"  The  30th  of  March  arrived,  and  at  that 
time  a  telegram  came  from  Gov.  Pickens,  in- 
quiring concerning  Col.  Lamon,  whose  visit 
to  Charleston,  he  supposed,  had  a  connection 
with  the  proposed  evacuation  of  Port  Sum- 
ter. 

"I  left  that  with  you,  and  was  to  have  an 
answer  the  following  Monday  (1st  April). 
On  the  first  of  April,  I  received  from  you  a 
statement,  in  writing,  'I  am  satisfied  the 
Government  will  not  undertake  to  supply 
Port  Sumtef  without  giving  notice  to  Gov. 
Pickens.'  The  words  '  I  am  satisfied'  were 
for  me  to  use  as  expressive  of  confidence  in 
the  remainder  of  the  declaration. 

"The  proposition,  as  originally  prepared, 
was,  'The  President  may  desire  to  supply 
Sumter,  but  will  not  do  so,'  etc.,  and  your 
verbal  explanation  was  that  you  did  not  be- 
lieve any  such  attempt  would  be  made,  and 
that  there  was  no  design  to  reenforce  Sumter. 

"There  was  a  departure  here  from  the 
pledges  of  the  previous  month  ;  but,  with  the 
verbal  explanation,  I  did  not  consider  it  a 
matter  then  to  complain  of — I  simply  stated 
to  you  that  I  had  that  assurance  previously. 

"On  the  7th  April,  I  addressed  you  a  let- 
ter on  the  subject  of  the  alarm  that  the  prep- 
arations by  the  Government  had  created,  and 
asked  you  if  the  assurances  I  had  given  were 
well  or  ill  founded.  In  respect  to  Sumter, 
your  reply  was,  '  Paith  as  to  Sumter  fully 
kept — wait  and  see.'  In  the  morning's  pa- 
per, I  read,  '  An  authorized  messenger  from 
President  Lincoln  informed  Gov.  Pickens 
and  Gen.  Beauregard  that  provisions  would 
be  sent  to  Port  Sumter  peaceably,  or  other- 
wise by  force? 

"  This  was  the  8th  of  April,  at  Charles- 
ton, the  day  following  your  last  assurance, 
and  is  the  evidence  of  the  full  faith  I  was  in- 
vited to  wait  for  and  see.  In  the  same  paper, 
I  read  that  intercepted  dispatches  disclose 
the  fact  that  Mr.  Fox,  who  had  been  allowed 
to  visit  Maj.  Anderson,  on  the  pledge  that 
his  purpose  was  pacific,  employed  his  oppor- 
tunity to  devise  a  plan  for  supplying  the  fort 
by  force,  and  that  this  plan  had  been  adopt- 
ed by  the  "Washington  Government,  and  was 
in  process  of  execution. 

"  My  recollection  of  the  date  of  Mr.  Fox's 
visit  carries  it  to  a  day  in  March.  I  learn 
he  is  a  near  connection  of  a  member  of  the 
Cabinet. 

"My  connection  with  the  commissioners 
and  yourself  was  superinduced  by  a  conver- 
sation with  Justice  Nelson.    He  informed 


434  THE  AMERICA 

me  of  your  strong  disposition  in  favor  of 
peace,  and  that  you  were  oppressed  with  a 
demand  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  Confed- 
erate States  for  a  reply  to  their  first  letter, 
and  that  you  desired  to  avoid,  if  possible,  at 
that  time.  I  told  him  I  might,  perhaps,  be 
of  some  service  in  arranging  the  difficulty. 
1  came  to  your  office  entirely  at  his  request, 
and  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Commis- 
sioners. Your  depression  was  obvious  to 
both  Judge  Nelson  and  myself.  I  was  grati- 
fied at  the  character  of  the  counsels  you 
were  desirous  of  pursuing,  and  much  im- 
pressed with  your  observation  that  a  civil 
war  might  be  prevented  by  the  success  of 
my  mediation.  You  read  a  letter  of  Mr. 
"Weed,  to  show  how  irksome  and  responsible 
the  withdrawal  of  troops  from  Sumter  was. 
A  portion  of  my  communication  to  Judge 
Crawford  on  the  loth  of  March  was  founded 
upon  these  remarks,  and  the  pledge  to  evac- 
uate Sumter  is  less  forcible  than  the  words 
you  employed.  Those  words  were,  1  Before 
this  letter  reaches  you  [a  proposed  letter  by 
me  to  President  Davis],  Sumter  will  have 
been  evacuated.' 

M  The  Commissioners  who  received  those 
communications  conclude  they  have  been 
abused  and  overreached.  The  Montgomery 
Government  hold  the  same  opinion.  The 
Commissioners  have  supposed  that  my 
communications  were  with  you,  and,  upon 
that  hypothesis,  prepared  to  arraign  you  be- 
fore the  country  in  connection  with  the 
President.  I  placed  a  peremptory  prohibi- 
tion upon  this,  as  being  contrary  to  the  terms 
of  my  communications  with  them.  I  pledged 
myself  to  them  to  communicate  information 
upon  what  I  considered  as  the  best  authori- 
ty, and  they  were  to  confide  in  the  ability 
of  myself,  aided  by  Judge  Nelson,  to  deter- 
mine upon  the  credibility  of  my  informant. 

"I  think  no  candid  man  who  will  read 
over  what  I  have  written,  and  consider  for 
a  moment  what  is  going  on  at  Sumter,  will 
agree  that  the  equivocating  conduct  of  the 
Administration,  as  measured  and  interpreted 
in  connection  with  these  promises,  is  the 
proximate  cause  of  the  great  calamity. 

u  I  have  a  profound  conviction  that  the 
telegrams  of  the  8th  of  April,  of  Gen.  Beau- 
regard, and  of  the  10th  of  April,  of  Gen. 
Walker,  the  Secretary  of  War,  can  be  re- 
ferred to  nothing  else  than  their  belief  that 
there  has  been  systematic  duplicity  practiced 
upon  them  throughout.  It  is  under  an  op- 
pressive sense  of  the  weight  of  this  respon- 
sibility that  I  submit  to  you  these  things  for 
your  explanation. 

"Very  respectfully, 

"John  A.  Campbell, 
11  Associate  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court. 
"  Hon.  Wm.  H.  Sewaed, 

"Secretary  of  State." 


N  CONFLICT. 

Judge  Campbell,  it  will  be  noted, 
takes  up  the  thread  of  the  furtive 
negotiations  exactly  where  the  Com- 
missioners had  dropped  it.  They 
had  made  their  demand  on  the  12th  ; 
had  been  answered  by  Gov.  Seward 
on  the  15th ;  but  the  answer  with- 
held ;  for  on  this  day  Judge  C.  makes 
his  first  appearance  on  the  scene, 
with  an  assurance  to  the  Commis- 
sioners that  he  felt  "  entire  confi- 
dence that  Fort  Sumter  would  be 
evacuated  within  the  next  ten  days," 
if  the  Commissioners  would  not  push 
matters  too  hurriedly  to  a  crisis.  Still 
later,  he  gave  these  Commissioners  as- 
surances that  no  attempt  would  be 
made  to  supply  the  closely  invest- 
ed and  scantily  provisioned  garrison 
of  Fort  Sumter,  until  due  notice  of 
the  intent  had  been  given  to  Gov. 
Pickens ;  which  promise  was  fulfilled 
to  the  letter. 

Judge  Campbell  quotes  Justice  Nel- 
son as  testifying  to  Gov.  Seward's 
"  strong  disposition  in  favor  of 
peace."  Who  ever  denied  or  doubt- 
ed it  ?  But  did  he  ever  avow  an  in- 
clination to  Peace  on  the  basis  of 
Disunion  f  That  is  the  vital  point ; 
and  it  is  not  covered,  even  by  as- 
sertions, on  the  part  of  the  Confed- 
erates. That  he  clung  tenaciously 
to  the  hope  of  some  '  adjustment'  or 
£  conciliation,'  whereby  civil  war  might 
be  averted,  and  the  just  authority  of 
the  Federal  Government  acknowl- 
edged and  respected  by  the  Confed- 
erate States,  is  manifest;  and  that 
is  the  whole  truth,  and  affords  a  sim- 
ple and  obvious  explanation  of  what 
seems  to  Confederates  so  mysterious, 
so  crafty,  or  so  atrocious.  The  mani- 
fest, controlling  fact  is,  that  the  par- 
ties to  this  unique  correspondence 
occupied  positions  so  contrasted,  so 


THE   CONFEDERATE   ENVOYS   TO   GOT.  SEWARD. 


435 


incompatible,  that  it  was  scarcely 
possible  that  they  should  seriously 
engage  in  a  negotiation,  much  less 
bring  it  to  a  happy  issue.  It  was 
much  as  if  a  plenipotentiary  should 
address  the  government  to  which  he 
was  accredited  in  Greek,  knowing  no 
other  tongue,  and  his  dispatch  be 
received  and  answered  by  one  who 
was  equally  ignorant  of  any  language 
but  Choctaw.  The  only  possible  re- 
sult of  such  diplomacy  is  a  postpone- 
ment of  hostilities ;  and  that  seems, 
in  this  case,  to  have  been  achieved : 
for  the  Confederate  envoys,  in  sha- 
king from  their  feet  the  dust  of 
Washington  and  returning  to  their 
own  6  nation,'  addressed,  on  the  9th 
of  April,  a  vituperative  letter  to  Gov. 
Seward,  whereof  all  that  is  not  mere 
rhetoric,  of  a  peculiarly  Southern 
stamp,  or  has  not  already  been  here- 
in stated,  is  as  follows : 

"  The  undersigned  clearly  understand  that 
you  have  declined  to  appoint  a  day  to  ena- 
ble them  to  lay  the  objects  of  the  mis- 
sion with  which  they  are  charged  before  the 
President  of  the  United  States,  because  so 
to  do  would  be  to  recognize  the  indepen- 
dence and  separate  nationality  of  the  Con- 
federate States.  This  is  the  vein  of  thought 
that  pervades  the  memorandum  before  us. 
The  truth  of  history  requires  that  it  should 
distinctly  appear  upon  the  record  that  the 
undersigned  did  not  ash  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  to  recognize  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  Confederate  States.  They  only 
asked  an  audience  to  adjust,  in  a  spirit  of 
amity  and  peace,  the  new  relations  springing 
from  a  manifest  and  accomplished  revolution 
in  the  government  of  the  late  Federal  Union. 
Your  refusal  to  entertain  these  overtures  for 
a  peaceful  solution,  the  active  naval  and  mili- 
tary preparations  of  this  Government,  and  a 
formal  notice  to  the  commanding  general 
of  the  Confederate  forces  in  the  harbor  of 
Charleston  that  the  President  intends  to  pro- 
vision Fort  Sumter,  by  forcible  means,  if  ne- 
cessary, are  viewed  by  the  undersigned,  and 
can  only  be  received  by  the  world,  as  a  dec- 
laration of  war  against  the  Confederate 
States;  for  the  President  of  the  United 
States  knows  that  Fort  Sumter  cannot  be 
provisioned  without  the  effusion  of  blood. 


The  undersigned,  in  behalf  of  their  Govern- 
ment and  people,  accept  the  gage  of  battle 
thus  thrown  down  to  them ;  and,  appealing 
to  God  and  the  judgment  of  mankind  for  the 
righteousness  of  their  cause,  the  people  of 
the  Confederate  States  will  defend  their  lib- 
erties to  the  last  against  this  flagrant  and 
open  attempt  at  their  subjugation  to  sec- 
tional power." 

As  the  world  has  not  been  grati- 
fied with  a  sight  of  the  credentials 
and  instructions  of  these  gentlemen, 
it  may  be  discourteous  to  assume 
that  their  eagerness  to  "accept  the 
gage  of  battle"  carried  them  beyond 
the  strict  limits  of  their  powers  and 
duties ;  but  the  subtile  casuistry 
which  enabled  them  to  discriminate 
between  a  recognition  of  Confederate 
independence  and  an  "audience  to 
adjust  the  new  relations  springing 
from  a  manifest  and  accomplished 
revolution,"  might  have  secured  to 
them  fame  and  fortune  in  some  more 
poetic  and  imaginative  vocation. 

As  the  Commissioners  seem  to  ap- 
prehend that  they  would  be  charged 
with  a  lack  of  energy  if  it  should  be 
understood  that  they  had  allowed  the 
Government  of  the  United  States 
nearly  four  weeks  wherein  to  decide 
between  recognizing  —  or,  if  they 
choose,  admitting  and  acting  upon — 
the  independence  of  the  Confederate 
States,  and  an  acceptance  of  the 
"  gage  of  battle,"  it  may  be  requisite 
to  give  one  more  extract  from  their 
valedictory,  as  follows : 

"  This  delay  was  assented  to  for  the  ex- 
press purpose  of  attaining  the  great  end  of 
the  mission  of  the  undersigned,  to  wit :  a 
pacific  solution  of  existing  complications. 
The  inference,  deducible  from  the  date  of 
your  memorandum,  that  the  undersigned 
had,  of  their  own  volition  and  without 
cause,  consented  to  this  long  hiatus  in  the 
grave  duties  with  which  they  were  charged, 
is  therefore  not  consistent  with  a  just  expo- 
sition of  the  facts  of  the  case.  The  inter- 
vening twenty-three  days  were  employed 
in  active  unofficial  efforts,  the  object  of 


436 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


which  was  to  smooth  the  path  to  a  pacific 
solution,  the  distinguished  personage  alluded 
to  [Judge  Campbell]  cooperating  with  the 
undersigned ;  and  every  step  of  that  effort 
is  recorded  in  writing,  and  now  in  possession 
of  the  undersigned  and  of  their  Government. 
It  was  only  when  all  these  anxious  efforts 
for  peace  had  been  exhausted,  and  it  became 
clear  that  Mr.  Lincoln  had  determined  to 
appeal  to  the  sword  to  reduce  the  people  of 
the  Confederate  States  to  the  will  of  the 
section  or  party  whose  President  he  is,  that 
the  undersigned  resumed  the  official  nego- 
tiation temporarily  suspended,  and  sent 
their  secretary  for  a  reply  to  their  note  of 
March  12th."* 

But  that  the  Confederacy  was  al- 
lowed, in  no  respect,  to  suffer  by  this 
brief  breathing-spell  mistakenly  ac- 
corded by  her  plenipotentiaries  to 
the  Union — that  the  4  peace'  which 
we  enjoyed  was  of  an  equivocal  and 
one-sided  character — will  appear,  not 
only  from  the  close  investment  of 
menaced  Fort  Sumter — with  which 
no  one  was  allowed  to  communicate, 
save  by  Gov.  Pickens's  gracious  per- 
mission— but  by  the  active,  aggressive 
hostility  to  Federal  authority  mani- 
fested throughout  the  South,as  evinced 
in  the  following  order : 

■  Head-Quarters  troops  Contederate  States,  ) 
Near  Pensacola,  Fla.,  March  18,  1S61.  f 

"The  Commanding  General  learns  with 
surprise  and  regret  that  some  of  our  citizens 
are  engaged  in  the  business  of  furnishing 
supplies  of  fuel,  water,  and  provisions,  to 
the  armed  vessels  of  the  United  States  now 
occupying  a  threatening  appearance  off  this 
harbor. 

"That  no  misunderstanding  may  exist 
upon  this  subject,  it  is  announced  to  all  con- 
cerned that  this  traffic  is  strictly  forbidden  ; 
and  all  such  supplies  which  may  be  captured 
in  transit  to  said  vessels,  or  to  Fort  Pickens, 
will  be  confiscated. 

"The  more  effectually  to  enforce  this  pro- 
hibition, no  boat  or  vessel  will  be  allowed 
to  visit  Fort  Pickens,  or  any  of  the  United 
States  naval  vessels,  without  special  sanction. 

"  Col.  John  H.  Forney,  Acting  Inspector- 
General,  will  organize  an  efficient  Harbor 
Police  for  the  enforcement  of  this  order. 

"  By  command  of  Brigadier  General 

"Braxton  Bragg. 
"Robert  C.  Wood,  Jr.,  Ass't.  Ad/ 1.- Gen." 


And,  all  through  the  seceded 
States,  those  Unionists  who  dared  to 
indicate  their  devotion  to  the  flag  of 
their  fathers  were  being  treated  with 
a  still  more  active  and  positive  illus- 
tration of  Confederate  amity  than 
was  accorded  to  the  garrison  of  Sum- 
ter and  the  fleet  off  Pensacola. 

Whether  President  Lincoln  did  or 
did  not,  for  some  days  after  his  inau- 
guration, incline  to  the  withdrawal 
of  Major  Anderson  and  his  brave 
handful  from  closely  beleaguered 
Sumter,  is  not  certain.  It  is  certain 
that  great  doubt  and  anxiety  on  this 
point  pervaded  the  country.  Some 
of  the  newspaper  correspondents  at 
Washington,  who  were  very  properly 
and  keenly  on  the  watch  for  the  least 
indication  of  the  Presidential  pur- 
pose, telegraphed,  quite  confidently, 
on  the  14th,  that  Sumter  was  to  be 
peaceably  evacuated ;  that  Gen.  Scott 
had  given  his  opinion  that  this  was  a 
military  necessity ;  that  the  fortress 
was  so  surrounded  and  enveloped 
by  Confederate  forts  and  batteries 
that  it  co  aid  not  now  be  reenforced, 
nor  even  provisioned,  save  at  an 
enormous  and  unjustifiable  cost  of 
human  blood ;  so  that  there  was  no 
practical  alternative  to  its  abandon- 
ment. 

The  new  Senate,  which  had  been 
convened  for  the  4th  by  President 
Buchanan  to  act  upon  the  nomina- 
tions of  his  successor,  remained  sit- 
ting in  Extra  Session  until  the  28th  ; 
and  its  Democratic  members — now 
reduced  by  Secession  and  by  changes 
to  a  decided  minority — urgently  and 
pertinaciously  demanded  from  the 
majority  some  declaration  of  the  Pre- 
sident's purpose.  u  Are  we  to  have 
coercion  and  civil  war,  or  concession 
and  peace  V  was  the  burden  of  their 


SENATOR   DOUGLAS   AGAINST    'COERCION.'  437 


inquiries.  Messrs.  T.  L.  Clingman,7  of 
North  Carolina,  Bayard,  of  Delaware, 
and  Breckinridge,8  of  Kentucky,  who 
were  all  three  close  allies  in  the  past 
of  the  Confederate  chiefs,  and  two 
of  them,  since,  open  participants  in 
the  Rebellion,  were  prominent  and 
pertinacious  in  pushing  these  inqui- 
ries ;  but  Mr.  Douglas,  of  Illinois, 
united  in  them,  talking  as  if  the  Pre- 
sident were  at  perfect  liberty  to  en- 
force the  laws  or  not,  at  his  discre- 
tion, and  as  if  his  attempting  to  do  it 
would  render  him  responsible  for 
lighting  the  flames  of  civil  war.  He 
distinctly  advocated  the  surrender  of 
the  Southern  fortresses ;  saying  : 

"  We  certainly  canirot  justify  the  holding 
of  forts  there,  much  less  the  recapturing  of 
those  which  have  been  taken,  unless  we  in- 
tend to  reduce  those  States  themselves  into 
subjection.  *  *  *  We  cannot  deny  that  there 
is  a  Southern  Confederacy,  de  facto,  in  ex- 
istence, with  its  capital  at  Montgomery. 
We  may  regret  it.  /  regret  it  most  pro- 
foundly ;  but  I  cannot  deny  the  truth  of  the 
fact,  painful  and  mortifying  as  it  is." 

No  Democrat  in  the  Senate,  and 
no  organ  of  Democratic  opinion  out 
of  the  Senate,  proffered  an  assurance 
or  an  exhortation  to  the  President, 
tending  to  encourage  and  support 
him  in  upholding  the  integrity  and 
enforcing  the  laws  of  the  Union  •  and 
not  Democrats  only,  but  those  who, 
in  the  late  Presidential  contest,  had 

7  Mr.  Clingman  offered  the  following  resolu- 
tion: 

"Resolved,  That,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Senate, 
it  is  expedient  that  the  President  withdraw  all 
Federal  troops  from  the  States  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi,  Texas, 
and  Louisiana,  and  abstain  from  all  attempts  to 
collect  revenue  in  these  States." 

8  Mr.  Breckinridge  finally  offered  the  follow- 
ing resolution  ;  action  on  which — together  with 
that  of  Mr.  Clingman — was  precluded  by  the 
adjournment  of  the  Senate : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Senate  recommend  and 
advise  the  removal  of  the  United  States  troops 
from  the  limits  of  the  Confederate  States." 


made  "  the  Union,  the  Constitution, 
and  the  enforcement  of  the  laws," 
their  platform  and  their  battle-cry, 
now  spoke  and  acted  precisely  as 
would  a  community  who,  seeing  their 
sheriff  set  forth  to  serve  a  precept 
upon  a  band  of  desperate  law-break- 
ers, were  to  ask  him  why  he  did  not 
desist  from  his  aggressive  project, 
and  join  them  in  preserving  the 
peace.  The  Republicans  of  the  Sen- 
ate were  either  unable  or  unwilling 
to  shed  any  additional  light  on  the 
purposes  of  the  Executive — the  reso- 
lution in  regard  to  them,  offered  by 
Mr.  Douglas,  being  laid  on  the  table 
by  a  party  vote :  Yeas  23  ;  Nays  11. 
But,  before  the  Senate  adjourned,  it 
was  very  generally  understood — cer- 
tainly among  Republicans — that  the 
Southern  forts  were  not  to  be  surren- 
dered, and  that  the  Union  was  to  be 
maintained. 

The  month  of  March  had  nearly 
worn  away  prior  to  any  outward 
manifestations,  by  the  6  new  lords'  at 
Washington,  of  a  firm  resolve  to  dis- 
card the  policy  of  indecision  and  in- 
action whereby  their  predecessors  had 
permitted  the  Republic's  strongholds, 
arms,  munitions,  and  treasure,  to  be 
seized  and  turned  against  her  by  the 
plotters  of  Disunion.9  So  late  as  the 
21st  of  that  month,  the  astute  and 

9  The  New  Orleans  Bee,  one  of  the  most  res- 
pectable of  Southern  journals,  in  its  issue  of 
March  10th,  thus  expressed  the  universal  con- 
viction of  the  Southrons  that  no  fight  could  be 
educed  from  the  North  : 

"The  Black  Republicans  are  a  cowardly  set, 
after  all.  They  have  not  the  courage  of  their 
own  convictions.  They  tamper  with  their  princi- 
ples. Loathing  Slavery,  they  are  willing  to  incur 
almost  any  sacrifice  rather  than  surrender  the 
Border  States.  Appearances  indicate  their  dis- 
position even  to  forego  the  exquisite  delight  of 
sending  armies  antf  fleets  to  make  war  on  the 
Confederate  States,  rather  than  run  the  risk  of 
forfeiting  the  allegiance  of  the  frontier  Slave 
States.    We  see  by  this  how  hollow  and  perfidi- 


438 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


rarely  over-sanguine  Yice-President 
Stephens 10  congratulated  his  hearers 
that  their  revolution  had  thus  -far 
been  accomplished  without  shedding 
a  drop  of  blood — that  the  fear  of  deadly 
collision  with  the  Union  they  had 
renounced  was  nearly  dispelled — that 
the  Southern  Confederacy  had  now  a 
population  considerably  larger  than 
that  of  the  thirteen  United  Colonies 
that  won  their  independence  through 
a  seven  years'  struggle  with  Great 
Britain — that  its  area  was  not  only 
considerably  larger  than  that  of  the 
United  Colonies,  but  larger  than  that 
of  both  France  and  the  Austrian  Em- 
pire— larger  than  that  of  France, 
Spain,  Portugal,  and  the  British  Isles 
altogether.  He  estimated  the  prop- 
erty of  the  Confederate  States  as 
worth  Twenty-two  Thousand  Mil- 
lions of  Dollars  ;  while  the  last  Cen- 
sus makes  that  of  the  entire  Union 
but  Sixteen  Thousand  Millions — an 
understatement,  doubtless.  That  the 
remaining  Slave  States  would  break 
away  from  the  Union  and  join  the 
Confederacy  was  regarded  by  him  as 
a  matter  of  course.  "  They  will  ne- 
cessarily gravitate  to  us  by  an  impe- 
rious law."    As  to  such  others  as 


might  be  deemed  desirable  acquisi- 
tions, Mr.  Stephens  spoke  more 
guardedly,  yet  no  less  complacently, 
as  was  previously  seen.11 

This  was  by  no  means  idle  gas- 
conade or  vain-glorious  presumption. 
Throughout  the  Free  States,  eminent 
and  eager  advocates  of  adhesion  to  the 
new  Confederacy  by  those  States — 
or  so  many  of  them  as  might  hope  to 
find  acceptance — were  widely  heard 
and  heeded.  The  New  England13 
States  (except,  possibly,.  Connecti- 
cut), it  was  agreed,  need  indulge  no 
such  hope — their  sins  were  past  for- 
giveness, and  their  reprobation  eter- 
nal. So  with  the  more  'fanatical' 
States  of  the  North-West ;  so,  perhaps, 
with  Western  New  York  and  Northern 
Ohio.  The  remaining  States  and  parts 
of  States,  it  was  assumed,  might  easily 
and  wisely  fit  themselves  for  adhe- 
sion to,  and  acceptance  by,  the  South- 
ern Confederacy  by  expelling  or  sup- 
pressing all  'fanatics,'  and  adopting 
the  Montgomery  Constitution,  thus 
legalizing  slaveholding  as  well  as 
slavehunting  on  their  soil.  Among 
those  who  were  understood  to  urge 
such  adhesion  were  Gov.  Seymour, 
of  New  York,  Judge  Woodward  and 


ous  is  their  policy,  and  how  inconsistent  are 
their  acts  with  their  professions.  The  truth  is, 
they  abhor  Slavery;  but  they  are  fully  alive  to 
the  danger  of  losing  their  power  and  influence, 
should  they  drive  Virginia  and  the  other  Bor- 
der States  out  of  the  Union.  They  chafe,  doubt- 
less, at  the  hard  necessity  of  permitting  South 
Carolina  and  her  sisters  to  escape  from  their 
thraldom ;  but  it  is  a  necessity,  and  they  must, 
perforce,  submit  to  it." 

10  In  his  speech  at  Savannah,  already  quoted. 

11  See  pages  416-18. 

12  The  New  York  Merald  of  December  9,  1860, 
has  a  Washington  dispatch  of  the  8th  relative  to 
a  caucus  of  Southern  Senators  then  being  held 
at  the  Capitol,  which  said : 

"  The  current  of  opinion  seems  to  set  strongly 
in  favor  of  a  reconstruction  of  the  Union,  with- 
out the  New  England  States.    The  latter  States 


are  supposed  to  be  so  fanatical  in  their  views  as 
to  render  it  impossible  that  there  should  be  any 
peace  under  a  government  to  which  they  were 
parties." 

And  G-ov.  Letcher,  of  Virginia,  in  his  Message 
of  January  7,  1861,  after  suggesting  "that  a  com- 
mission, to  consist  of  two  of  our  most  intelligent, 
discreet,  and  experienced  statesmen,"  should  be 
appointed  to  visit  the  Legislatures  of  the  Free 
States,  to  urge  the  repeal  of  the  Personal 
Liberty  bills  which  had  been  passed,  said: 

"In  renewing  the  recommendation  at  this 
time,  I  annex  a  modification,  and  that  is,  that 
commissioners  shall  not  be  sent  to  either  of  the 
New  England  States.  The  occurrences  of  the 
last  two  months  have  satisfied  me  that  New 
England  Puritanism  has  no  respect  for  human 
constitutions,  and  so  little  regard  for  the  Union 
that  they  would  not  sacrifice  their  prejudices,  or 
smother"  their  resentments,  to  perpetuate  it." 


PROPOSED  PRO-SLAVE 


RY  'RECONSTRUCTION.' 


439 


Francis  W.  Hughes,13  of  Pennsylva- 
nia, Rodman  M.  Price,14  of  New  Jer- 
sey, etc.,  etc. 

Kindred  in  idea,  thongh  diverse  in 
its  mode  of  operations,  was  an  associa- 
tion organized  at  JSrew  York  during 
this  month,  naming  itself  the  "  Ameri- 
can Society  for  promoting  National 
Unity,"  whereof  Prof.  Samuel  F.  B. 
Morse  (of  telegraphic  fame  and  for- 
tune) was  made  President,  while  The 
Journal  of  Commerce  became  its  ac- 
credited organ.  The  cardinal  idea 
of  this  fraternity  was  the  restoration 
and  conservation  of  National  Unity 
through  the  conversion  of  all  dissi- 
dents to  the  faith  that  African  Sla- 
very is  ordained  by  God,  for  the  im- 

13  For  many  years,  Chairman  of  the  Democratic 
State  Committee. 

14  Formerly  Representative  in  Congress  from 
California;  since,  Democratic  Governor  of  New- 
Jersey.  Gov.  Price's  letter  to  L.  W.  Burnett,  Esq., 
of  Newark,  N.  J.,  appeared  in  The  Newark  Mer- 
cury of  April  4,  1861.    He  says: 

M  If  we  find  that  to  remain  with  the  North, 
separated  from  those  who  have,  heretofore,  con- 
sumed our  manufactures,  and  given  employment 
to  a  large  portion  of  our  labor,  deprived  of  that 
reciprocity  of  trade  which  wre  have  hitherto  en- 
joyed, our  Commerce  will  cease,  European  com- 
petition will  be  invited  to  Southern  markets,  our 
people  be  compelled  to  seek  employment  else- 
where, our  State  becoming  depopulated  and  im- 
poverished, thereby  affecting  our  agricultural 
interest,  which  has  not  yet  felt  the  crisis — com- 
merce and  manufactures  being  always  first  to 
feel  political  and  financial  embarrassments.  But 
at  last  the  blow  wrill  be  felt  by  all;  even  now, 
the  farmers'  products  are  at  ruinous  prices  at  the 
West.  These  are  the  prospective  results  of  re- 
maining with  the  present  Northern  confederacy. 
Whereas,  to  join  our  destiny  with  the  South  will 
be  to  continue  our  trade  and  intercourse,  our  pros- 
perity, progress,  and  happiness,  uninterrupted, 
and  perhaps  in  an  augmented  degree.  Who  is 
he  that  would  advise  New  Jersey  to  pursue  the 
path  of  desolation  when  one  of  prosperity  is  open 
before  her,  without  any  sacrifice  of  principle  or 
honor,  and  without  difficulty  or  danger ;  besides 
being  the  course  and  policy,  in  my  judgment, 
most  likely  to  reunite  all  the  States  under  the 
glorious  'Stars  and  Stripe3?' 

"The  action  of  our  State  will  prove  influen- 
tial and,  perhaps,  potential,  from  our  geograph- 
ical position,  upon  the  adjoining  great  States  of 
Pennsylvania  and  New  York;  and  I  am  confi- 
dent that  the  people  of  those  States,  whose  in- 


provement  and  blessing  of  both  the 
Whites  and  the  Blacks.  The  pro- 
gramme of  this  society  thus  illus- 
trates the  bland,  benignant  piety 
wherein  the  movement  was  ground- 
ed :— 

"  We  believe  that  the  time  has  come  when 
such  evil  teachings  [Abolitionism]  should  bo 
firmly  and  boldly  confronted,  not  by  the  an- 
tagonisms of  doubtful  and  perishable  wea- 
pons, but  by  '  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth 
and  abideth  for  ever,'  as  expounded  by  a 
broad  and  faithful  recognition  of  His  moral 
and  providential  government  over  the  world. 
It  is  with  this  view  that  we  propose  an  or- 
ganized effort,"  etc.,  etc. 

"Our  attention  will  not  be  confined  to 
Slavery;  but  this  will  be,  at  present,  our 
main  topic.  Four  millions  of  immortal  be- 
ings, incapable  of  self-care,  and  indisposed 
to  industry  and  foresight,  are  providentially 
committed  to  the  hands  of  our  Southern 


terests  are  identical  with  our  own  to  a  consid- 
erable degree,  will,  when  they  elect,  choose  also 
to  cast  their  lot  with  the  South.  And,  after 
them,  the  Western  and  North-Western  States 
will  be  found  in  the  same  balance,  which 
would  be,  essentially,  a  reconstruction  of  the  old 
Government.  What  is  the  difference  whether 
we  go  to  the  South,  or  they  come  to  us?  I 
would  rather  be  the  magnanimous  brother  or 
friend,  to  hold  out  the  hand  of  reconciliation, 
than  he  who,  as  magnanimously,  receives  the 
proffer. 

"It  takes  little  discernment  to  see  that  one 
policy  will  enrich  us,  and  the  other  impoverish 
us.  Knowing  our  rights  and  interests,  we  dare 
maintain  them.  The  Delaware  River  only  sepa- 
rates us  from  the  State  of  Delaware  for  more 
than  one  hundred  miles.  A  portion  of  our  State 
extends  south  of  Mason  and  Dixon's  line,  and 
south  of  Washington  city.  The  Constitution 
made  at  Montgomery  has  many  modifications 
and  amendments  desired  by  the  people  of  this 
State,  and  none  they  would  not  prefer  to  dis- 
union. We  believe  that  Slavery  is  no  sin; 
'  that  the  negro  is  not  equal  to  the  white  man  ; 
that  Slavery — subordination  to  the  superior  race 
— is  his  natural  and  normal  condition;'  still,  we 
might  desire  some  change  in  the  Constitution, 
which  time  may  effect ;  but,  as  a  whole,  it  is,  in 
my  opinion,  the  only  basis  upon  which  the  coun- 
try can  be  saved ;  and,  as  the  issue  between  the 
North  and  the  South  has  been  a  practical  one 
(the  question  of  territorial  rights  was  immate- 
rial, and,  practically,  nothing  to  us),  let  us,  then, 
savo  the  country — let  us  do  that  which  is  mosi 
likely  to  reunite  the  States,  speedily  and  peace- 
fully." 

Arguments  nearly  identical  with  the  forego- 
ing were  used  to  like  purpose  by  Gov.  Sey- 
mour, of  New  York,  but  in  private  conversa- 
tions only. 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


friends.  This  stupendous  trust  they  cannot 
put  from  them,  if  they  would.  Emancipa- 
tion, were  it  possible,  would  be  rebellion 
against  Providence,  and  destruction  to  the 
colored  race  in  our  land.  We  at  the  North 
rid  ourselves  of  no  responsibility  by  assum- 
ing an  attitude  of  hostility  to  Slavery,  and 
thus  sundering  the  bonds  of  State  fellow- 
ship ;  we  only  put  it  out  of  our  power  to  do 
the  good  which  both  humanity  and  religion 
demand.  Should  we  not  rather  recognize 
the  Providence  of  God,  in  His  placing  such 
a  vast  multitude  of  the  degraded  and  de- 
pendent sons  of  Africa  in  this  favored  land, 
and  cheerfully  cooperate,  by  all  needful 
labors  and  sacrifices,  with  His  benevolent 
design  to  save  and  not  to  destroy  them? 
Under  a  Providential  dispensation,  lifting 
them  up  from  the  degradation  and  miseries 
of  indolence  and  vice,  and  exacting  of  them 
due  and  needful  labor,  they  can  certainly  be 
trained  and  nurtured,  as  many  have  been, 
for  the  services  and  joys  of  heaven  ;  and,  if 
the  climate  and  institutions  of  the  South  are 
such  that  our  fellow-citizens  there  can  afford 
to  take  the  onerous  care  of  them,  in  return 
for  their  services,  should  we  not  gladly  con- 


sent ?  They  freely  concede  to  us  our  con- 
scientious convictions,  our  rights,  and  all 
our  privileges :  should  we  not  as  freely  con- 
cede to  them  theirs  ?  Why  should  we  con- 
tend? Why  paralyze  business,  turn  thou- 
sands of  the  industrious  and  laborious  poor 
out  of  employment,  sunder  the  last  ties  of 
affection  that  can  bind  these  States  together, 
destroy  our  once  prosperous  and  happy  na- 
tion, and  perhaps  send  multitudes  to  prema- 
ture graves — and  all  for  what  ?  Is  not  such 
a  course  a  struggle  of  arrogant  assumption 
against  the  Providence  of  the  Most  High? 
and,  if  persisted  in,  will  it  not  surely  bring 
down  His  heavy  and  prolonged  judgments 
upon  us?" 

Such  were  the  means  whereby 
many  conservative  and  Christian 
men  were  intent  on  preserving  our 
National  unity,  and  reviving  the 
sentiment  of  fraternity  among  our 
people,  in  March  and  the  beginning 
of  April,  1861. 


XXVIII. 
FORT  SUMTEK. 


"Whether  the  hesitation  of  the 
Executive  to  reenforce  Fort  Sumter 
was  real  or  only  apparent,  the  re- 
serve evinced  with  regard  to  his 
.  intentions  was  abundantly  justified. 
The  President,  in  his  Inaugural  Ad- 
dress, had  kindly  and  explicitly  set 
forth  his  conception  of  the  duties 
and  responsibilities  assumed  in  taking 
his  oath  of  office.  No  man  of  decent 
understanding  who  can  read  our  lan- 
guage had  any  reason  or  right  to 
doubt,  after  hearing  or  perusing  that 

1  Mr.  Douglas — though  one  of  the  most  zeal- 
ous advocates  of  the  Crittenden  Compromise,  and 
though  he,  as  such,  strangely  employed  all  his 
great  ability  throughout  the  winter  of  '60-' Gl 


document,  that  he  fully  purposed,  to 
the  extent  of  his  ability,  to  maintain 
the  authority  and  enforce  the  laws 
of  the  Union  on  every  acre  of  the 
geographical  area  of  our  country. 
Hence,  secessionists  in  Washington, 
as  well  as  South  of  that  city,  uni- 
formly denounced  that  manifesto  as 
a  declaration  of  war,  or  as  rendering 
war  inevitable.  The  naked  dishon- 
esty of  professed  Unionists  inquiring 
— as  even  Senator  Douglas,1  for  two 
weeks,  persisted  in  doing — whether 

to  demonstrate  that  the  Republicans  ought  to 
act,  in  accordance  not  with  their  own  principles 
and  convictions,  but  with  his — and  who  talked 
and  acted  in  this  vein  through  most  of  the  Sen,- 


FUTILITY    OF    THE    'PEACE'    CLAMOR.  441 


Mr.  Lincoln  intended  peace  or  war, 
was  a  sore  trial  to  human  patience. 
A  government  which  cannot  uphold 
and  vindicate  its  authority  in  the 
country  which  it  professes  to  rule  is 
to  be  pitied ;  but  one  which  does  not 
even  attempt  to  enforce  respect  and 
obedience  is  a  confessed  imposture 
and  sham,  and  deserves  to  be  hooted 
off  the  face  of  the  earth.  Nay,  more : 
it  was  impossible  for  ours  to  exist  on 
the  conditions  prescribed  by  its  do- 
mestic foes.  ISTo  government  can  en- 
dure without  revenue ;  and  the  Federal 
Constitution  (Art.  I.  §  9)  expressly 
prescribes  that 

"No  preference  shall  be  given,  by  any 
regulation  of  commerce  or  revenue,  to  the 
ports  of  one  State  over  those  of  another ;  nor 
shall  vessels  bound  to  or  from  one  State  be 
obliged  to  enter,  clear,  or  pay  duties,  in  an- 
other." 

But  here  were  the  ports  of  nearly 
half  our  Atlantic  and  Gulf  coasts 

ate's  called  Session,  which  followed — yet,  when 
war  actually  grew  out  of  the  conflicting  preten- 
sions of  the  Union  and  the  Confederacy,  took 
nobly  and  heartily  the  side  of  his  whole  country. 
But,  even  before  the  close  of  the  called  Session, 
a  decided  change  in  his  attitude,  if  not  in  his  con- 
ceptions, was  manifest.  On  the  25th  of  March, 
replying  to  a  plea  for  '  Peace,'  on  the  basis  of  '  No 
Coercion,'  by  Senator  J.  C.  Breckinridge,  of  Ken- 
tucky, he  thus  thoroughly  exposed  the  futility 
of  the  main  pretext  for  Disunion: 

"From  the  beginning  of  this  Government 
down  to  1859,  Slavery  was  prohibited  by  Con- 
gress in  some  portion  of  the  territories  of  the 
United  States.  But  now,  for  the  first  time  in  the 
history  of  this  Government,  there  is  no  foot  of 
ground  in  America  where  Slavery  is  prohibited  by 
act  of  Congress.  You,  of  the  other  side  of  this 
chamber,  by  the  unanimous  vote  of  every  Re- 
publican in  this  body,  and  of  every  Republican 
in  the  House  of  Representatives,  have  organized 
3ll  the  territories  of  the  United  States  on  the 
principle  of  non-intervention,  by  Congress,  with 
the  question  of  Slavery — leaving  the  people  to 
do  as  they  please,  subject  only  to  the  limitations 
of  the  Constitution.  Hence,  I  think  the  Senator 
from  Kentucky  fell  into  a  gross  error  of  fact  as 
well  as  of  law  when  he  said,  the  other  day,  that 
you  had  not  abated  one  jot  of  your  creed — that 
you  had  not  abandoned  your  aggressive  policy  in 


sealed  against  the  commerce  and 
navigation  of  the  other  half,  save  on 
payment  of  duties  utterly  unknown 
to  our  laws;  while  goods  could  be 
entered  at  those  ports  at  quite  other 
(and  generally  lower)  rates  of  impost 
than  those  established  by  Congress. 
Hence,  importers,  with  good  reason, 
refused  to  pay  the  established  duties 
at  Northern  ports  until  the  same 
should  be  exacted  at  Southern  as 
well ;  so  that  three  months'  acquies- 
cence by  the  President  in  what  was 
untruly  commended  as  the  "Peace 
policy,"  would  have  sunk  the  coun- 
try into  anarchy  and  whelmed  the 
Government  in  hopeless  ruin. 

Still,  no  one  is  required  to  achieve 
the  impossible,  though  to  attempt 
what  to  others  will  seem  such  may 
sometimes  be  accepted  by  the  unself- 
ish and  intrepid  as  a  duty ;  and  this 
practical  question   confronted  the 

the  territories,  and  that  you  were  now  pursuing 
the  policy  of  excluding  the  Southern  people  from 
all  the  territories  of  the  United  States.  *  *  * 
There  never  has  been  a  time  since  the  Govern- 
ment was  founded  when  the  right  of  the  slave- 
holders to  emigrate  to  the  territories,  to  carry 
with  them  their  slaves,  and  to  hold  them  on  an 
equal  footing  with  all  other  property,  was  as 
fully  and  distinctly  recognized  in  all  the  territories  as 
at  this  time,  and  that,  too,  by  the  unanimous  vols 
of  the  Republican  party  in  both  Houses  of  Congress. 

"The  Senator  from  Kentucky  [Mr.  Breckin- 
ridge] has  told  you  that  the  Southern  States, 
still  in  the  Union,  will  never  be  satisfied  to  re- 
main in  it  unless  they  get  terms  that  will  give 
them  either  a  right,  in  common  with  all  the 
other  States,  to  emigrate  into  the  territories,  or 
that  will  secure  to  them  their  rights  in  the  ter- 
ritories on  the  principle  of  an  equitable  division. 
These  are  the  only  terms  on  which,  as  he  says, 
those  Southern  States  now  in  the  Union  will  con- 
sent to  remain.  I  wish  to  call  the  attention  of 
that  distinguished  Senator  to  the  fact  that,  un- 
der the  law  as  it  now  stands,  the  South  has  all 
the  rights  which  he  claims.  First,  Southern  men 
have  the  right  to  emigrate  into  all  the  territories, 
and  to  carry  their  Slave  property  with  them,  on 
an  equality  with  the  citizens  of  the  other  States. 
Secondly,  they  have  an  equitable  partition  of  the 
territories  assigned  by  law,  viz. :  all  is  Slave  Terri- 
tory up  to  the  thirty -seventh  degree,  instead  of  up  to 
the  parallel  of  thirty-six  degrees  thirty  minutes — a 
half  degree  more  than  they  claim." 


442 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT, 


President  on  the  threshold :  '  What 
means  have  I  at  command  wherewith 
to  compel  obedience  to  the  laws?' 
Now,  the  War  Department  had,  for 
nearly  eight  years  prior  to  the  last 
few  weeks,  been  directed  successively 
by  Jefferson  Davis  and  John  B. 
Floyd.  The  better  portion  of  onr 
little  army  had  been  ordered  by 
Floyd  to  Texas,  and  there  put  under 
the  command  of  Gen.  Twiggs,  by 
whom  it  had  already  been  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  his  fellow-traitors. 
The  arms  of  the  Union  had  been  sed- 
ulously transferred  by  Floyd  from  the 
Northern  to  the  Southern  arsenals. 
The  most  effective  portion  of  the 
Navy  had,  in  like  manner,  been  dis- 
persed over  distant  seas.  But,  so 
early  as  the  21st  of  March,  at  the 
close  of  a  long  and  exciting  Cabinet 
session,  it  appears  to  have  been  defi- 
nitively settled  that  Fort  Sumter  was 
not  to  be  surrendered  without  a  strug- 
gle ;  and,  though  Col.  G.  W.  Lay,  an 
Aid  of  Gen.  Scott,  had  visited  Charles- 


ton on  the  20th,  and  had  a  lon£ 
interview  with  Gov.  Pickens  and 
Gen.  Beauregard,  with  reference,  it 
was  said,  to  the  terms2  on  which 
Fort  Sumter  should  be  evacuated,  if 
evacuated  at  all,  the  25th  brought  to 
Charleston  Col.  Ward  H.  Lamon,  a 
confidential  agent  of  the  President, 
who,  after  an  interview  with  the 
Confederate  authorities,  was  permit- 
ted to  visit  the  fort,  and  hold  unre- 
stricted intercourse  with  Major  An- 
derson, who  apprised  the  Govern- 
ment through  him  that  their  scanty 
stock  of  provisions  would  suffice  his 
little  garrison  only  till  the  middle  of 
April.  Col.  Lamon  returned  imme- 
diately to  Washington,  and  was  said 
to  have  reported  there,  that,  in  Major 
Anderson's  opinion  as  well  as  in  his 
own,  the  relief  of  the  fortress  was 
impracticable. 

By  this  time,  however,  very  de- 
cided activity  began  to  be  manifest 
in  the  Navy  Yards  still  held  by  the 
Union.    Such  ships  of  war  as  were 


2  The  New  York  Herald  of  April  9th  has  a  dis- 
patch from  its  Washington  correspondent,  con- 
firming one  sent  twenty-four  hours  earlier  to  an- 
nounce the  determination  of  the  Executive  to 
provision  Fort  Sumter,  which  thus  explains  the 
negotiations,  and  the  seeming  hesitation,  if  not 
vacillation,  of  March: 

"  The  peace  policy  of  the  Administration  has 
been  taken  advantage  of  by  the  South,  while,  at 
the  same  time,  their  representatives  have  been 
here  begging  the  President  to  keep  hands  off. 
While  he  was  holding  back,  in  the  hope  that  a 
forbearing  disposition,  on  the  part  of  the  authori- 
ties of  the  seceded  States,  would  be  manifested, 
to  his  great  surprise,  he  found  that,  instead  of 
peace,  they  were  investing  every  fort  and  navy 
yard  with  Rebel  troops  and  fortifications,  and 
actually  preparing  to  make  war  upon  the  Fede- 
ral Government.  Not  only  this,  but,  while  the 
Administration  was  yielding  to  the  cry  against 
coercion,  for  the  purpose,  if  possible,  of  averting 
the  calamity  of  civil  war,  the  very  men  who 
were  loudest  against  coercion  were  preparing  for 
it;  the  Government  was  losing  strength  with  the 
people;  and  the  President  and  his  Cabinet  were 
charged  with  being  imbecile  and  false  to  the 
high  trust  conferred  upon  them. 

"  At  last,  they  have  determined  to  enforce  the 


laws,  and  to  do  it  vigorously ;  but  not  in  an  ag- 
gressive spirit.  When  the  Administration  de- 
termined to  order  Major  Anderson  out  of  Fort 
Sumter,  some  days  since,  they  also  determined 
to  do  so  on  one  condition :  namely,  that  the  fort 
and  the  property  in  it  should  not  be  molested,  but 
allowed  to  remain  as  it  is.  The  authorities  of  the 
Confederacy  would  not  agree  to  this,  but  mani- 
fested a  disposition  to  get  possession  of  the  fort 
and  United  States  property  therein.  The  Gov- 
ernment would  not  submit  to  any  such  humilia- 
tion. 

"  It  was  immediately  determined  to  kee'p 
Major  Anderson  in  Fort  Sumter,  and  to  supply 
him  with  provisions  forthwith.  *  *  *  There  is 
no  desire  to  put  „  additional  men  into  the  fort, 
unless  resistance  is  offered  to  the  attempt  to 
furnish  Major  Anderson  with  supplies.  The 
fleet  will  not  approach  Charleston  with  hostile 
intent ;  but,  in  view  of  the  great  military  prepa* 
rations  about  Fort  Sumter,  the  supply  vessels 
will  go  prepared  to  reply  promptly  to  any  re- 
sistance of  a  warlike  character  that  may  be 
offered  to  a  peaceful  approach  to  the  fort.  The 
responsibility  of  opening  the  war  will  be  thrown 
upon  the  parties  who  set  themselves  in  defiance 
to  the  Government.  It  is  sincerely  hoped,  by 
the  Federal  authorities  here,  that  the  leaders  of 
the  secessionists  will  not  open  their  batteries." 


FIRE    OPENED  ON 


FORT  SUMTER. 


443 


at  hand  were  rapidly  fitted  for  ser- 
vice and  put  into  commission  ;  while 
several  swift  ocean  steamers  of  the 
largest  size  were  hurriedly  loaded 
with  provisions,  munitions,  and  for- 
age. By  the  6th  or  7th  of  April, 
nearly  a  dozen  of  these  vessels  had 
left  New  York  and  other  Northern 
ports,  under  sealed  orders.  Lieut. 
Talbot,  who  had  arrived  at  Wash- 
ington on  the  6th,  from  Fort  Sumter, 
bearing  a  message  from  Major  An- 
derson that  his  rigidly  restricted  sup- 
plies of  fresh  food  from  Charleston 
market  had  been  cut  off  by  the  Con- 
federate authorities,  and  that  he  must 
soon  be  starved  into  surrender,  if 
not  relieved,  returned  to  Charleston 
on  the  8th,  and  gave  formal  notice 
to  Gov.  Pickens  that  the  fort  would 
be  provisioned  at  all  hazards.  Gen. 
Beauregard  immediately  telegraphed 
the  fact  to  Montgomery ;  and,  on  the 
10th,  received  orders  from  the  Con- 
federate Secretary  of  War  to  demand 
the  prompt  surrender  of  the  fort,  and, 
in  case  of  refusal,  to  reduce  it.  The 
demand  was  accordingly  made  in  due 
form  at  2  p.  m.,  on  the  11th,  and 
courteously  declined.  But,  in  conse- 
quence of  additional  instructions  from 
Montgomery — based  on  a  suggestion 
of  Major  Anderson  to  his  summoners 
that  he  would  very  soon  be  starved 
out,  if  not  relieved — Gen.  Beaure- 
gard, at  11  p.  m.,  again  addressed 
Major  Anderson,  asking  him  to  state 
at  what  time  he  would  evacuate  Fort 
Sumter,  if  unmolested  ;  and  was  an- 
swered that  he  would  do  so  at  noon 
on  the  15th,  "  should  I  not  receive, 
prior  to  that  time,  controlling  instruc- 
tions from  my  Government,  or  ad- 
ditional supplies."  This  answer  was 
judged  unsatisfactory;  and,  at  3:20 
a.  m.,  of  the  12th,  Major  Anderson 


was  duly  notified  that  fire  would  be 
opened  on  Fort  Sumter  in  one  hour. 

Punctual  to  the  appointed  moment, 
the  roar  of  a  mortar  from  Sullivan's 
Island,  quickly  followed  by  the  rush- 
ing shriek  of  a  shell,  gave  notice  to 
the  world  that  the  era  of  compromise 
and  diplomacy  was  ended — that  the 
Slaveholders'  Confederacy  had  ap- 
pealed from  sterile  negotiations  to 
the  '  last  argument'  of  aristocracies 
as  well  as  kings.  Another  gun  from 
that  island  quickly  repeated  the 
warning,  waking  a  response  from 
battery  after  battery,  until  Sumter 
appeared  the  focus  of  a  circle  of  vol- 
canic fire.  Soon,  the  thunder  of  fifty 
heavy  breaching  cannon,  in  one  grand 
volley,  followed  by  the  crashing  and 
crumbling  of  brick,  stone,  and  mortar 
around  and  above  them,  apprised  the 
little  garrison  that  their  stay  in  those 
quarters  must  necessarily  be  short. 
Unless  speedily  relieved  by  a  large 
and  powerful  fleet,  such  as  the  Union 
did  not  then  possess,  the  defense  was, 
from  the  outset,  utterly  hopeless. 

It  is  said  that  the  Confederate  lead- 
ers expected  to  reduce  the  fort  within 
a  very  few  hours ;  it  is  more  certain 
that  the  country  was  disappointed  by 
the  inefficiency  of  its  fire  and  the 
celerity  of  its  reduction.  But  it  was 
not  then  duly  considered  that  Sumter 
was  never  intended  to  withstand  a 
protracted  cannonade  from  batteries 
solidly  constructed  on  every  side  of 
it,  but  to  resist  and  repel  the  ingress 
of  fleets  from  the  Ocean — a  service 
for  which  it  has  since  proved  itself 
admirably  adapted.  Nor  was  it  suffi- 
ciently considered  that  the  defensive 
styength  of  a  fortress  inheres  largely 
in  its  ability  to  compel  its  assailants 
to  commence  operations  for  its  reduc- 
tion at  a  respectful  distance,  and  to 


444 


THE 


AMERICAN 


CONFLICT. 


make  their  approaches  slowly,  under 
conditions  that  secure  to  its  fire  a 
great  superiority  over  that  of  the 
besiegers.  But  here  were  the  assail- 
ants, in  numbers  a  hundred  to  one, 
firing  at  short  range  from  batteries 
which  had  been  constructed  and 
!  mounted  in  perfect  security,  one  of 
them  covered  with  iron  rails  so  ad- 
justed as  to  glance  the  balls  of  the 
fortress  harmlessly  from  its  mailed 
front.  Had  Major  Anderson  been 
ordered,  in  December,  to  defend  his 
post  against  all  aggressive  and  threat- 
ening demonstrations,  he  could  not 
have  been  shelled  out  of  it  by  a 
thirty  hours'  bombardment.  But 
why  officers'  quarters  and  barracks 
of  wood  should  ever  have  been  con- 
structed in  the  center  of  such  a  fort — 
or  rather,  why  they  should  have  been 
permitted  to  stand  there  after  the 
hostile  intentions  of  the  Confederates 
had  been  clearly  proclaimed — is  not 
obvious.  That  shells  and  red-hot 
balls  would  be  rained  into  this  area — 
that  the  frail  structures  which  nearly 
filled  it  would  inevitably  take  fire, 
and  not  only  imperil  magazines,  car- 
tridges, and  everything  else  combus- 
tible, but  prevent  the  working  of  the 
guns,  was  palpable  from  the  outset. 
To  have  committed  to  the  surround- 
ing waves  every  remaining  particle 
of  wood  that  was  not  essential  to  the 
defense,  would  seem  the  manifest 
work  of  the  night  which  preceded  the 
opening  of  the  bombardment,  after 
the  formal  demand  that  the  fort  be 
surrendered.  To  do  this  while  yet 
unassailed  and  unimperiled,  instead 
of  rolling  barrel  after  barrel  of  pre- 
cious powder  into  the  sea  under  the 
fire  of  a  dozen  batteries,  with  the 
whole  center  of  the  fortress  a  glowing 
furnace,  and  even  the  casemates  so 


hot  that  their  tenants  could  only  es- 
cape roasting  by  lying  flat  on  the 
floor  and  drawing  their  breath 
through  wet  blankets,  wrould  seem 
the  dictate  of  the  simplest  forecast. 

So,  when  we  read  that  "  the  guns, 
without  tangents  or  scales,  and  even 
destitute  of  bearing-screws,  were  to 
be  ranged  by  the  eye,  and  fired  '  by 
guess,' "  we  have  an  ample  explanation 
of  the  inefficiency  of  their  fire,  but 
none  of  the  causes  of  this  strange  and 
fatal  lack  of  preparation  for  a  contest 
that  had  so  long  been  imminent.  It 
might  seem  as  if  Sumter  had  been 
held  only  that  it  should  be  assailed 
with  impunity  and  easily  taken. 

It  was  at  7  o'clock — nearly  three 
hours  after  the  first  shot  came  crash- 
ing against  her  walls — that  Sumter's 
garrison,  having  deliberately  eaten 
their  breakfast — whereof  salt  pork 
constituted  the  staple — fired  their 
first  gun.  They  had  been  divided 
into  three  squads  or  reliefs,  each  in 
succession  to  man  the  guns  for  four 
hours,  and  then  be  relieved  by  an- 
other. Capt.  Arthur  Doubleday  com- 
manded the  first  on  duty,  and  fired 
the  first  gun.  Only  the  casemate  guns 
were  commonly  fired — those  on  the 
parapet  being  too  much  exposed  to 
the  shot  and  shell  pouring  in  from 
every  quarter  to  render  their  use 
other  than  a  reckless,  bootless  waste 
of  life.  The  fire  of  the  fort  was  so 
weak,  when  compared  to  that  of  its 
assailants,  as  to  excite  derision  rather 
than  apprehension  on  their  part.  It 
was  directed  at  Fort  Moultrie,  the 
Cummings'  Point  battery,  and  Sulli- 
van's Island,  from  which  a  masked 
battery  of  heavy  columbiads,  hitherto 
unsuspected  by  the  garrison,  had 
opened  on  their  walls  with  fearful 
effect.    The  floating  battery,  faced 


BOMBARDMENT   OP   FORT  SUMTER. 


445 


with  railroad  bars,  though  planted 
very  near  to  Sumter,  and  seemingly 
impervious  to  her  balls,  was  far  yless 
effective.  A  new  English  gun,  em- 
ployed by  the  Confederates,  was  re- 
marked by  the  garrison  as  wonder- 
fully accurate  and  efficient ;  several 
of  its  shots  entering  their  embrasures, 
and  one  of  them  slightly  wounding 
four  men.  But  the  casemates  were 
shell-proof;  the  officers  constantly 
warned  their  men  against  needless 


exposure ;  so  that,  though  the  peril 
from  fire  and  from  their  own  ammu- 
nition was  even  greater  than  that 
from  the  enemy's  guns,  not  one  was 
seriously  hurt.  And,  though  Fort 
Moultrie  was  considerably  damaged, 
and  the  little  village  of  Moultrie  ville — 
composed  of  the  Summer  residences 
of  certain  wealthy  citizens  of  Charles- 
ton—  was  badly  riddled,  it  was 
claimed,  and  seems  undisputed,  that 
no. one  was  mortally  wounded  on  the 


CHARLESTON  HARBOR  AND  FORT  SUMTER. 


side  of  the  assailants.  So  bloodless 
was  the  initiation  of  the  bloodiest 
struggle  that  America  ever  witnessed. 

But,  though  almost  without  casu- 
alty, the  contest  was  not,  on  the  side 
of  the  Union,  a  mere  mockery  of  war : 
it  even  served  to  develop  traits  of 
heroism.  Saj;s  one  of  those  who  par- 
ticipated in  the  perils  of  the  defense : 

"  The  workmen  [Irish  Laborers,  hired  in 
New  York  for  other  than  military  service] 
were  at  first  rather  reluctant  to  assist  the 
soldiers  in  Handling  the  guns ;  but  they 
gradually  took  hold  and  rendered  valuable 


assistance.  Few  shots  were  fired  before  ev- 
ery one  of  them  was  desperately  engaged  in 
the  conflict.  We  had  to  abandon  one  gun 
on  account  of  the  l^eavy  fire  made  upon  it. 
Hearing  the  fire  renewed,  I  went  to  the  spot. 
I  there  found  a  party  of  workmen  engaged 
in  serving  it.  I  saw  one  of  them  stooping 
over,  with  his  hands  on  his  knees,  convulsed 
with  joy,  while  the  tears  rolled  down  his 
powder-begrimed  cheeks.  '"What  are  you 
doing  here  with  that  gun?'  I  asked.  '  Hit  it 
right  in  the  center,'  was  the  reply;  the  man 
meaning,  that  his  shot  had  taken  effect  in 
the  center  of  the  floating  battery.'1 

Says  another  eye-witness : 

"  Shell3  burst  with  the  greatest  rapidity 


4-16 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


in  every  portion 'of  the  work,  hurling  the 
loose  brick  and  stone  in  all  directions,  break- 
ing the  windows,  and  setting  fire  to  what- 
ever wood-work  they  burst  against.  The 
solid-shot  firing  of  the  enemy's  batteries, 
and  particularly  of  Fort  Moultrie,  was'  di- 
rected at  the  barbette  [unsheltered]  guns  of 
Fort  Sumter,  disabling  one  ten-inch  colum- 
biad  [they  had  but  two],  one  eight-inch  co- 
lumbiad,  one  forty-two  pounder,  and  two 
eight-inch  seacoast  howitzers,  and  also  tear- 
ing a  large  portion  of  the  parapet  away. 
The  firing  from  the  batteries  on  Cummings1 
Point  was  scattered  over  the  whole  of  the 
gorge  or  rear  of  the  fort,  till  it  looked  like  a 
sieve.  The  explosion  of  shells,  and  the  quan- 
tity of  deadly  missiles  that  were  hurled  in 
every  direction  and  at  every  instant  of  time, 
made  it  almost  certain  death  to  go  out  of  the 
lower  tier  of  casemates,  and  also  made  the 
working  of  the  barbette  or  upper  [uncov- 
ered] guns,  which  contained  all  our  heavi- 
est metal,  and  by  which  alone  we  could 
throw  shells,  quite  impossible.  During  the 
first  day,  there  was  hardly  an  instant  of  time 
that  there  was  a  cessation  of  the  whizzing 
of  balls,  which  were  sometimes  coming  half 
a  dozen  at  once.  There  was  not  a  por- 
tion of  the  work  which  was  not  taken  in 
reverse  from  mortars. 

"  On  Friday,  before  dinner,  several  of  the 
vessels  of  the  fleet,  beyond  the  bar,  were 
seen  through  the  port-holes.  They  dipped 
their  flag.  The  commander  ordered  Sum- 
ter's flag  to  be  dipped  in  return,  which  was 
done,  while  the  shells  were  bursting  in  every 
direction.  [The  flag-staff  was  located  in  the 
parade,  which  was  about  the  center  of  the 
open  space  within  the  fort.]  Sergeant  Hart 
saw  the  flag  of  Fort  Sumter  half-way  down, 
and,  supposing  it  had  been  cut  by  the  ene- 
my's shot,  rushed  out  through  the  fire  to 
assist  in  getting  it  up.  Shortly  after  it  had 
been  re-raised,  a  shell  burst  and  cut  the  hal-  I 
liards,  but  the  rope  was  so  intertwined 
around  the  halliards,  that  the  flag  would 
not  fall.  The  cartridges  were  exhausted  by 
about  noon,  and  a  party  was  sent  to  the 
magazines  to  make  more  of  the  blankets 
and  shirts ;  the  sleeves  of  the  latter  being 
readily  converted  to  the  use  desired.  An- 
other great  misfortune  was,  that  there  was 
not  an  instrument  in  the  fort  by  which  they 
could  weigh  the  powder ;  which,  of  course, 
destroyed  all  approach  to  accuracy  of  firing. 
Nor  had  they  tangent-screws,  breech-slides, 
or  other  instruments  with  which  to  point  a 
gun. 

"  When  it  became  so  dark  as  to  render  it 
impossible  to  see  the  effect  of  their  shot,  the 
port-holes  were  closed  for  the  night,  while 
the  batteries  of  the  Secessionists  continued 
their  fire  unceasingly. 

"During  Friday,  the  officers'  barracks 


were  three  times  set  on  fire  by  the  shells, 
and  three  times  put  out  under  the  most  gall- 
ing and  destructive  cannonade.  This  was 
the  only  occasion  on  which  Maj.  Anderson 
allowed  the  men  to  expose  themselves  with- 
out an  absolute  necessity.  The  guns  on  the 
parapet — which  had  been  pointed  the  day 
before — were  fired  clandestinely  by  some  of 
the  men  slipping  up  on  top. 

"  The  firing  of  the  rifled  guns  from  the 
iron  battery  on  Cummings'  Point  became 
extremely  accurate  in  the  afternoon  of  Fri- 
day, cutting  out  large  quantities  of  the  ma- 
sonry about  the  embrasures  at  every  shot, 
throwing  concrete  among  the  cannoneers, 
and  slightly  wounding  and  stunning  others. 
One  piece  struck  Sergeant  Kernan,  an  old 
Mexican  war  veteran,  hitting  him  on  the 
head  and  knocking  him  down.  On  being 
revived,  he  was  asked  if  he  was  hurt  badly. 
He  replied:  'No;  I  was  only  knocked 
down  temporarily and  he  went  to  work 
again.  *  *  * 

"  For  the  fourth  time,  the  barracks  were 
set  on  fire  early  on  Saturday  morning,  and 
attempts  were  made  to  extinguish  the  flames ; 
but  it  was  soon  discovered  that  red-hot  shot 
were  being  thrown  into  the  fort  with  fear- 
ful rapidity,  and  it  became  evident  that  it 
would  be  impossible  to  put  out  the  confla- 
gration. The  whole  garrison  was  then  set 
to  work,  or  as  many  as  could  be  spared,  to 
remove  the  powder  from  the  magazines, 
which  was  desperate  work,  rolling  barrels 
of  powder  through  the  fire. 

u  Ninety-odd  barrels  had  been  rolled  out 
through  the  flames,  when  the  heat  became 
so  intense  as  to  make  it  impossible  to  get 
out  any  more.  The  doors  were  then  closed 
and  locked,  and  the  fire  spread  and  became 
general.  The  wind  so  directed  the  smoke 
as  to  fill  the  fort  so  full  that  the  men  could 
not  see  each  other ;  and,  with  the  hot,  sti- 
fling air,  it  was  as  much  as  a  man  could  do 
to  breathe.  Soon,  they  were  obliged  to 
cover  their  faces  with  wet  cloths  in  order 
to  get  along  at  all,  so  dense  was  the  smoke 
and  so  scorching  the  heat. 

"  But  few  cartridges  were  left,  and  the 
guns  were  fired  slowly;  nor  could  more  car- 
tridges be  made,  on  account  of  the  sparks 
falling  in  every  part  of  the  works.  A  gun 
was  fired  every  now  and  then,  only  to  let 
the  fleet  and  the  people  in  the  town  know 
that  the  fort  had  not  been  silenced.  The 
cannoneers  could  not  see  to  aim,  much  less 
where  they  hit. 

"After  the  barracks  were  well  on  fire, 
the  batteries  directed  upon  Fort  Sumter  in- 
creased their  cannonading  to  a  rapidity 
greater  than  had  been  attained  before. 
About  this  time,  the  shells  and  ammunition 
in  the  upper  service-magazines  exploded, 
scattering  the  tower  and  upper  portions  of 


SOUTH   CAROLINA    IX  ECSTASY. 


447 


the  building  in  every  direction.  The  crash 
of  the  beams,  the  roar  of  the  flames,  and  the 
shower  of  fragments  of  the  fort,  with  the 
blackness  of  the  smoke,  made  the  scene  in- 
describably terrific  and  grand.  This  contin- 
ued for  several  hours.  Meanwhile,  the 
main  gates  were  burned  down,  the  chassis 
of  the  barbette  guns  were  burned  away  on 
the  gorge,  and  the  upper  portions  of  the 
towers  had  been  demolished  by  shells. 

"  There  was  not  a  portion  of  the  fort 
where  a  breath  of  air  could  be  got  for 
hours,  except  through  a  wet  cloth.  The 
fire  spread  to  the  men's  quarters  on  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left,  and  endangered 
the  powder  which  had  been  taken  out  of 
the  magazines.  The  men  went  through  the 
fire  and  covered  the  barrels  with  wet  cloths ; 
but  the  danger  of  the  fort's  blowing  up  be- 
came so  imminent  that  they  were  obliged 
to  heave  the  barrels  out  of  the  embrasures. 
While  the  powder  was  being  thrown  over- 
board, all  the  guns  of  Moultrie,  of  the  iron 
floating  battery,  of  the  enfilade  battery,  and 
of  the  Dahlgren  battery,  worked  with  in- 
creasing vigor. 

"  All  but  four  barrels  were  thus  disposed 
of,  and  those  remaining  were  wrapped  in 
many  thicknesses  of  wet  woolen  blankets. 
But  three  cartridges  were  left,  and  these 
were  in  the  guns.  About  this  time,  the 
flag-staff  of  Fort  Sumter  was  shot  down, 
some  fifty  feet  from  the  truck ;  this  being 
the  ninth  time  that  it  had  been  struck  by  a 
shot.  The  man  cried  out,  'The  flag  is 
down!  it  has  been  shot  away!'  In  an 
instant,  Lieut.  Hall  rushed  forward,  and 
brought  the  flag  away.  But  the  halliards 
were  so  inextricably  tangled  that  it  could 
not  be  righted;  it  was  therefore  nailed  to 
the  staff,  and  planted  upon  the  ramparts, 
while  batteries  in  every  direction  were 
playing  upon  them." 

The  fleet  from  New  York,  laden 
with,  provisions  for  the  garrison,  had 
appeared  off  the  bar  by  noon  of  the 
day  on  which  fire  was  opened,  but 
made  no  effort  to  fulfill  its  errand. 
To  have  attempted  to  supply  the  fort 
would  have,  at  best,  involved  a  heavy 
cost  of  life,  probably  to  no  purpose. 
Its  commander  communicated  by  sig- 
nals with  Major  Anderson,  but  re- 

3  The  New  York  merchants  who  sold  the 
costly  fabrics  are  still  waiting  for  their  pay. 

4  A  Charleston  dispatch, dated  April  13th,  says : 
"Had  the  surrender  not  taken  place,  Fort 

Sumter  would  have  been  stormed  to-night.  The 
men  are  crazy  for  a  fight. 


mained  out  of  the  range  of  the  ene- 
my's fire  till  after  the  surrender; 
when  he  returned  as  he  came. 

Meantime,  the  boom  of  heavy  ord- 
nance and  the  telegraph  had.  borne 
far  and  wide  the  eagerly  awaited 
tidings  that  the  war  for  which  South 
Carolina  had  so  long  been  impatient 
had  actually  begun  ;  and  from  every 
side  thousands  flocked  to  the  spec- 
tacle as  to  a  long  expected  holiday. 
Charleston  herself  was  drunk  with 
excitement  and  joyous  exultation. 
Her  entire  white  population,  and  her 
gay  crowds  of  well-dressed  3  visitors, 
thronged  her  streets  and  quays,  noting 
the  volume  and  resonant  thunder  of 
the  Confederate  cannonade,  and  the 
contrasted  feebleness  of  that  by  which 
it  was  replied  to.4  That  seven  thou- 
sand men,  after  five  months  of  care- 
ful preparation,  could  overcome  sev- 
enty, was  regarded  as  an  achieve- 
ment ranking  with  the  most  memo- 
rable deeds  of  Alexander  or  Hannibal, 
Caesar  or  Napoleon.  Champagne 
flowed  on  every  hand  like  water ; 
thousands  quaffed,  and  feasted  on  the 
richest  viands,  who  were  ere  long  to 
regard  rancid  pork  as  a  dainty,  and 
tea  and  coffee  as  faintly  remembered 
luxuries.  Beauregard  shot  up  like 
Jonah's  gourd  to  the  altitude  of  the 
world's  greatest  captains ;  and  "  Dam- 
nation to  the  Yankees  !"  was  drunk 
with  rapture  by  enthusiastic  crowds 
whose  heads  were  sure  to  ache  to- 
morrow with  what  they  had  drunk 
before.  Already,  in  the  ardent  ima- 
gination of  her  Chivalry,  the  Con- 
federacy had  established  its  independ- 

"The  bells  have  been  chiming  all  day,  guns 
firing,  ladies  waving  handkerchiefs,  people 
cheering,  and  citizens  making  themselves  gene- 
rally demonstrative.  It  is  regarded  as  the  great- 
est day  in  the  history  of  South  Carolina" 

—Such  it  undoubtedly  was. 


448 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ence  beyond  dispute,  and  was  about 
to  conquer  and  lay  waste  the  degene- 
rate, cowardly  North. 

The  credit  of  putting  an  end  to  this 
most  unequal  contest  is  due  to  Louis 
T.  Wigfall,  late  a  Senator  from  the 
State  of  Texas,  now  styling  himself  a 
Confederate  Brigadier.  Wigfall — a 
Carolinian  by  birth,  a  Nullifier  by 
training,  and  a  duelist  by  vocation — 
had  the  faults  and  virtues  of  his 
caste;  and  one  of  the  latter  is  a 
repugnance  to  witnessing  a  con- 
flict between  parties  too  palpably 
ill-matched.  Seeing  that  the  Are  of 
Sumter  was  only  maintained  as  a  mat- 
ter of  pride — for  the  fainting  garri- 
son had  quite  enough  to  do  at  fight- 
ing the  flames  that  had  burned  their 
quarters,  and  in  rolling  out  their  pow- 
der to  prevent  its  explosion — Wigfall 
seized  a  skiff  on  the  afternoon  of  Sat- 
urday (the  second  day  of  the  bom- 
bardment), and  made  direct  toward 
the  almost  silenced  and  thoroughly 
harmless  fortress.  He  was  soon  at 
the  side  of  the  fort,  and,  showing  his 
face  at  an  embrasure,  waving  a  white 
handkerchief  on  the  point  of  his 
sword,  he  asked  to  be  presented  to 
Maj.  Anderson.  No  objection  being 
made,  he  crawled  through  the  em- 
brasure into  the  casemate,  and  was 
there  met  by  several  officers,  to  whom 
he  urged  the  futility  of  further  resist- 
ance. "  Let  us  stop  this  firing,"  said 
he ;  "you  are  on  fire, and  your  flag  is 
down.  Let  us  quit."  "  No,"  replied 
Lieut.  Davis,  "  our  flag  is  not  down. 
Step  out  here,  and  you  will  see  it 
waving  over  the  ramparts."  Wigfall 
persisted  that  the  resistance  had  no 
longer  any  justification,  and  urged 
one  of  the  officers  to  wave  his  white 
flag  toward  Moultrie ;  and,  this  being 
declined,  proceeded  to  wave  it  himself 


Finally,  a  corporal  was  induced  to  re- 
lieve him  in  this,  but  to  no  purpose. 
About  this  time,  Maj.  Anderson  ap- 
proached, to  whom  Wigfall  announced 
himself  (incorrectly)  as  a  messenger 
from  Gen.  Beauregard,  sent  to  in- 
quire on  what  terms  he  would  evac- 
uate the  fortress.  Maj.  Anderson 
calmly  replied  :  "  Gen.  Beauregard 
is  already  acquainted  with  my  only 
terms."  After  a  few  more  civil  in- 
terchanges of  words,  to  no  purpose, 
Wigfall  retired,  and  was  soon  suc- 
ceeded by  ex-Senator  Chesnut,  and 
ex-Representatives  Roger  A.  Pryor 
and  W.  Porcher  Miles,  who  assured 
Maj.  A.  that  Wigfall  had  acted  en- 
tirely without  authority.  Maj.  A. 
thereupon  ordered  his  flag,  which  had 
been  lowered,  to  be  raised  again  ;  but 
his  visitors  requested  that  this  be 
delayed  for  further  conference ;  and, 
having  reported  to  Beauregard,  re- 
turned, two  or  three  hours  afterward, 
with  a  substantial  assent  to  Maj.  An- 
derson's conditions.  The  latter  was 
to  evacuate  the  fort,  his  garrison  to 
retain  their  arms,  with  personal  and 
company  property,  and  march  out  with 
the  honors  of  war,  being  conveyed  to 
whatever  port  in  the  loyal  States  they 
might  indicate.  Considering  his  hope- 
less condition,  these  terms  were  high- 
ly honorable  to  Maj.  Anderson,  and 
hardly  less  so  to  Gen.  Beauregard; 
though  it  was  the  manifest  interest 
of  the  Confederates  not  only  to  stop 
their  prodigal  expenditure  of  ammu- 
nition at  the  earliest  moment,  but  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  coveted  fort- 
ress in  as  effective  a  state  as  possible 
— each  day's  additional  bombardment 
subtracting  seriously  from  its  strength 
and  efficiency,  as  a  defense  of  Charles- 
ton after  it  should  have  fallen  into 
their  hands. 


SUMTER,    NORTH   AND  SOUTH. 


449 


While  Charleston  resumed  and  in- 
tensified her  exulting  revels,5  and  the 
telegraph  invited  all  '  Dixie'  to  share 
the  rapture  of  her  triumph,  the  wear  j 
garrison  extinguished  the  fire  still 
raging,  and  lay  down  to  rest  for  the 
night.  The  steamboat  Isabel  came 
down  next  morning  to  take  them  off ; 
but  delay  occurred  in  their  removal 
by  tug  to  her  deck,  until  it  was  too 
late  to  go  out  by  that  day's  tide. 
"When  the  baggage  had  all  been  re- 
moved, a  part  of  the  garrison  was 
told  off  as  gunners  to  salute  their  flag 
with  fifty  guns ;  the  Stars  and  Stripes 
being  lowered  with  cheers  at  the  firing 
of  the  last  gun.  Unhappily,  there  was 
at  that  fire  a  premature  explosion, 
whereby  one  of  the  gunners  was 
killed,  and  three  more  or  less  seriously 
wounded.  The  men  were  then  formed 
and  marched  out,  preceded  by  their 
band,  playing  inspiring  airs,  and 
taken  on  board  the  Isabel,  whereby 


they  were  transferred  to  the  Federal 
steamship  Baltic,  awaiting  them  off 
the  bar,  which  brought  them  directly 
to  New  York,  whence  Maj.  Ander- 
son dispatched  to  his  Government 
this  brief  and  manly  report : 

"  Steamship  Baltic,  off  Sattoy  Hook:,  ) 
April  18,  1861.  \ 
"  The  Honorable  S.  Oameeox, 

Secretary  of  War,  Washington,  D.  C.  : 

"  Sir  :  Having  defended  Fort  Sumter  for 
thirty-four  hours,  until  the  quarters  were 
entirely  burned,  the  main  gates  destroyed, 
the  gorge-wall  seriously  injured,  the  maga- 
zine surrounded  by  flames,  and  its  door 
closed  from  the  effects  of  the  heat,  four  bar- 
rels and  three  cartridges  of  powder  only 
being  available,  and  no  provisions  but  pork 
remaining,  I  accepted  terms  of  evacuation 
offered  by  Gen.  Beauregard  (being  the  same 
offered  by  him  on  the  11th  instant,  prior  to 
the  commencement  of  hostilities),  and 
marched  out  of  the  fort  on  Sunday  after- 
noon, the  14th  instant,  with  colors  flying 
and  drums  beating,  bringing  away  company 
and  private  property,  and  saluting  my  flag 
with  fifty  guns. 

"  Kobeet  Anderson", 

"  Major  First  Artillery." 


XXIX. 

THE  CALL   TO    ARMS . 


"Whether  the  bombardment  and 
reduction  of  Fort  Sumter  shall  or 
shall  not  be  justified  by  posterity,  it 
is  clear  that  the  Confederacy  had  no 
alternative  but  its  own  dissolution. 
Five  months  had  elapsed  since  the 
Secession  movement  was  formally  in- 
augurated— five  months  of  turmoil, 
uncertainty,  and  business  stagnation, 
throughout  the  seceded  States.  That 

6  "  Bishop  Lynch  (Roman  Catholic),  of  Charles- 
ton, S.  ft,  celebrated  on  Sunday  the  blood- 
less victory  of  Fort  Sumter  with  a  Te  Deum  and 
congratulatory  address.  In  all  the  churches, 
allusions  were  made  to  the  subject.  The  Epis- 
copal Bishop,  wholly  blind  and  feeble,  said  it 
waa  his  strong  persuasion,  confirmed  by  travel 

^•9 


section  was  deeply  in  debt  to  the  mer- 
chants and  manufacturers  of  the 
Northern  cities,  as  well  as  to  the 
slave-breeders  and  slave-traders  of 
the  Border  States;  and,  while  many 
creditors  were  naturally  urgent  for 
their  pay,  few  desired  or  consented 
to  extend  their  credits  in  that  quar- 
ter. Secession  had  been  almost  every- 
where followed,  if  not  preceded,  by 

through  every  section  of  South  Carolina,  that 
the  movement  in  which  the  people  were  engaged 
was  begun  by  them  in  the  deepest  conviction  of 
duty  to  God ;  and  God  had  signally  blessed  their 
dependence  on  Him.  If  there  is  a  war,  it  will 
be  purely  a  war  of  self-defense." — New  York  Tri- 
bune, April  16. 


450 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


a  suspension  of  specie  payments  by 
the  Banks ;  and,  though  the  lawyers 
in  most  places  patriotically  refused 
to  receive  Northern  claims  for  collec- 
tion, a  load  of  debt  weighed  heavily 
on  the  planting 1  and  trading  classes 
of  the  entire  South,  of  whom  thou- 
sands had  rushed  into  political  con- 
vulsion for  relief  from  the  intolerable 
pressure.  Industry,  save  on  the 
plantations,  was  nearly  at  a  stand ; 
never  before  were  there  so  many 
whites  vainly  seeking  employment. 
The  North,  of  course,  sympathized 
with  these  embarrassments  through 
the  falling  off  in  its  trade,  especially 
with  the  South,  and  through  the 
paucity  of  remittances  ;  but  our  cur- 
rency was  still  sound,  while  Southern 
debts  had  always  been  slow,  and  paid 
substantially  at  the  convenience  of 
the  debtors,  when  paid  at  all.  Still, 
the  feeling  that  the  existing  suspense 
and  apprehension  were  intolerable, 
and  that  almost  any  change  would 
be  an  improvement,  was  by  no  means 
confined  to  the  South. 

1The  following  private  letter  from  a  South 
Carolina  planter  to  an  old  friend  settled  in  Texas, 
gives  a  fair  idea  of  the  situation  : 

"Abbeville  C.  H.,  S.  C,  Jan.  24,1861. 

"Dear  Sir: — I  desire  you  to  procure  for  me, 
and  send  by  mail,  a  Texas  Almanac.  Six  months 
since,  I  felt  perfectly  willing  to  remain  in  South 
Carolina ;  but  I  can  remain  here  no  longer.  At 
the  election  of  Lincoln,  we  all  felt  that  we  must 
resist.  In  this  move,  I  placed  myself  among 
the  foremost,  and  am  yet  determined  to  resist 
him  to  the  bitter  end.  I  had  my  misgivings,  at 
first,  of  the  idea  of  separate  Secession;  but 
thought  it  would  be  but  for  a  short  time,  and  at 
small  cost.  In  this  manner,  together  with 
thousands  of  other  Carolinians,  we  have  been 
mistaken.  Everything  is  in  the  wildest  commo- 
tion. My  bottom  land  on  Long  Cone,  for  which 
I  could  have  gotten  thirty  dollars  per  acre,  I 
now  cannot  sell  at  any  price.  All  our  young 
men,  nearly,  are  in  and  around  Charleston. 
Thither  we  have  sent  many  hundreds  of  our 
negroes  (/  have  sent  twenty)  to  work.  Crops 
were  very  short  last  year ;  and  it  does  now  seem 
that  nothing  will  be  planted  this  coming  season. 
All  are  excited  to  the  highest  pitch,  and  not  a 
thought  of  the  future  is  taken.    Messengers  are 


Secession,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
been  initiated  by  the  aid  of  the  most 
positive  assurances  that,  once  fairly 
in  progress,  every  Slave  State  would 
speedily  and  surely  unite  in  it ;  yet, 
up  to  this  time,  but  seven  of  the  fif- 
teen Slave  States,  having  a  decided 
minority  of  the  population,  and  a 
still  more  decided  minority  of  the 
white  inhabitants,  of  that  £  section,' 
had  justified  the  sanguine  promise. 
On  the  contrary,  the  so-called  '  Bor- 
der States,'  with  Tennessee  and  Ar- 
kansas, had  voted  not  to  secede,  and 
most  of  them  by  overwhelming  ma- 
jorities ;  save  that  Kentucky,  Mary- 
land, and  Delaware,  had  scarcely 
deigned  to  take  the  matter  into  con- 
sideration. And,  despite  Vice-Presi- 
dent Stephens's  glowing  rhetoric,  it 
was  plain  that  the  seceded  States  did 
not  and  could  not  suffice  to  form  a 
nation.  Already,  the  talk  in  their 
aristocratic  circles  of  Protectorates 
and  imported  Princes 2  betrayed  their 
own  consciousness  of  this.  Either  to 
attack  the  Union,  and  thus  provoke 

running  here  and  there,  with  and  without  the 
Governor's  orders.  We  have  no  money.  A 
forced  tax  is  levied  upon  every  man.  I  have 
furniehed  the  last  surplus  dollar  I  have.  I  had 
about  $27,000  in  the  bank.  At  first,  I  gave  a 
check  for  $10,000;  then  $5,000;  then  the  re- 
mainder. It  is  now  estimated  that  we  are 
spending  $25,000  per  day,  and  no  prospect  of 
getting  over  these  times.  It  was  our  full  under- 
standing, when  we  went  out  of  the  Union,  that 
we  would  have  a  new  Government  of  all  the 
Southern  States.  Our  object  was  to  bring 
about  a  collision  with  the  authorities  at  Wash- 
ington, which  all  thought  would  make  all  join 
us.  Although  we  have  sought  such  collision  in 
every  way,  wo  have  not  yet  got  a  fight,  and  the 
prospect  is  very  distant.  I  want  the  Almanac 
to  see  what  part  of  Texas  may  suit  me.  I  want 
to  raise  cotton  principally,  but  must  raise  corn 
enough  to  do  me.  I  cannot  live  here,  and  must 
get  away.  Many  are  leaving  now ;  at  least 
10,000  negroes  have  left  already;  and,  before 
long,  one-third  of  the  wealth  of  South  Carolina 
will  be  in  the  West.  I  desire  you  to  look  around 
and  help  me  to  get  a  home.  As  ever  yours, 
"Robert  Lyon." 

a  Wm.  H.  Russell,  of  The  London  Times,  in  his 


HESITATION    OF  TH 


B    BORDER  STATES. 


451 


a  war,  or  to  sink  gradually  but  surely 
out  of  existence  beneath  a  general 
appreciation  of  weakness,  insecurity, 
and  intolerable  burdens,  was  the  only 
choice  left  to  the  plotters  and  uphold- 
ers of  Secession. 

And,  though  signally  beaten  in 
the  recent  elections  of  the  non-sece- 
ded Slave  States,  they  had  yet  a  very 
strong  party  in  most  of  those  States 
— stronger  in  wealth,  in  social  stand- 
ing, and  in  political  activity  and  in- 
fluence, than  in  numbers.  A  major- 
ity of  these  had  been  able  to  bring 
the  Conventions  or  the  Legislatures 
of  their  respective  States  to  say,  with 
tolerable  unanimity,  "If  the  Black 
Republicans  attempt  to  coerce  the 
seceded  States,  we  will  join  them  in 
armed  resistance."  It  was  indispen- 
sable, therefore,  to  their  mutual  pur- 

"  Diary,  North  and  South,"  writing  at  Charles- 
ton, April  18,  1861,  says: 

M  These  tall,  thin,  fine-faced  Carolinians  are 
great  materialists.  Slavery,  perhaps,  has  aggra- 
vated the  tendency  to  look  at  all  the  world 
through  parapets  of  cotton-bales  and  rice-hags ; 
and,  though  more  stately  and  less  vulgar,  the 
worshipers  here  are  not  less  prostrate  before 
the  'almighty  dollar'  than  the  Northerners. 
Again,  cropping  out  of  the  dead  level  of  hate  to 
the  Yankee,  grows  its  climax  in  the  profession, 
from  nearly  every  one  of  the  guests,  that  he 
would  prefer  a  return  to  British  rule  to  any  re- 
union with  New  England.  *  *  *  They  affect  the 
agricultural  faith  and  the  belief  of  a  landed  gen- 
try. It  is  not  only  over  the  wine-glass — why 
call  it  cup  ? — that  they  ask  for  a  Prince  to  reign 
over  them.  I  havo  heard  the  wish  repeatedly 
expressed  within  the  last  two  days  that  we 
could  spare  them  one  of  our  young  Princes,  but 
never  in  jest  or  in  any  frivolous  manner." 

Mr.  Russell's  letters  from  Charleston  to  The 
Times  are  to  the  same  effect,  but  more  explicit 
and  circumstantial. 

3  The  RichmondWhig  of  November  9,  1860,  had 
the  following: 

"Because  the  Union  was  created  by  the  vol- 
untary consent  of  the  original  States,  it  does  not 
follow  that  such  consent  can  be  withdrawn  at 
will  by  any  single  party  to  the  compact,  and  its 
obligations  and  duties,  its  burdens  and  demands, 
be  avoided.  A  government  resting  on  such  a 
basis  would  be  as  unstable  as  the  ever-shifting 


poses,  that  there  should  be  'coer- 
cion.' 

So  late  as  April  4th — a  month  after 
the  return  of  her  'Commissioners' 
from  the  abortive  Peace  Conference 
— Virginia,  through  her  Convention, 
by  the  decisive  vote  of  89  to  45,  re- 
fused to  pass  an  Ordinance  of  Seces- 
sion. Still,  her  conspirators  worked 
on,  like  those  of  the  other  'Border 
States,'  and  claimed,  not  without 
plausible  grounds,  that  they  were 
making  headway.  Richmond  was 
the  focus  of  their  intrigues,  as  it  was 
of  her  Slave-trade ;  but  it  was  boasted 
that,  whereas  two  of  her  three  dele- 
gates to  the  Convention  were  chosen 
as  Unionists,  she  would  now  give  a 
decided  majority  for  Secession.  The 
Richmond  Whig'  the  time-honored 
organ  of  her  "Whig  i  Conservatives,' 

sands.  The  sport  of  every  popular  excitement, 
the  victim  of  every  conflicting  interest,  of  plot- 
ting ambition  or  momentary  impulse,  it  would 
afford  no  guarantee  of  perpetuity,  while  the 
hours  bring  round  the  circuit  of  a  single  year. 
To  suppose  that  a  single  State  could  withdraw 
at  will,  is  to  brand  the  statesmen  of  the  Revolu- 
tion, convinced  of  the  weakness  and  certain  de- 
struction of  the  old  Confederation  of  States,  of 
laboring  to  perpetuate  the  evil  they  attempted 
to  remedy.  The  work,  which  has  been  the  mar- 
vel of  the  world,  would  be  no  government  at  all ; 
the  oaths  taken  to  support  and  maintain  it  would 
be  bitter  mockery  of  serious  obligations;  and 
nothing  would  exist  to  invite  the  confidence  of 
citizens  or  strangers  in  its  protection. 

"  Less  strong  would  it  be  than  a  business 
partnership  of  limited  time.  From  this^  neither 
party  who  has  entered  into  it  can  escape,  except 
by  due  course  of  law.  Withdrawal  of  one  mem- 
ber carries  no  rights  of  possession  of  property  or 
control  of  the  affairs  of  the  partnership,  unless 
the  injunctions  of  legal  tribunals  are  invoked  to 
restrain  all  action  until  the  matter  in  dispute  is 
settled.  A  State  seceding  knows  no  law  to 
maintain  its  interest  nor  vindicate  its  rights. 
The  right  to  secede,  on  the  other  hand,  places 
the  Government  more  at  the  mercy  of  popular 
whim  than  the  business  interest  of  the  least 
mercantile  establishment  in  the  country  is  placed, 
by  the  law  of  the  land." 

Such  were  the  just  and  forcibly  stated  convic- 
tions of  a  leading  journal,  which  soon  after  be- 
came, and  has  since  remained,  a  noisy  oracle 
of  Secession. 


452 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


who  had  secured  her  vote  for  Bell 
and  Everett,  had  been  changed — by 
purchase,  it  was  said — and  was  now 
as  zealous  for  Secession  as  hitherto 
against  it.  Finally,  her  Convention 
resolved,  on  the  4th  aforesaid,  to  send 
new  Commissioners  to  wait  on  Presi- 
dent Lincoln,  and  appointed  Messrs. 
William  Ballard  Preston,  Alex.  H.  H. 
Stuart,  and  George  W.  Randolph  (of 
whom  the  last  only  was  formerly  a 
Democrat,  and  was  chosen  as  a  Se- 
cessionist), to  proceed  to  Washington 
on  this  errand.  They  did  not  ob- 
tain their  formal  audience  until  the 
13th — the  day  of  Fort  Sumter's  sur- 
render— when  its  bombardment,  if 
not  its  capture  also,  was  already 
known  in  that  city — and  there  was  a 
grim  jocosity  in  their  appearance  at 
such  an  hour  to  set  before  the  ha- 
rassed President  such  a  missive  as 
this : 

"  Whereas,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Conven- 
tion, the  uncertainty  which  prevails  in  the 
public  mind  as  to  the  policy  which  the  Fed- 
eral Executive  intends  to  pursue  toward  the 
seceded  States  is  extremely  injurious  to  the 
industrial  and  commercial  interests  of  the 
country,  tends  to  keep  up  an  excitement 
which  is  unfavorable  to  the  adjustment  of  the 
pending  difficulties,  and  threatens  a  disturb- 
ance of  the  public  peace  :  therefore, 

"Resolved,  That  a  Committee  of  three  del- 
egates be  appointed  to  wait  on  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  present  to  him  this 
preamble,  and  respectfully  ask  him  to  com- 
municate to  this  Convention  the  policy 
which  the  Federal  Executive  intends  to 
pursue  in  regard  to  the  Confederate  States." 

To  this  overture,  after  duly  ac- 
knowledging its  reception,  Mr.  Lin- 
coln replied  as  follows : 

"  In  answer,  I  have  to  say  that,  having,  at 
the  beginning  of  my  official  term,  expressed 
my  intended  policy  as  plainly  as  I  was  able, 
it  is  with  deep  regret  and  mortification  I 
now  learn  that  there  is  a  great  and  injurious 
uncertainty  in  the  public  mind  as  to  what 
that  policy  is,  and  what  course  I  intend  to 
pursue.  Not  having,  as  yet,  seen  occasion 
to  change,  it  is  now  my  purpose  to  pursue 
the  course  marked  out  in  that  Inaugural 


Address.  I  commend  a  careful  consideration 
of  the  document  as  the  best  expression  I  can 
give  to  my  purposes.  As  I  then  and  therein 
said,  I  now  repeat,  '  The  power  confided  in 
me  will  be  used  to  hold,  occupy,  and  possess, 
property  and  places  belonging  to  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  to  collect  the  duties  on  im- 
ports; but,  beyond  what  is  necessary  for 
these  objects,  there  will  be  no  invasion,  no 
using  of  force  against  or  among  the  people 
anywhere.'  By  the  words  'property  and 
places  belonging  to  the  Government,'  I 
chiefly  allude  to  the  military  posts  and 
property  which  were  in  possession  of  the 
Government  when  it  came  into  my  hands. 
But  if,  as  now  appears  to  be  true,  in  pursuit 
of  a  purpose  to  drive  the  United  States 
authority  from  these  places,  an  unprovoked 
assault  has  been  made  upon  Fort  Sumter,  I 
shall  hold  myself  at  liberty  to  repossess  it, 
if  I  can,  like  places  which  had  been  seized 
before  the  Government  was  devolved  upon 
me ;  and,  in  any  event,  I  shall,  to  the  best  of 
my  ability,  repel  force  by  force.  In  case  it 
proves  true  that  Fort  Sumter  has  been  as- 
saulted, as  is  reported,  I  shall,  perhaps,  cause 
the  United  States  mails  to  be  withdrawn 
from  all  the  States  which  claim  to  have  se- 
ceded, believing  that  the  commencement  of 
actual  war  against  the  Government  justifies 
and,  possibly,  demands  it.  I  scarcely  need 
to  say  that  I  consider  the  military  posts  and 
property,  situated  within  the  States  which 
claim  to  have  seceded,  as  yet  belonging  to 
the  United  States  as  much  as  they  did  before 
the  supposed  secession.  Whatever  else  I  may 
do  for  the  purpose,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  col- 
lect the  duties  and  imposts  by  any  armed  in- 
vasion of  any  part  of  the  country ;  not  mean- 
ing by  this,  however,  that  I  may  not  land  a 
force  deemed  necessary  to  relieve  a  fort  on 
the  border  of  the  country.  From  the  fact 
that  I  have  quoted  a  portion  of  the  Inaugu- 
ral Address,  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  I 
repudiate  any  other  part,  the  whole  of  which 
I  reaffirm,  except  so  far  as  what  I  now  say 
of  the  mails  may  be  regarded  as  a  modifica- 
tion." 

With  this  answer,  the  Commission- 
ers retired ;  and  the  next  important 
news  from  Virginia  reached  Wash- 
ington via  Montgomery  and  New 
Orleans,  which  cities  had  been  ex- 
hilarated to  the  point  of  cheering 
and  cannon-firing,  by  dispatches  from 
Eichmond,  announcing  the  fact  that 
the  Convention  had,  in  secret,  taken 
their  State  out  of  the  Union,  and 
united  her  fortunes  with  those  of  the 


THE   PRESIDENT'S  FIR 


ST   CALL   FOR  MILITIA. 


453 


Confederacy.4  The  vote  by  which 
this  result  was  achieved  stood  88  to 
55 — the  majority  greatly  strength- 
ened, doubtless,  if  not  secured,  by  an 
act  of  the  Confederate  Congress  for- 
bidding the  importation  of  slaves 
from  States  out  of  the  Confederacy 
— an  act  which,  so  long  as  Yirginia 
adhered  to  the  Union,  struck  a  stag- 
gering blow  at  the  most  important 
and  productive  branch  of  her  indus- 
try. And,  while  the  fact  of  her  se- 
cession was  still  unproclaimed,  her 
authorities  at  once  set  whatever  mili- 
tary forces  they  could  muster  in  mo- 
tion to  seize  the  Federal  Navy  Yard 
at  Norfolk  (Portsmouth)  and  the  Ar- 
senal at  Harper's  Ferry. 

As  the  news  of  the  attack  on  Sum- 
ter flashed  over  the  country,  an  in- 
tense and  universal  excitement  was 
aroused  in  the  Free  as  well  as  the 
Slave  States.  Indignation  was  par- 
amount in  the  former ;  exultation 
ruled  throughout  the  latter.5  Many 
at  the  North  obstinately  refused  to 
credit  the  tidings;  and,  when  news 
of  the  surrender  of  the  fort  so  speed- 

4  The  New  Fork  Herald  of  April  13th  had  a 
Charleston  dispatch  of  the  12th,  which  thus  cor- 
rectly expresses  the  Confederate  idea : 

"The  first  shot  [at  Fort  Sumter]  from  Ste- 
vens's battery  was  fired  by  the  venerable  Ed- 
mund Rufnn,  of  Virginia.  That  ball  will  do 
more  for  the  cause  of  Secession  in  Virginia  than 
volumes  of  stump  speeches." 

5  The  New  York  Herald  of  the  14th  had  the  fol- 
lowing : 

"  Richmond,  Va.,  April  13,  1861. 

"  There  is  great  rejoicing  here  over  the  news 
from  Charleston. 

u  One  hundred  guns  have  been  fired  to  cele- 
brate the  surrender  of  Fort  Sumter. 

"  Confederate  flags  are  everywhere  displayed ; 
while  music  and  illuminations  are  the  order  of 
the  evening. 

"Gov.  Letcher  has  just  been  serenaded.  He 
made  a  non-committal  speech. 

"The  streets  are  crowded  with  people,  and 
the  utmost  enthusiasm  and  excitement  prevails." 


ily  followed,  the  number  of  the  in- 
credulous was  even  increased.  All 
doubt,  however,  was  dispelled  when 
the  journals  of  Monday  morning, 
April  15th,  displayed  conspicuously 
the  following 

"  PROCLAMATION". 

"Whereas,  the  laws  of  the  United  States 
have  been  for  some  time  past,  and  now  are, 
opposed,  and  the  execution  thereof  obstruct- 
ed, in  the  States  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia, 
Alabama,  Florida,  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  and 
Texas,  by  combinations  too  powerful  to  be 
suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course  of  judicial 
proceedings,  or  by  the  powers  vested  in  the 
marshals  by  law :  now,  therefore,  I,  Abra- 
ham Lincoln,  President  of  the  United  States, 
in  virtue  of  the  power  in  me  vested  by  the 
Constitution  and  the  laws,  have  thought  fit 
to  call  forth  the  Militia  of  the  several  States 
of  the  Union  to  the  aggregate  number  of 
75,000,  in  order  to  suppress  said  combina- 
tions, and  to  cause  the  laws  to  be  duly  exe- 
cuted. 

"  The  details  for  this  object  will  be  imme- 
diately communicated  to  the  State  authori- 
ties through  the  War  Department.6  I  appeal 
to  all  loyal  citizens  to  favor,  facilitate,  and 
aid,  this  enbrt  to.  maintain  the  honor,  the  in- 
tegrity, and  existence,  of  our  national  Union, 
and  the  perpetuity  of  popular  Government, 
and  to  redress  wrongs  already  long  enough 
endured.  I  deem  it  proper  to  say  that  the 
first  service  assigned  to  the  forces  hereby 
called  forth  will  probably  be  to  repossess  the 
forts,  places,  and  property  which  have  been 
seized  from  the  Union ;  and  in  every  event  the 

6  The  Circular  from  the  War  Department, 
which  was  sent  to  the  Governors  along  with 
this  Proclamation,  explained  that  the  call  was 
for  regiments  of  infantry  or  riflemen  only — each 
regiment  to  be  composed  of  780  men — the  ap- 
portionment of  regiments  to  the  several  States 
called  on  being  as  follows : 


1 

Yirginia  .    .  . 

.  3 

New  Hampshire 

.  1 

North  Carolina  . 

.  2 

Vermont  .    .  . 

.  1 

Kentucky     .  , 

.  4 

Massachusetts  . 

.  2 

Arkansas .    .  . 

.  1 

Rhode  Island  . 

.  1 

Missouri  .    .  . 

.  4 

Connecticut  .  . 

.  1 

Ohio  .... 

.  13 

New  York    .  . 

.  17 

Indiana    .    .  . 

.  6 

New  Jersey  .  . 

.  4 

Illinois     .    .  . 

.  6 

Pennsylvania  . 

.  16 

Michigan .    .  . 

.  1 

Delaware .    .  . 

.  1 

Iowa  .... 

.  1 

Tennessee    .  . 

.  2 

Minnesota    .  . 

.  1 

Maryland .    .  . 

.  4 

Wisconsin    .  . 

.  1 

The  94  regiments  thus  called  for  would  form  a 
total  of  73,391  men— the  residue  of  the  75,000 
being  expected  from  the  Federal  District. 


454 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


utmost  care  will  be  observed,  consistently 
with  the  objects  aforesaid,  to  avoid  any  de- 
vastation, any  destruction  of,  or  interference 
with,  property,  or  any  disturbance  of  peaceful 
citizens  of  any  part  of  the  country ;  and  I 
hereby  command  the  persons  composing  the 
combinations  aforesaid,  to  disperse  and  retire 
peaceably  to  their  respective  abodes,  within 
twenty  days  from  this  date. 

''Deeming  that  the  present  condition  of 
public  affairs  presents  an  extraordinary  oc- 
casion, I  do  hereby,  in  virtue  of  the  power 
in  me  vested  by  the  Constitution,  convene 
both  Houses  of  Congress.  The  Senators  and 
Eepresentatives  are,  therefore,  summoned  to 
assemble  at  their  respective  chambers  at  12 
o'clock,  noon,  on  Thursday,  the  4th  day  of 
July  next,  then  and  there  to  consider  and 
determine  such  measures  as,  in  their  wis- 
dom, the  public  safety  and  interest  may  seem 
to  demand. 

"In  witness  whereof,  I  have  hereunto  set 
my  hand,  and  caused  the  seal  of  the  United 
States  to  be  affixed. 

"Done  at  the  City  of  "Washington,  this 
15th  day  of  April,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-one,  and 
of  the  independence  of  the  United  States  the 
eighty-fifth. 

"Abraham  Lincoln-. 

"  By  the  President : 

"Wm.'H.  Sewaed,  Secretary  of  State.'''' 

This  Proclamation  was  received 
tkroughout  the  Free  States  with  very- 
general  and  enthusiastic  approval. 
Nearly  all  of  them  on  this  side  of  the 
Hocky  Mountains  had  Republican 
Governors  and  Legislatures,  who  vied 
with  each  other  in  proffers  of  men, 
money,  munitions,  and  everything  that 
could  be  needed  to  vindicate  the  au- 
thority and  maintain  the  integrity  of 
the  Union.  The  only 7  Governor  not 
elected  as  a  Republican  was  William 
Sprague,  of  Rhode  Island — an  in- 
dependent 'conservative' — who  not 
merely  raised  promptly  the  quota  re- 
quired of  him,  but  volunteered  to  lead 
it  to  Washington,  or  wherever  its 
services  might  be  required.  No  State 
was  more  prompt  and  thorough  in  her 
response,  and  none  sent  her  troops  into 


the  field  more  completely  armed  and 
serviceably  equipped,  than  did  Rhode 
Island.  Among  the  privates  in  her 
first  regiment  was  one  worth  a  million 
dollars,  who  destroyed  the  passage- 
ticket  he  had  bought  for  a  voyage  to 
Europe,  on  a  tour  of  observation  and 
pleasure,  to  shoulder  his  musket  in 
defense  of  his  country  and  her  laws. 

Hitherto,  the  Democrats  and  other 
6  conservatives'  of  the  Free  States  had 
seemed8  to  sympathize  rather  with 
'  the  South'  than  with  the  new  Ad- 
ministration, in  so  far  as  they  were  at 
variance,  though  not  usually  to  the 
extent  of  justifying  Secession.  Now, 
public  meetings,  addresses,  enlist- 
ments, the  mustering  of  companies 
and  of  regiments  on  all  sides,  seemed 
for  a  time  to  indicate  an  almost  un- 
broken unanimity  in  support  of  the 
Government.  The  spirit  of  the  hour 
is  very  fairly  exhibited  in  the  leading 
article  of  The  New  York  Tribune  of 
April  15th,  as  follows : 

"  Fort  Sumter  is  lost,  but  freedom  is  saved. 
There  is  no  more  thought  of  bribing  or  coax- 
ing the  traitors  who  have  dared  to  aim  their 
cannon-balls  at  the  flag  of  the  Union,  and 
those  who  gave  their  lives  to  defend  it.  It 
seems  but  yesterday  that  at  least  two-thirds 
of  the  journals  of  this  city  were  the  virtual 
allies  of  the  Secessionists,  their  apologists, 
their  champions.  The  roar  of  the  great  cir- 
cle of  batteries  pouring  their  iron  hail  upon 
devoted  Sumter  has  struck  them  all  dumb. 
It  is  as  if  one  had  made  a  brilliant  and  effect- 
ive speech,  setting  forth  the  innocence  of 
murder,  and,  having  just  bidden  adieu  to  the 
cheers  and  the  gas-lights,  were  to  be  con- 
fronted by  the  gory  form  and  staring  eyes 
of  a  victim  of  assassination,  the  first  fruit  of 
his  oratorical  success. 

"  For  months  before  the  late  Presidential 
election,  a  majority  of  our  journals  predicted 
forcible  resistance  to  the  Government  as  the 
natural  and  necessary  result  of  a  Republican 
triumph  ;  for  months  since,  they  have  been 
cherishing  and  encouraging  the  Slavehold- 
ers' Rebellion,  as  if  it  were  a  very  natural 


7  These  of  California  and  Oregon  were  excep- 
tions; but,  being  far  away,  and  not  called  on 


for  Militia,  their  views  were  then  undeveloped. 
8  See  especially  pages  355-6.  and  thenceforward. 


THE    PRESS    ON  THE 


PRESIDENT'S  CALL. 


455 


and  proper  proceeding.  Their  object  was 
purely  partisan — they  wished  to  bully  the 
Republican  Administration  into  shameful 
recreancy  to  Republican  principle,  and  then 
call  upon  the  people  to  expel  from  power  a 
party  so  profligate  and  so  cowardly.  They 
did  not  succeed  in  this  ;  they  have  succeeded 
in  enticing  their  Southern  proteges  and  some- 
time allies  into  flagrant  treason.  *  *  * 

w  Most  of  our  journals  lately  parading  the 
pranks  of  the  Secessionists  with  scarcely 
disguised  exultation,  have  been  suddenly 
sobered  by  the  culmination  of  the  slavehold- 
ing  conspiracy.  They  would  evidently  like 
to  justify  and  encourage  the  traitors  further, 
but  they  dare  not ;  so  the  Amen  sticks  in 
their  throat.  The  aspect  of  the  people  ap- 
palls them.  Democrat  as  well  as  Repub- 
lican, Conservative  and  Radical,  instinctive- 
ly feel  that  the  guns  fired  at  Sumter  were 
aimed  at  the  heart  of  the  American  Repub- 
lic. Not  even  in  the  lowest  groggery  of  our 
city  would  it  be  safe  to  propose  cheers  for 
Beauregard  and  Gov.  Pickens.  The  Tories 
of  the  Revolution  were  relatively  ten  times 
as  numerous  here  as  are  the  open  sympa- 
thizers with  the  Palmetto  Rebels.  It  is 
hard  to  lose  Sumter ;  it  is  a  consolation  to 
know  that  in  losing  it  we  have  gained  a 
united  people.  Henceforth,  the  loyal  States 
are  a  unit  in  uncompromising  hostility  to 
treason,  wherever  plotted,  however  justified. 
Fort  Sumter  is  temporarily  lost,  but  the 
country  is  saved.    Live  the  Republic!" 

Dissent  from  this  view  did,  indeed, 
seem  for  the  moment  almost,  but  not 
entirely,  silenced.  The  opposite  con- 
ception was  temperately  set  forth,  on 
the  evening  of  that  day,  by  The  New 
York  Express,  as  follows : 

"The  1  irrepressible  conflict'  started  by 
Mr.  Seward  and  indorsed  by  the  Republican 
party,  has  at  length  attained  to  its  logical, 
foreseen  result.  That  conflict,  undertaken 
1  for  the  sake  of  humanity,'  culminates  now 
in  inhumanity  itself,  and  exhibits  the  afflict- 
ing spectacle  of  brother  shedding  brother's 
blood. 

"Refusing  the  ballot  before  the  bullet, 
these  men,  flushed  with  the  power  and  pat- 
ronage of  the  Federal  Government,  have 
madly  rushed  into  a  civil  war,  which  will 
probably  drive  the  remaining  Slave  States 
into  the  arms  of  the  Southern  Confederacy, 
and  dash  to  pieces  the  last  hope  for  a  recon- 
struction of  the  Union. 

"  To  the  gallant  men  who  are  so  nobly 
defending  their  flag  within  the  walls  of  Fort 
Sumter,  the  nation  owes  a  debt  of  eternal 
gratitude — not  less  than  to  the  equally  gal- 
lant and  patriotic  spirits,  who,  in  like  obedi- 


ence to  the  demands  of  duty,  are  periling 
their  lives  and  shedding  their  blood  in  the 
heroic,  but,  as  yet,  unsuccessful  endeavor  to 
afford  them  succor.  But,  to  the  cold-blood- 
ed, heartless  demagogues  who  started  this 
civil  war — themselves  magnanimously  keep- 
ing out  of  the  reach  of  bodily  harm — we 
can  only  say,  You  must  find  your  account,  if 
not  at  the  hands  of  an  indignant  people,  then 
in  the  tears  of  widows  and  orphans.  The 
people  of  the  United  States,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  petitioned,  begged,  and  im- 
plored these  men,  who  are  become  their  ac- 
cidental masters,  to  give  them  an  opportu- 
nity to  be  heard  before  this  unnatural  strife 
was  pushed  to  a  bloody  extreme  ;  but  their 
petitions  were  all  spurned  with  contempt; 
and  now  the  bullet  comes  in  to  decide  the 
issue  I" 

In  another  editorial,  The  Express 
said : 

"  The  great  fact  is  upon  us.  Civil  war 
has  commenced.  Where  it  will  end,  is 
known  only  to  that  Higher  Power  'that 
shapes  our  ends,  rough-hew  them  as  we 
will.'  Of  one  thing,  however,  we  are  thor- 
oughly convinced— the  South  can  never  be 
subjugated  by  the  North,  nor  can  any  mark- 
ed successes  be  achieved  against  them. 
They  have  us  at  every  advantage.  They 
fight  upon  their  own  soil,  in  behalf  of  their 
dearest  rights — for  their  public  institutions, 
their  homes,  and  their  property.  They  are 
abundantly  supplied  with  all  the  means  and 
appliances  for  the  contest;  are  commanded 
by  officers  who  have  fought  and  won  battles 
by  the  side  of  those  against  whom  they  are 
now  arrayed,  with  ranks  filled  by  men  as  in- 
telligent, patriotic,  and  brave,  as  e'er  faced  a 
foe,  and  a  determination  never  to  be  de- 
feated. *  *  * 

"  The  South,  in  self-preservation,  has  been 
driven  to  the  wall,  and  forced  to  proclaim 
its  independence.  A  servile  insurrection 
and  wholesale  slaughter  of  the  whites  will 
alone  satisfy  the  murderous  designs  of  the 
Abolitionists.  The  Administration,  egged 
on  by  the  halloo  of  the  Black  Republican 
journals  of  this  city,  has  sent  its  mercenary 
forces  to  pick  a  quarrel  and  initiate  the 
wor~k  of  desolation  and  ruin.  A  call  is  made 
for  an  army  of  volunteers,  under  the  pre- 
tense that  an  invasion  is  apprehended  of  the 
Federal  capital ;  and  the  next  step  will  be  to 
summon  the  slave  population  to  revolt  and 
massacre." 

The  Utica  £N".  Y.]  Observer  more 

pointedly  said : 

"  Of  all  the  wars  whioh  have  disgraced  the 
human  race,  it  has  been  reserved  for  our  own 
enlightened  nation  to  be  involved  in  the  most 


456 


T II E  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


useless  and  foolish  one.  "What  advantage 
can  possibly  accrue  to  any  one  from  this 
war,  however  prolonged  it  might  he  ?  Does 
any  suppose  that  millions  of  free  white 
Americans  in  the  Southern  States,  who  will 
soon  be  arrayed  against  us,  can  be  con- 
quered by  any  efforts  which  can  be  brought 
against  them  ?  Brave  men,  fighting  on  their 
own  soil,  and,  as  they  believe,  for  their  free- 
dom and  dearest  rights,  can  never  be  subju- 
gated. The  war  may  be  prolonged  until  we 
are  ourselves  exhausted,  and  become  an  easy 
prey  to  military  despotism  or  equally  fatal 
anarchy ;  but  we  can  never  conquer  the 
South.  Admit,  if  you  please,  that  they  are 
rebels  and  traitors:  they  are  beyond  our 
reach.  Why  should  we  destroy  ourselves  in 
injuring  them? 

"  Who  are  to  fight  the  hattles  of  sectional 
hatred  in  this  sad  strife?  The  Seceders  will 
fight;  but  will  the  Abolitionists,  who  have 
combined  with  them  to  overthrow  the  Union, 
make  themselves  food  for  powder?  If  this 
could  be  so — if  ten  thousand  picked  fire-eat- 
ers of  either  sido  could  be  arrayed  against 
each  other,  and  would  fight  until,  like  the 
Kilkenny  cats,  all  were  destroyed — the  coun- 
try would  be  the  better  for  it.  But,  while 
the  Secessionist  defends  himself,  the  Aboli- 
tionist will  sneak  in  the  back-ground,  leav- 
ing those  to  do  the  fighting  who  have  no  in- 
terest in  the  bloody  strife,  no  hatred  against 
their  brethren.  The  best  we  can  hope  is, 
that,  at  the  end  of  a  fearful  struggle,  when 
the  country  becomes  tired  of  gratifying  a 
spirit  of  fanaticism,  we  shall  have  peace 
through  a  treaty  in  which  botli  sides  must 
make  sacrifices,  but  each  must  agree  to 
respect  the  rights  of  the  other.  How  much 
better  to  make  such  a  treaty  now,  before 
further  bloodshed,  before  worse  hatreds  are 
engendered!" 

The  Bangor  Union  (Maine)  still 
more  boldly  said : 

"  Democrats  of  Maine  !  the  loyal  sons  of 
the  South  have  gathered  around  Charleston, 
as  your  fathers  of  old  gathered  about  Bos- 
ton, in  defense  of  the  same  sacred  principles 
of  liberty — principles  which  you  have  ever 
upheld  and  defended  with  your  vote,  your 
voice,  and  your  strong  right  arm.  Your 
sympathies  are  w^ith  the  defenders  of  the 
truth  and  the  right.  Those  who  have  inau- 
gurated this  unholy  and  unjustifiable  war 
are  no  friends  of  yours — no  friends  of  Dem- 
ocrat ic  Liberty.  Will  you  aid  them  in  their 
work  of  subjugation  and  tyranny? 

"  When  the  Government  at  Washington 
calls  for  volunteers  or  recruits  to  carry  on 
the  work  of  subjugation  and  tyranny  under 
the  specious  phrase  of  'enforcing  the  laws,' 
k  retaking  and  protecting  the  public  proper- 


ty,' and  \  collecting  the  revenue,'  let  every 
Democrat  fold  his  arms,  and  bid  the  minions 
of  Tory  despotism  do  a  Tory  despot's  work. 
Say  to  them  fearlessly  and  boldly,  in  the 
language  of  England's  great  Lord,  the  Earl 
of  Chatham,  whose  bold  words  in  behalf  of 
the  struggling  colonies  of  America,  in  the 
dark  hours  of  the  Kevolution,  have  en- 
shrined  his  name  in  the  heart  of  every 
friend  of  freedom  and  immortalized  his  fame 
wherever  the  name  of  liberty  is  known — 
say,  in  his  thrilling  language :  '  If  I  were  a 
Southerner,  as  I  am  a  Northerner,  while  a 
foreign  troop  was  landed  in  my  country,  I 
would  never  lay  down  my  arms — never,  nev- 
er, nevek!'  " 

The  Albany  Argus  more  cautiously 
and  guardedly  said : 

"The  first  gun  of  civil  war  is  heard, 
whose  reverberations  are  yet  to  echo  through 
the  civilized  world — the  signal  of  events  of 
which  no  man  can  tell  the  end.  A  fearful 
responsibility  is  due  to  those  who  have 
brought  this  crisis  upon  the  country.  War 
is  not  the  least  of  calamities.  If  the  Federal 
Government  were  about  to  sacrifice  its  trea- 
sures and  fleets  and  armies  to  rebuke  the 
Spanish  usurpation  in  Saint  Domingo — if 
this  armament  were  intended  to  repel 
can  aggression,  or  to  assert  our  right  to^san 
Juan  against  English  pretension — every  citi- 
zen would  gladly  rally  to  the  support  of  the 
Government.  But  it  is  between  the  States 
of  the  Union  that  the  war  is  to  be  declared ; 
and  its  provocations  are  to  bo  found  in  the 
aggressions  of  section  against  section,  and 
the  defiance  of  constitutional  guarantees. 
It  is  a  civil  war  that  opens — a  war  whose 
successes  are  without  glory,  whose  noblest 
deeds  are  without  honor,  for  they  are  won 
in  fratricidal  conflict,  and  their  cost  is  fratri- 
cidal blood.  If  this  were  even  a  natural, 
intelligent  assertion  of  Government  author- 
ity, it  would  appeal  to  the  moral  sentiment 
of  the  country.  If  its  object  and  result 
were  to  restore  the  Union  and  reestablish 
tho  Constitution  over  these  States.it  might  be 
worth  all  the  sacrifices  it  imposed.  For  our- 
selves, wo  should  place  no  impediments  in 
its  way,  but  bid  it  God  speed  to  its  end. 
Every  Democrat  in  the  North  would  take 
the  same  position.  But  it  cannot,  in  any 
event,  have  this  effect.  It  cannot  restore; 
it  can  only  destroy.  There  are  those  who 
believe  that  it  is  the  deliberate  purpose  of 
the  Administration  to  terminate,  in  a  war  in 
which  sectional  passions  shall  bo  aroused 
to  the  utmost  hight,  the  connection  be- 
tween the  North  and  the  South,  and  to  cut 
off  all  possible  hope  of  reconstruction.  If 
this  is  the  purpose  of  the  Administration, 
they  have  lost  no  time  in  its  execution.  Tho 


THE   PRESS  ON 


FORT  SUMTER. 


457 


deed  of  separation  is  sealed  in  the  first  blood 
shed  in  this  conflict." 

The  Journal  of  Commerce  (New 

York)  said : 

"  We  will  not  undertake,  at  this  moment, 
to  apportion  the  measure  of  folly  and  crime, 
on  either  side,  which  has  led  to  the  present 
catastrophe.  No  doubt  it  has  been  precipi- 
tated by  the  sending  of  a  fleet  with  troops, 
by  the  United  States  Government,  for  the 
relief  (as  was  understood)  of  Sumter.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  this 
action  of  the  United  States  Government  was 
occasioned  by  the  cutting  off  of  supplies 
from  Fort  Sumter  by  the  Confederate  au- 
thorities, which  rendered  it  necessary  to 
send  them  from  New  York  or  some  other 
point.  To  this,  again,  it  may  be  replied, 
that  the  cutting  off  of  supplies  by  the  Con- 
federate authorities  was  caused  by  the  long 
continued  delay  of  the  United  States  au- 
thorities to  take  or  consent  to  any  measures 
of  adjustment  of  the  pending  difterences, 
thus  leaving  the  Confederate  authorities 
subject  to  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a 
large  military  force  at  Charleston  for  an  in- 
definite period,  or  abandoning  their  claims 
altogether.  The  Confederate  authorities 
must,  however,  bear  the  responsibility  (and 
it  is  a  heavy  one)  of  commencing  the  actual 
firing." 

The  Boston  Post  still  more  mildly 
said : 

"  The  people  must  speak  in  their  primary 
capacity,  if  they  would  save  their  country 
from  a  miserable  destiny — if  they  would  se- 
cure to  their  families  and  themselves  peace 
and  safety.  This  should  be  done  in  a  legal 
manner.  An  Extra  Session  of  Congress 
should  be  called  at  once.  And,  if  that 
body  prove  incompetent  to  the  duty  re- 
quired, then  a  National  Convention  should 
be  convened ;  and,  if  all  measures  for  a  sat- 
isfactory adjustment  fail,  after  full  hearing 
and  answers  to  statements  of  discontent, 
and  a  portion  of  our  country  declare  its  de- 
termination, at  all  events,  to  dissolve  its  as- 
sociation with  another  portion,  let  it  depart 

a  The  True  American  (Trenton,  N.  J.),  and,  so 
far  as  can  now  be  traced,  every  other  prominent 
Democratic  journal  issued  in  New  Jersey,  blamed 
the  Administration  and  the  1  Black  Republicans' 
for  inciting  and  provoking  '  the  South'  to  rebel- 
lion and  civil  war,  in  substantial  accordance  with 
the  foregoing  views  of  The  New  York  Express  and 
The  Albany  Argus.  The  Pennsylvanian  (Philadel- 
phia), and  TJie  Patriot  and  Union  (Harrisburg), 
with  nearly  every  other  leading  Democratic 
journal  in  Pennsylvania,  also  treated  the  war 


in  peace,  if  possible;  but,  if  it  be  not  pos- 
sible, then  we  shall  feel  that  we  have  done 
all  that  Christianity,  reason,  and  patriotism 
could  demand,  and  be  prepared  to  meet  the 
last  dreadful  issue  with  a  sustaining  con- 
science." 8 

The  New  York  Herald  of  the  15th 
put  forth  a  e  leader,'  whereof  the  drift 
is  exhibited  in  the  following  extracts : 

"  Earnestly  laboring  in  behalf  of  peace, 
from  the  beginning  of  these  sectional  trou- 
bles down  to  this  day,  and  for  the  mainte- 
nance of  the  Union  through  mutual  conces- 
sions, we  do  not,  even  yet,  utterly  despair 
of  arresting  this  civil  war  before  it  shall  have 
passed  beyond  the  reach  of  reason.  In  any 
event,  the  people  of  this  metropolis  owe  it 
to  themselves,  to  their  material  and  political 
interests,  to  their  social  security  and  to  the 
country  at  large,  to  make  a  solemn  and  im- 
posing effort  in  behalf  of  peace.  To  this 
end,  we  again  call  upon  our  fellow-citizens 
of  this  island,  irrespective  of  creed  or  party, 
to  meet  together  in  an  earnest  consultation 
upon  the  ways  and  means  of  peace.  The 
Government  at  Washington  and  that  at 
Montgomery,  confronted  with  the  horrors  of 
civil  war,  may  yet  recoil  from  them. 

"The  conservative  city  of  New  York, 
guiltless  of  any  agency  in  precipitating  upon 
the  two  sections  of  this  great  country  this 
causeless  and  senseless  appeal  to  arms,  has 
the  right,  and  has  some  power,  to  speak  to 
the  North  and  the  South  in  behalf  of  peace." 

The  Uerald  of  the  next  day  con- 
tained a  leading  article  in  substantial 
accordance  with  the  new  drift  of  pub- 
lic sentiment,  even  among  £  conserva- 
tives:' saying: 

"  The  measures  that  have  been  adopted, 
within  the  last  few  days,  by  the  Government 
of  Mr.  Lincoln,  entirely  change  the  aspect  of 
public  affairs.  Had  a  similar  course  been 
pursued  five  months  ago,  the  last  would 
have  been  heard  of  Secession  before  now. 
Not  the  firing  of  a  gun  would  have  been 

now  opening  as  provoked,  if  not  wantonly  com- 
menced, by  the  'Black  Republicans.'  So  with 
the  ablest  and  most  widely  circulated  Democratic 
journals  of  Connecticut.  The  Chicago  Times,  Tlie 
Detroit  Free  Press,  andOM?  Statesman  (Columbus), 
likewise  regarded  and  treated  the  conflict  as  one 
which  the  Republicans  had  unwarrantably  com- 
menced, or,  at  least,  incited.  Few  or  none  of 
these,  however,  counseled  acquiescence  in  Dis- 
union— much  less,  a  surrender  of  Washington 
and  Maryland. 


458 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


needed;  the  fortifications  npon  the  coast 
would  have  been  rendered  impregnable 
against  local  attacks  ;  and,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  South  Carolina,  no  State  would  have 
withdrawn  from  the  Union.  Such  a  policy 
was  strongly  recommended  to  Mr.  Buchan- 
an's Administration,  at  the  time,  by  -The 
New  York  Herald;  but  treason  in  his  Cabi- 
net, and  the  atrocious  perfidy  of  many  others 
who  surrounded  him,  prevented  his  acts 
from  corresponding  with  the  exigencies  of 
the  period.  It  is  better,  however,  late  than 
never. 

*  *  *  "  The  time  has  passed  for  such  pub- 
lic peace  meetings,  in  the  North,  as  were 
advocated,  and  might  have  effected  some 
beneficial  result,  a  few  weeks  since.  War 
will  make  the  Northern  people  a  unit.  Ke- 
publicans  look  upon  it  as  inevitable,  and 
Democrats  have  been  gradually  becoming 
disgusted  at  the  neglect  and  ingratitude  with 
which  they  have  been  treated  by  a  section 
for  which  they  have  faithfully  borne  the 
heat  and  burden  of  conflict  for  so  many 
years.  Fire-eaters  have  accustomed  them- 
selves to  adopt  an  indiscriminate  tone  of 
hostility  toward  citizens  of  the  non-slave- 
holding  States,  which  would  have,  long  ago, 
alienated  their  friends,  but  that  the  party 
attachment  of  the  latter  has  been  founded 
upon  principles,  not  recklessly  to  be  aban- 
doned. 

"  The  policy  adopted  by  Mr.  Lincoln,  as 
set  forth  in  his  Proclamation  and  his  speech 
to  the  Virginia  Commissioners,  is,  on  the 
whole,  approved  by  the  masses  of  the  com- 
munity. It  cannot  harm  the  North  event- 
ually;  and,  if  the  damage  it  may  inflict  upon 
the  South  is  to  be  regretted,  it  will  be  none 
the  less  well,  if  it  secures  final  peace  to  the 
country." 

That  those  who  for  years  had  zeal- 
ously maintained  that  a  simple  ad- 
herence to  the  policy  of  Jefferson 
with  regard  to  the  exclusion  of  Sla- 
very from  the  territories  was  an  un- 
warranted and  unjustifiable  war  upon 
*  the  South,'  impelled  by  6  fanaticism' 
and  c  sectional'  hate,  should,  by  the 
mere  crashing  of  a  few  balls  against 
the  walls  of  a  Federal  fortress,  be 
converted  to  an  entirely  different 
view  of  the  past  and  present  attitude 

9  The  Neio  York  Herald  of  April  10th,  after 
proclaiming  in  its  '  leader'  that 1  civil  war  is  close 
at  hand,'  and  announcing  that  Lieut.  Talbot  had 
been  stopped  in  Charleston  on  his  return  from 


of  the  combatants,  was  not  to  be  ex- 
pected. That  the  hated  6  Abolition- 
ists' were  the  real,  responsible,  culpa- 
ble authors  of  the  long  foreseen  and 
deeply  deplored  collision,  was  doubt- 
less still  the  belief  of  thousands  who 
saw  no  adequate  reason  for  insisting 
on  it  at  this  juncture,  and  in  whose 
minds  indignation  at  the  Secession- 
ists, not  only  as  factious  and  unpa- 
triotic, but  as  untrue  and  ungrateful 
to  their  6  conservative'  friends  in  the 
Free  States,  for  the  moment  over- 
bore all  countervailing  considerations. 
But,  despite  this  undertone  of  demur 
and  dissatisfaction,  it  is  certain  that 
the  North  had  never  before  seemed 
so  nearly  and  enthusiastically  unani- 
mous and  determined  as  in  devotion 
to  the  maintenance  of  the  Union  for 
the  month  or  two  succeeding  the  re- 
duction of  Fort  Sumter. 


Yery  different  was  the  impression 
made  on  the  public  mind  of  the  South 
by  the  same  occurrences — strikingly 
diverse  was  the  reception  there  ac- 
corded to  the  President's  Proclama- 
tion. 

On  the  evening  of  April  12th,  the 
Confederates  congregated  at  their 
capital,  Montgomery,  held  high  car- 
nival over  the  tidings  that  Beaure- 
gard had,  by  order,  opened  fire  that 
morning  on  Fort  Sumter.  As  was 
natural,  their  Secretary  of  "War,  Mr. 
Leroy  Pope  Walker,  was  called  out 
for  a  speech,  and,  in  his  response, 
predicted  that  the  Confederate  flag 
would  float,  before  the  1st  of  May, 
over  "Washington  City,9  as  it  might, 
ultimately,  over  Faneuil  Hall  itsel£ 

Washington  to  Major  Anderson  in  Fort  Sumter 
says: 

"  Anticipating,  then,  the  speedy  inauguration 
of  civil  war  at  Charleston,  at  Pensacola,  or  pi 


SOUTHERN  RESPONSE 


S   TO   THE   PRESIDENT.  459 


This  declaration  was,  very  naturally, 
at  once  flashed  over  the  whole  conn- 
try  ;  and  it  was  well  known  that  a 
portion  of  the  Confederate  forces 
were  dispatched  northward  from 
Charleston  directly  after  the  fall  of 
Sumter.10  Yet,  in  the  face  of  these 
notorious  facts,  Gov.  Letcher  respond- 
ed to  the  President's  call  on  Virginia 
for  Militia  to  defend  the  capital  in 
the  following  terms : 

*'  I  have  only  to  say  that  the  militia  of 
Virginia  will  not  be  furnished  to  the  powers 
at  Washington  for  any  such  use  or  purpose 
as  they  have  in  view.  Your  object  is  to  sub- 
jugate the  Southern  States ;  and  a  requisition 
made  upon  me  for  such  an  object — an  ob- 
ject, in  my  judgment,  not  within  the  pur- 
view of  the  Constitution  or  the  Act  of 
1795 — will  not  be  complied  with.  You 
have  chosen  to  inaugurate  civil  war ;  and, 
having  done  so,  we  will  meet  you  in  a  spirit 
as  determined  as  the  Administration  has  ex- 
hibited toward  the  South.1' 

To  the  same  effect,  Gov.  Ellis,  of 

North  Carolina — who  had  long  been 

Texas,  or,  perhaps,  at  all  these  places,  the  in- 
quiry is  forced  upon  us,  What  will  be  the  prob- 
able consequences  ?  We  apprehend  that  they 
will  be :  first,  the  secession  of  Virginia  and  the 
other  border  Slave  States,  and  their  union  with  the 
Confederate  States ;  secondly,  the  organization 
of  an  army  for  the  removal  of  the  United  States 
ensign  and  authorities  from  every  fortress  or 
public  building  within  the  Confederate  States, 
including  the  White  House,  the  Capitol,  and  other 
public  buildings  at  Washington.  After  the  seces- 
sion of  Virginia  from  the  United  States,  it  is  not 
likely  that  Maryland  can  be  restrained  from  the 
same  decisive  act.  She  will  follow  the  fortunes 
of  Mrginia,  and  will  undoubtedly  claim  that,  in 
withdrawing  from  the  United  States,  the  District 
of  Columbia  reverts  into  her  possession  under  the 
supreme  right  of  revolution.  Here  we  have 
verge  and  scope  enough  for  a  civil  war  of  five, 
ten,  or  twenty  years'  duration. 

';  What  for  ?  To  '  show  that  we  have  a  Gov- 
ernment'— to  show  that  the  seceded  States  are 
still  in  our  Union,  and  are  still  subject  to  its 
laws  and  authorities.  This  is  the  fatal  mistako 
of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and  his  Cabinet,  and  his  party. 
The  simple  truth — patent  to  all  the  world — is, 
that  the  seceded  States  are  out  of  the  Union, 
and  are  organized  under  an  independent  Govern- 
ment of  their  own.  The  authority  of  the  United 
States,  within  the  borders  of  this  independent 
Confederacy,  has  been  completely  superseded, 
except  in  a  detached  fort  here  and  there.  We 
desire  to  restore  this  displaced  authority  in  its 
full  integrity.  How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  By  entering 


thoroughly  in  the  interest  and  coun- 
sels of  the  plotters  of  Disunion — re- 
sponded to  the  call  as  follows : 

"  Raleigh,  April  15,  1861. 
"  Honorable  Simon  Cameron, 

"  Secretary  of  War  : 
"  Your  dispatch  is  received,  and,  if  genu- 
ine— which  its  extraordinary  character  leads 
me  to  doubt — I  have  to  say  in  reply,  that 
I  regard  the  levy  of  troops  made  by  the  Ad- 
ministration for  the  purpose  of  subjugating 
the  States  of  the  South,  as  in  violation  of 
the  Constitution,  and  a  usurpation  of  power. 
I  can  be  no  party  to  this  wicked  violation 
of  the  laws  of  the  country,  and  to  this  war 
upon  the  liberties  of  a  free  people.  You 
can  get  no  troops  from  North  Carolina.  I 
will  reply  more  in  detail  when  your  call  is 
received  by  mail.        John  "W.  Ellis, 

"  Governor  of  North  Carolina." 

Gov.  Isham  G.  Harris,  of  Tennessee 
— likewise  a  thorough  sympathizer 
with  South  Carolina — responded  as 
follows : 

"  Tennessee  will  not  furnish  a  single  man 
for  coercion,  but  fifty  thousand,  if  necessary, 
for  the  defense  of  our  rights  and  those  of  our 
brethren." 


into  a  war  with  the  seceded  States  for  the  con- 
tinued occupation  of  those  detached  forts  ?  No. 
A  war  will  only  widen  the  breach,  and  enlarge 
and  consolidate  this  Southern  Confederacy,  on 
the  one  hand;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will 
bring  ruin  upon  the  commerce,  the  manufactures, 
the  financial  and  industrial  interests,  of  our 
Northern  cities  and  States,  and  may  end  in  an 
oppressive  military  despotism. 

"  How  then  are  we  to  restore  these  seceded 
States  to  the  Union  ?  We  can  do  it  only  by 
conciliation  and  compromise." 

10  The  Mobile  Advertiser  about  this  time,  had 
the  following: 

"Wo  are  prepared  to  fight,  and  the  enemy  is 
not.  Now  is  the  time  for  action,  while  he  is  yet 
unprepared.  Let  the  fife  sound  '  Gray  Jackets 
over  the  Border,'  and  let  a  hundred  thousand 
men,  with  such  arms  as  they  can  snatch,  get 
over  the  border  as  quickly  as  they  can.  Let  a 
division  enter  every  Northern  border  State,  des- 
troy railroad  connection  to  prevent  concentration 
of  the  enemy,  and  the  desperate  strait  of  these 
States,  the  body  of  Lincoln's  country,  will  com- 
pel him  to  a  peace — or  compel  his  successor, 
should  Virginia  not  suffer  him  to  escape  from 
his  doomed  capital.  Kentucky,  and  Tennessee 
are  offering  to  send  legions  south  to  our  aid. 
Their  route  is  north.  They  place  themselves  at 
the  orders  of  our  Government — and  we  have  not 
yet  heard  that  our  Government  has  ordered 
them  south.1" 


460 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


From  Union-loving  Kentucky,  this 

reply  was  rendered : 

"Fbankfokt,  April  16,  1861. 
"  Hon.  Simon  Camekon,  Secretary  of  War : 
"  Your  dispatch  is  received.    In  answer, 
I  say  emphatically  that  Kentucky  will  fur- 
nish no  troops  for  the  wicked  purpose  of 
subduing  her  sister  Southern  States. 

"B.  Magoffin, 
"  Governor  of  Kentucky." 

Four  days  prior  to  the  date  of  this 

exhibition  of  Kentucky  loyalty,  the 

following  telegram  had  flown  all  over 

the  country : 

"Louisville,  Ky.,  April  12,  1861. 
"  Dispatches  have  come  here  to  hold  the 
Kentucky  volunteer  regiment  in  readiness 
to  move  at  a  moment's  notice  from  the  War 
Department  at  Montgomery ." 

This  formal  order  from  the  Confed- 
erate Government  to  the  Kentuck- 
ians  enlisted  for  its  service  does  not 
seem  to  have  evoked  a  remonstrance 
from  her  Governor.  It  was  only  the 
call  for  Kentuckians  to  maintain  the 
integrity  of  the  Republic  and  enforce 
the  authority  of  its  Government  that 
aroused  his  abhorrence  of  its  "  wicked 
purpose." 

The  Louisville  Journal — chief  ora- 
cle of  Bell-Everett  6 conservatism'  in 
Kentucky — then,  as  before  and  since, 
professedly  devoted  to  the  Union — 
thus  responded  to  the  President's  call : 

"  The  President's  Proclamation  has  reached 
us.  We  are  struck  with  mingled  amaze- 
ment and  indignation.  The  policy  an- 
nounced in  the  Proclamation  deserves  the 
unqualified  condemnation  of  every  American 
citizen.  It  is  unworthy  not  merely  of  a 
statesman  but  of  a  man.  It  is  a  policy  ut- 
terly harebrained  and  ruinous.  If  Mr.  Lin- 
coln contemplated  this  policy  in  his  Inau- 


11  The  National  Intelligencer — perhaps  the  only 
journal  of  note  issued  south  of  Mason  and  Dix- 
on's line  that  did  not  utterly  execrate  the  Presi- 
dent's call — thus  mildly  indicated  [April  16th] 
its  dissent  from  the  policy  thereby  initiated : 

"For  ourselves,  we  have  to  express  the  hope 
and  belief  that,  until  the  meeting  of  Congress, 
the  President  will  employ  the  forces  of  the  Gov- 
ernment in  purely  defensive  purposes,  guarding 
all  points  threatened  with  attack,  and  awaiting, 


gural  Address,  he  is  a  guilty  dissembler ;  if 
he  has  conceived  it  under  the  excitement 
aroused  by  the  seizure  of  Fort  Sumter,  he 
is  a  guilty  Hotspur.  In  either  case,  he  is 
miserably  unfit  for  the  exalted  position  in 
which  the  enemies  of  the  country  have 
placed  him.  Let  the  people  instantly  take 
him  and  his  Administration  into  their  own 
hands,  if  they  would  rescue  the  land  from 
bloodshed,  and  the  Union  from  sudden  and 
irretrievable  destruction." 11 

Few  or  no  journals  issued  in  the 
Slave  States — save  a  portion  of  those 
of  St.  Louis  and  Knoxville — gave  the 
call  a  more  cordial  greeting  than  this. 

Gov.  Claiborne  F.  Jackson,12  of 
Missouri,  gave  these  among  his  rea- 
sons for  disregarding  and  defying  the 
President's  call : 

"  It  is  illegal,  unconstitutional,  revolution- 
ary, inhuman,  diabolical,  and  cannot  be  com- 
plied with." 

He  added : 

"  Not  one  man  will  the  State  of  Missouri 
furnish  to  carry  on  so  unholy  a  crusade." 

Gov.  Burton,  of  Delaware,  deferred 
his  response  to  the  26th,  and  then 
stated  that  "  the  laws  of  this  State  do 
not  confer  upon  the  Executive  any 
authority  allowing  him  to  comply 
with  such  requisition."  He  proceed- 
ed, however,  formally  and  officially,  to 

"recommend  the  formation  of  volunteer 
companies  for  the  protection  of  the  lives  and 
property  of  the  citizens  of  this  State  against 
violence  of  any  sort  to  which  they  may  be 
exposed.  For  these  purposes,  such  compa- 
nies, when  formed,  will  be  under  the  control 
of  the  State  authorities,  though  not  subject 
to  be  ordered  by  the  Executive  into  the  Uni- 
ted States  service — the  law  not  vesting  in 
him  such  authority.  They  will,  however, 
have  the  option  of  offering  their  services  to 
the  General  Government  for  the  defense  of 
its  Capital  and  the  support  of  the  Constitu- 
tion and  laws  of  the  country." 


in  the  mean  time,  the  counsel  and  cooperation  of 
the  people's  representatives,  before  proceeding 
to  ulterior  measures ;  and  upon  those  represent- 
atives, when  they  are  assembled,  we  shall,  with- 
out questioning  the  legal  rights  of  the  Govern- 
ment, urge  the  impolicy  of  advising  and  consent- 
ing to  the  recapture  of  forts  and  public  property, 
which  we  do  not  want  in  States  out  of  the  Union, 
and  which,  certainly,  cannot  be  permanently 
regained  to  the  Union  by  military  force." 
12  April  16th. 


MARYLAND'S   RESPONSE  TO 

In  other  words :  Gov.  Burton  called 
for  an  organization  of  the  Militia  of 
Delaware,  not  in  obedience  to  the 
requisition  of  the  President,  nor  in 
support  of  the  integrity  and  author- 
ity of  the  Union,  but  to  be  wielded 
by  himself,  as  circumstances  should 
eventually  dictate.  And,  in  consist- 
ency with  this,  neither  the  Governor 
nor  the  great  body  of  his  political  ad- 
herents rendered  any  aid  or  encourage- 
ment whatever  to  the  Government 
down  to  the  close  of  his  official  life, 
which  happily  terminated  with  the 
year  1862. 

Gov.  Hicks,  of  Maryland,  made  at 
first  no  direct,  but  several  indirect, 
responses  to  the  President's  call.  He 
issued,  on  the  18th,  a  Proclamation, 
assuring  the  people  of  Maryland  of 
his  desire  to  preserve  "  the  honor  and 
integrity  of  the  State"  and  to  main- 
tain "  within  her  limits,  that  peace  so 
earnestly  desired  by  all  good  citi- 
zens." He  exhorted  them  to  "ab- 
stain from  all  heated  controversy 
upon  the  subject,"  and  pledged  them 
that  "  all  powers  vested  in  the  Gov- 
ernor will  be  strenuously  exerted  to 
preserve  the  peace  and  maintain  in- 
violable the  honor  and  integrity  of 
Maryland;"  adding  his  assurance 
that  "  no  troops  will  be  sent  from 
Maryland,  unless  it  may  be  for  the 
defense  of  the  National  capital" — 
that  being  the  express  purpose  for 
which  the  President  had  required 
them.  Finally,  this  model  South- 
ern Unionist  apprised  them  that 

"The  people  of  this  State  will,  in  a  short 
time,  have  the  opportunity  afforded  them,  in 
a  special  election  for  Members  of  the  Con- 
gress of  the  United  States,  to  express  their 
devotion  to  the  Union,  or  their  desire  to  see 
it  broken  up." 

In  other  words :  Maryland  might, 
at  any  time,  relieve  herself  of  all  her 


THE    PRESIDENT'S    CALL.  461 

engagements  and  obligations  to  her 
sister  States  in  the  Union  by  giving 
a  Disunion  majority  on  her  vote  for 
Members  of  Congress!  Surely,  no 
Secessionist  could  go  further  or  ask 
more  than  that!  Yet  this  was  the 
response  of  the  only  Governor  of  a 
Slave  State  who  had  claimed  votes 
for  his  party  in  the  late  Presidential 
canvass  on  the  ground  of  its  espe- 
cial and  unflinching  devotion  to  "  the 
Union,  the  Constitution,  and  the  en- 
forcement of  the  laws." 

Mayor  Brown,  of  Baltimore — be- 
ing thoroughly  in  the  confidence  as 
well  as  the  interest  of  the  Disunion- 
ists — was  but  too  happy  to  indorse 
and  reiterate  these  sentiments.  In  a 
Proclamation  of  even  date  with  the 
foregoing,  he  "heartily  concurs"  in 
the  Governor's  views  aforesaid,  "  and 
will  earnestly  cooperate  with  his 
efforts  to  maintain  peace  and  order 
in  the  city  of  Baltimore;"  but  he 
more  especially  approves  and  takes 
delight  in  the  Governor's  assurance 
that  "no  troops  shall  be  sent  from 
Maryland  to  the  soil  of  any  other 
State."  Of  course,  he  responds  to 
the  Governor's  suggestion  that,  at 
the  approaching  election,  the  people 
of  Maryland  may  vote  themselves 
out  of  the  Union,  if  a  majority  shall 
see  fit  to  do  so.  He  is  sure  that,  if 
the  Governor's  counsels  shall  be 
heeded,  "the  storm  of  war  which 
now  threatens  the  country  will,  at 
least,  pass  over  our  beloved  State 
and  leave  it  unharmed ;  but,  if  they 
shall  be  disregarded,  a  fearful  and 
fratricidal  strife  may  at  once  burst 
forth  in  our.  midst." 

These  hints  and  covert  menaces 
were  destined  to  receive  a  prompt 
and  tragical  explication. 


462 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


The  President's  call  was  issued  on 
the  morning  of  the  15th;  and,  on 
the  evening  of  the  16th,  several  com- 
panies from  Pennsylvania  had  reached 
Washington  and  reported  for  duty. 
In  the  afternoon  of  the  17th,  the  Sixth 
Massachusetts — the  first  full  regiment 
that  responded  to  the  call — started 
from  Boston  by  rail,  leaving  the 
Fourth  all  but  ready  to  follow.  On 
the  18th,  more  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers, including  an  artillery  company, 
reported  at  Washington,  having  that 
day  passed  through  Baltimore — mau- 
ger  the  Governor's  and  Mayor's  Proc- 
lamations aforesaid — without  objec- 
tion or  impediment.  The  Sixth  Mas- 
sachusetts—  one  thousand  strong — 
enjoyed  that  day  a  magnificent  ova- 
tion in  New  York,  and  passed  on 
southward  at  night,  reaching  Balti- 
more by  train  about  noon  on  the 
19th,  utterly  unsuspecting  and  un- 
prepared for  the  reception  that 
awaited  them. 

But  the  Secessionists  of  Baltimore 
had  been  intensely  excited,  on  the 
18th,  by  the  arrival  of  emissaries 
from  Charlestown,  Ya.,  instructed  to 
exact  not  only  pledges  but  guaran- 
tees from  the  managers  of  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  Railroad  that  no  Fed- 
eral troops  should  be  permitted  to 
pass  over  their  main  line,  and  that  no 
munitions  should  be  removed  thereon 
from  the  Federal  Arsenal  at  Harper's 
Ferry !  In  case  of  their  refusal,  their 
great  bridge  over  the  Potomac  at  that 
point  should  be  blown  up.  Hereup- 
on, an  immense  meeting  of  "  The 
National  Yolunteer  Association"  was 
held  at  evening  in  Monument  Square 
—  T.  Parkin  Scott  presiding;  he, 
with  Wilson  C.  N.  Carr  and  William 
Burns  (President  of  said  Association) 
being  the  speakers.    All  these  were 


rank  Disunionists,  and  the  Associa- 
tion was  organized  in  the  interest  of 
Secession.  None  of  the  speakers  di- 
rectly advocated  attacks  on  the  North- 
ern troops  about  to  pass  through  the 
city ;  but  each  was  open  in  his  hos- 
tility to  i  coercion,'  and  ardently  ex- 
horted his  hearers  to  organize,  arm, 
and  drill,  for  the  conflict  now  inevi- 
table.   Carr  said : 

"I  do  not  care  how  many  Federal  troops 
are  sent  to  Washington ;  they  will  soon  find 
themselves  surrounded  by  such  an  army  from 
Virginia  and  Maryland  that  escape  to  their 
homes  will  be  impossible;  and  when  the 
75,000  who  are  intended  to  invade  the  South 
shall  have  polluted  that  soil  with  their  touch, 
the  South  will  exterminate  and  sweep  them 
from  the  earth."  [Frantic  cheering  and  yell- 
ing.] 

The  meeting  broke  up  with  sten- 
torian cheers  for  6  the  South'  and  for 
*  President  Davis.' 

To  add  fuel  to  the  raging  flames, 
news  arrived  next  morning  that 
Lieut.  Jones,  who  was  in  charge  of 
the  Federal  Arsenal  and  other  prop- 
erty at  Harper's  Ferry,  with  barely 
forty-five  regulars,  learning  that  a 
force  of  2,500  Yirginia  Militia  was 
advancing  to  seize  that  post,  had 
evacuated  it  during  the  night,  after 
endeavoring,  in  the  face  of  a  sud- 
denly gathered  force  of  Yirginians,  to 
destroy  by  fire  the  National  proper- 
ty, including  fifteen  thousand  Spring- 
field muskets  there  deposited.  These 
were  somewhat  injured ;  but  the  Con- 
federates are  understood  to  have  ulti- 
mately repaired  and  used  most  of 
them.  Lieut.  Jones  fled  across  the 
thin  western  strip  of  Maryland  to 
Chambersburg,  Pa.,  losing  three  of 
his  men.  He  left  the  Ferry  at  10 
o'clock,  p.  m.,  and  reached  Hagers- 
town,  Md.,  thirty  miles  distant,  next 
morning;  having  blown  up  and  de- 
stroyed the  public  property  so  far  as 


SECESSION   RIOT   IN  BALTIMORE. 


463 


possible,  but  saving  none  of  it  to  the 
Government. 

At  the  hight  of  the  frenzied  excite- 
ment created  by  these  tidings,  the 
Massachusetts  Sixth,  with  ten  com- 
panies of  the  Philadelphia  Washing- 
ton brigade,  under  Gen.  Small,  hav- 
ing left  Philadelphia  at  3  a.  m.,  of 
the  19th,  reached  Baltimore,  in  a 
train  of  seventeen  passenger  cars, 
containing  over  two  thousand  per- 
sons, mainly  soldiers.  The  train 
stopped  at  the  Camden  station,  on 
the  east  side  of  the  city,  a  little  before 
noon.  The  five  foremost  cars,  con- 
taining a  portion  of  the  Massachu- 
setts men,  were  here  detached,  and 
drawn  singly  through  the  city  by  four 
horses  each.  There  being  no  horses 
for  the  remainder,  the  residue  of  the 
regiment,  of  whom  but  a  small  por- 
tion were  armed,  left  the  cars  and 
formed  in  the  street,  waiting  the  ar- 
rival of  horses.  None  came  ;  for  the 
Secession  mob  who  filled  the  streets 
had  covered  the  track,  immediately 
behind  the  five  cars  aforesaid,  with 
heavy  anchors,  timber,  stones,  and 
other  obstructions — piled,  in  one  in- 
stance, to  a  hight  of  fifteen  feet — and, 
by  the  help  of  these,  were  prepared 
to  prevent  the  passage  of  any  more 
cars.  Meantime,  the  residue  of  the 
regiment,  as  they  formed,  were  as- 
sailed by  showers  of  stones  and  other 
missiles,  hurled  from  the  streets  and 
the  house-tops,  whereby  several  of 
them  were  knocked  down  and  other- 
wise badly  injured.  In  the  confusion 
thus  created  among  the  raw,  unarmed 
soldiers,  a  rioter  came  behind  the  last 
platoon,  seized  the  musket  of  one  of 
the  volunteers,  and  shot  him  dead. 
Hereupon,  the  soldiers  were  ordered 
to  fire ;  and  those  who  had  guns  and 
ammunition  did  so,  with  some  effect. 


This  caused  the  mob  to  recoil ;  and 
the  soldiers,  learning  that  the  track 
had  been  obstructed,  closed  their 
ranks,  and  commenced  their  march 
of  two  miles  and  a  half  through  the 
streets  of  the  city  to  the  Washington 
depot,  surrounded  and  followed  by 
the  howling,  pelting  mob/  Mayor 
Brown  and  a  strong  detachment  of 
police  marched  at  the  head  of  the 
troops,  opening  a  way  before  them 
through  the  vast  and  angry  crowd. 
Missiles  still  poured  upon  them  from 
every  quarter ;  and,  in  some  cases, 
heavy  pieces  of  iron  were  cast  out  of 
second  and  third-story  windows  upon 
their  heads.  One  man  was  crushed 
down  by  one  of  these  iron  billets. 
The  front  of  the  column  received  lit- 
tle injury  ;  but  the  rioters  closed  in 
upon  and  attempted  to  cut  off  a  por- 
tion of  the  rear,  which,  being  hardly 
pressed,  was  at  length  ordered  to  fire  ; 
and  the  order  was  obeyed.  Several 
volleys  were  fired  by  a  small  portion 
of  the  regiment,  whereby  eleven  of 
the  mob  were  killed,  and  four  severe- 
ly wounded.  ,  Of  the  soldiers,  three 
were  slain,  and  eight  seriously  in- 
jured. Most  of  the  remaining  volun- 
teers reached  the  Washington  depot 
and  crowded  into  the  cars,  which 
were  dispatched,  so  soon  as  possible, 
for  Washington.  Fifteen  of  the  sol- 
diers who  went  on  with  their  comrades 
were  so  injured  by  the  missiles  that, 
on  reaching  the  capital,  they  were 
sent  to  the  hospital. '  The  train  was 
repeatedly  fired  at  from  the  hills  and 
woods  along  the  route,  but  at  too 
great  distance  to  do  harm.  At  the 
Jackson  bridge,  it  was  stopped  by  the 
removal  of  several  rails,  which  were 
promptly  relaid,  under  the  protection 
of  the  troops. 

The  Pennsylvanians  were  left  be- 


464  THE  AMERICA 

hind ;  and,  being  entirely  unarmed, 
Gen.  Small  decided  that  they  should 
not  proceed.  He  attempted  to  have 
the  cars  in  which  they  remained 
drawn  back  out  of  the  city,  but  with- 
out immediate  success.  Soon,  a  por- 
tion of  the  mob,  desisting  from  the 
pursuit  of  the  Massachusetts  men, 
turned  upon  these,  and  commenced 
a  violent  stoning  of  the  cars,  whereby 
the  windows  were  broken  and  several 
men  severely  injured.  The  Pennsyl- 
vanians  sprang  from  the  cars,  and 
engaged  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight  with 
their  assailants,  being  aided  to  some 
extent  by  Baltimore  Unionists.  An 
irregular  fight  was  here  kept  up  for 
nearly  two  hours,  during  which  ten 
or  twelve  soldiers  were  badly  hurt, 
and  one  or  two  killed.  Finally,  Po- 
lice Marshal  Kane  appeared  on  the 
ground,  and,  being  very  influential 
with  the  Secessionists,  soon  stopped 
the  fight ;  when  the  Pennsylvanians, 
returning  to  the  cars,  were  started 
on  the  back  track  to  Philadelphia, 
where  they  arrived  late  that  night. 

At  4  p.  m.  of  that  day — the  soldiers 
from  the  Free  States  having  all  de- 
parted— a  great  meeting  of  the  tri- 
umphant rioters,  under  a  Maryland 
flag,  was  held  in  Monument  Square. 
After  a  rebel  speech  by  Dr.  A.  C. 
Robinson,  Mayor  Brown  harangued 
the  multitude  in  favor  of  peace  and 
order,  which  was  received  with  evi- 
dent disrelish;  but,  when  he  added 
that  he  disapproved  of  the  President's 
call,  and  would  not  have  responded 
to  it,  had  he  been  Governor,  the  riot- 
ers recognized  their  friend.  He  told 
them  that  he  had  conferred  with 
Gov.  Hicks,  who  had  united  with 
him  in  telegraphing  to  Washington 
and  to  Philadelphia  that  no  more 
Northern  troops  must  be  sent  through 


N  CONFLICT. 

Maryland,  and  had  received  assur- 
ances from  the  President  of  the  Phil- 
adelphia and  Baltimore  railroad  that 
he  would  send  none  without  further 
consultation  and  concert  with  the  au- 
thorities of  Baltimore  and  Maryland. 
Gov.  Hicks  further  concurred  with 
him  in  the  opinion  that  it  is  folly  and 
madness  for  one  portion  of  this  great 
nation  to  attempt  the  subjugation  of 
another  portion.  It  can  never  be 
done.  [Cheers.]  A  deputation  was 
sent  for  the  Governor,  who  duly  ap- 
peared, and,  standing  under  the 
Maryland  flag,  addressed  the  assem- 
blage.   He  said : 

"  I  coincide  in  the  sentiment  of  your  wor- 
thy Mayor.  After  three  conferences,  we 
have  agreed;  and  I  bow  in  submission  to 
the  people.  I  am  a  Marylander;  I  love  my 
State,  and  I  love  the  Union ;  but  I  will  suffer 
my  right  arm  to  be  torn  from  my  body  be- 
fore I  will  raise  it  to  strike  a  sister  State." 

Hereupon,  the  meeting  adjourned. 

That  night,  Baltimore,  and,  in  fact, 
nearly  all  Maryland,  were  completely 
in  the  hands  of  the  Secessionists. 
The  Unionists  were  terrified,  paralyz- 
ed, silenced,  and  they  generally  shrank 
from  observation.  The  rebel  mob — 
partially  armed  from  the  gunstores — 
paraded  the  streets  of  Baltimore  un- 
opposed, broke  in  the  doors  and  win- 
dows of  the  President-street  railroad 
depot,  and  demanded  the  muskets 
which  they  insisted  were  in  the  build- 
ing, and  were  allowed  to  appoint  a 
Committee  to  search  it,  and  report. 
The  Committee  examined  it,  was  sat- 
isfied, and  reported  that  there  were 
no  arms ;  so  they  left.  Ex-Gov.  Louis 
E.  Lowe  harangued  the  mob,  under 
the  Maryland  flag,  from  the  portico 
of  Barnum's  Hotel;  pledging  them 
ample  assistance  from  his  [Frederick] 
county.  "With  the  full  assent,  if  not 
by  express  direction,  of  Mayor  Brown 


BALTIMORE    UNDER    THE  REBELS. 


465 


and  Police  Marshal  Kane,  the  tele- 
graph wires  connecting  Baltimore 
with  the  Free  States  were  cut,  and 
the  railroad  bridges  northward  and 
north-eastward  from  Baltimore,  on 
the  railroads  to  Philadelphia  and 
Harrisburg,  burned;  thus  shutting 
off  Washington  and  the  Government 
from  all  communication  with  the 
Northern,  as  Gov.  Letcher  and  his 
backers  had  just  excluded  them  from 
all  intercourse  with  the  Southern, 
States.  The  telegraphic  communi- 
cation westward  was  preserved,  to  en- 
able the  master-spirits  to  dispatch  to 
their  confederates  in  Western  Mary- 
land such  messages  as  this  to  one  at 
Frederick,  who  soon  after  joined  the 
Confederate  army  :* 

"  To  Bradley  T.  Johnson,  Esq. : 

"  Thank  you  for  your  offer.  Bring  your 
men  by  the  first  train,  and  we  will  arrange 
with  the  railroad  afterward.  Streets  red 
with  Maryland  blood. 

"  Send  expresses  over  the  mountains  and 
valleys  of  Maryland  and  Virginia  for  the 
riflemen  to  come  without  delay.  Further 
hordes  [of  Union  volunteers]  will  be  down 
upon  us  to-morrow  [the  20th].  We  will 
fight  them,  and  whip  them,  or  die. 

"  Geo.  P.  Kane." 

Mayor  Brown  sent  three  envoys  to 
the  President,  bearing  a  dispatch  in- 
dorsed by  Gov.  Hicks,  wherein  he 
says: 

"  The  people  are  exasperated  to  the  high- 
est degree  by  the  passage  of  troops,  and  the 
citizens  are  unusually  decided  in  the  opinion 
that  no  more  troops  should  be  ordered  to 
come. 

u  The  authorities  of  the  city  did  their  best 
to-day  to  protect  both  strangers  and  citizens, 
and  to  prevent  a  collision,  but  in  vain ;  and, 
but  for  their  great  efforts,  a  fearful  slaughter 
would  have  occurred. 

"Under  these  circumstances,  it  is  my 
solemn  duty  to  inform  you  that  it  is  not 
possible  for  more  soldiers  to  pass  through 
Baltimore,  unless  they  fight  their  way  at 
every  step.  I,  therefore,  hope  and  trust, 
and  most  earnestly  request,  that  no  more 
troops  be  permitted  or  ordered  by  the  Gov- 
ernment to  pass  through  the  city.  If  they 
30 


should  attempt  it,  the  responsibility  for  the 
bloodshed  will  not  rest  upon  me." 

The  Committee  telegraphed  back 
the  following  message : 

"  Washington,  April  20,  1861. 
"To  Mayor  Brown,  Baltimore:  We 
have  seen  the  President  and  Gen.  Scott. 
We  bear  from  the  former  a  letter  to  the 
Mayor  and  Governor,  declaring  that  no 
troops  shall  be  brought  through  Baltimore, 
if,  in  a  military  point  of  view,  without  op- 
position, they  can  be  marched  around  Bal- 
timore. Hi  L.  Bond, 

J.  C.  Brune,  Geo.  W.  Dobbin." 

The  President  of  the  Baltimore  and 

Ohio  railroad  had  already  responded 

to  a  similar  message  as  follows : 

"Gentlemen:  I  have  the  honor  to  ac- 
knowledge the  receipt  of  your  communica- 
tion of  this  date,  in  which  you  advise  that 
the  troops  now  here  be  sent  back  to  the 
'borders  of  Maryland.'  Most  cordially  ap- 
proving this  advice,  I  have  just  telegraphed 
the  same  to  the  Philadelphia,  Wilmington, 
and  Baltimore  railroad  company,  and  this 
company  will  act  in  accordance  therewith. 

"J.  W.  Gaerett,  President." 

Gov.  Andrew,  of  Massachusetts, 

having  telegraphed  to  Mayor  Brown 

as  follows : 

"  I  pray  you  to  cause  the  bodies  of  our 
Massachusetts  soldiers,  dead  in  Baltimore, 
to  be  laid  out,  preserved  in  ice,  and  tenderly 
sent  forward  by  express  to  me.  All  ex- 
penses will  be  paid  by  the  Commonwealth  :" 

Mayor  Brown  responded  as  follows : 

"  Sir  :  No  one  deplores  the  sad  events  of 
yesterday  in  this  city  more  deeply  than  my- 
self, but  they  were  inevitable.  Our  people 
viewed  the  passage  of  armed  troops  of  an- 
other State,  through  the  streets,  as  an  in- 
vasion of  our  soil,  and  could  not  be  restrained. 
The  authorities  exerted  themselves  to  the 
best  of  their  ability,  but  with  only  partial 
success.  Gov.  Hicks  was  present,  and  con- 
curs in  all  my  views  as  to  the  proceedings 
now  necessary  for  our  protection.  When 
are  these  scenes  to  cease?  Are  we  to  have 
a  war  of  sections  ?  God  forbid !  The  bodies 
of  the  Massachusetts  soldiers  could  not  be 
sent  on  to  Boston,  as  you  requested,  all  com- 
munication between  this  city  and  Philadel- 
phia by  railroad,  and  with  Boston  by  steam- 
ers, having  ceased;  but  they  have  been 
placed  in  cemented  coffins,  and  will  be  placed 
with  proper  funeral  ceremonies  in  the  mau- 
soleum of  Green  Mount  Cemetery,  where 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


they  shall  be  retained  until  further  directions 
are  received  from  you.  The  wounded  are 
tenderly  cared  for.  I  appreciate  your  offer  ; 
but  Baltimore  will  claim  it  as  her  right  to 
pay  all  expenses  incurred." 

Gov.  Andrew  promptly  rejoined : 

"Dear  Sir:  I  appreciate  your  kind  at- 
tention to  our  wounded  and  our  dead,  and 
trust  that,  at  the  earliest  moment,  the  re- 
mains of  our  fallen  will  return  to  us.  I  am 
overwhelmed  with  surprise  that  a  peaceful 
march  of  American  citizens  over  the  high- 
way to  the  defense  of  our  common  capital 
should  be  deemed  aggressive  to  Baltimoreans. 
Through  JSTew  York,  the  march  was  tri- 
umphal." 

At  3  A.  m.,  on  Sunday,  April  21st, 
Mayor  Brown  received  a  message 
from  the  President,  requesting  Gov. 
Hicks  and  himself  to  proceed  imme- 
diately to  Washington  for  consulta- 
tion. Gov.  Hicks  being  no  longer 
in  the  city,  Mayor  Brown,  on  further 
conference,  went  without  him,  taking 
three  friends — whereof,  at  least  two 
were  ardent  Secessionists — to  bear 
him  company.  They  reached  Wash- 
ington at  10  a.  m.,  and  were  admitted 
to  an  immediate  interview  with  the 
President,  attended  by  the  Cabinet 
and  Gen.  Scott.  Mr.  Lincoln  urged, 
with  abundant  reason,  that  he  had 
no  choice  between  bringing  troops 
through  Maryland  and  surrendering 
the  capital  to  armed  treason.  He 
finally  appealed  to  Gen.  Scott,  who 
gave  his  military  opinion  that  troops 
might  be  brought  through  Maryland 
by  way  of  Annapolis  or  the  Relay 
House,  without  passing  through  Bal- 
timore. The  Mayor  dilated  on  the 
fearful  excitement  of  the  Balti- 
moreans, and  the  impossibility  of  his 
answering  for  the  consequences,  if 
more  Northern  troops  should  appear 
in  that  city.  He  adroitly  added  that 
his  jurisdiction  was  confined  to  the 
city,  and  that  he  could  make  no  pro- 
mises as  to  the  behavior  of  the  Mary- 


landers  on  either  side  of  it.  In  his 
official  report  of  the  interview,  Mr. 
Brown  says : 

"  The  Mayor  and  his  companions  availed 
themselves  of  the  President's  full  discussion 
of  the  questions  of  the  day  to  urge  upon  him 
respectfully,  but  in  the  most  earnest  manner, 
a  course  of  policy  which  would  give  peace 
to  the  country,  and  especially  the  with- 
drawal of  all  orders  contemplating  the  pass- 
age of  troops  through  any  part  of  Maryland." 

On  returning  to  the  cars,  the  Mayor 
received  a  dispatch  from  railroad 
President  Garrett,  announcing  the 
approach  of  troops  (Pennsylvanians) 
by  railroad  from  Harrisburg  to  Cock- 
eysville,  a  few  miles  north  of  Balti- 
more, and  that  the  city  was  greatly 
excited  thereby ;  whereupon,  Messrs. 
Brown  &  Co.  returned  to  the  Presi- 
dent, and  demanded  a  further  audi- 
ence, which  was  granted.  The  dis- 
patch was  submitted  ;  and  the  Presi- 
dent and  Gen.  Scott  agreed  that  the 
Pennsylvania  soldiers,  who  had  thus 
unwittingly  profaned  the  soil  of 
Maryland  by  daring  to  advance  over 
it  to  the  defense  of  the  National  Me- 
tropolis, should  be  turned  back  to 
Harrisburg. 

There  is  not  much  more  of  this 
nature  to  be  recorded;  but,  among 
the  Baltimoreans  who,  next  day, 
visited  Washington  to  second  the  de- 
mands of  Messrs.  Brown  &  Co.,  and 
confirm  the  impression  which  it  was 
hoped  they  had  made,  was  a  Com- 
mittee from  the  Young  Men's  Chris- 
tian Association,  who  modestly  peti- 
tioned that  the  President  should  put 
an  end  to  the  unnatural  conflict  now 
imminent  by  yielding  to  the  demands 
of  the  South.  To  this  end,  they  ad- 
vised that  the  Federal  forces  already 
in  Washington  should  be  disbanded  ; 
but,  at  all  events,  that  no  more  should 
be  marched  across  the  territory  of 


GOT.    SEWARD    TO  GOV. 


HICKS —  GEORGE  LAW. 


467 


Maryland.  The  President,  in  reply, 
called  their  attention  to  the  fact  that 
the  capital  was  imminently  threat- 
ened ;  that  he  was  informed  that 
Bebel  batteries  were  being  erected 
on  the  Virginia  bank  of  the  Potomac 
to  command  the  passage  of  that  river ; 
that  the  Rebel  Government  had  de- 
termined to  establish  forthwith  its 
headquarters  in  the  honse  where  this 
interview  wa3  held;  and  that  the 
only  effect  of  yielding  to  their  pray- 
ers would  be  the  destruction  of  the 
Government  as  well  as  his  own  death 
or  captivity.  The  Young  Christians, 
of  course,  disclaimed  any  purpose  to 
produce  such  a  catastrophe ;  to  which 
the  President  replied  that  their  intent 
mattered  little,  since  the  effect  of  the 
course  demanded  by  Baltimore  could 
be  no  other  than  this.  To  a  similar 
but  more  formal  representation  from 
Gov.  Hicks,  objecting  to  the  passage 
of  Northern  troops  across  any  portion 
of  Maryland,  Gov.  Seward  returned 
the  following  most  moderate  and  con- 
ciliatory answer : 

"Depaetment  of  State,  April  22, 18G1. 
"His  Excellency  Thos.  H.  Hicks, 

"  Governor  of  Maryland : 

"  Sie  :  I  have  had  the  honor  to  receive 
your  communication  of  this  morning,  in 
which  you  inform  me  that  you  have  felt  it 
to  be  your  duty  to  advise  the  President  of 
the  United  States  to  order  elsewhere  the 
troops  then  off  Annapolis,  and  also  that  no 
more  may  be  sent  through  Maryland ;  and 
that  you  have  further  suggested  that  Lord 
Lyons  be  requested  to  act  as  mediator  be- 
tween the  contending  parties  in  our  country, 
to  prevent  the  effusion  of  blood. 

"  The  President  directs  me  to  acknowl- 
edge the  receipt  of  that  communication,  and 
to  assure  you  that  he  has  weighed  the  coun- 
sels which  it  contains  with  the  respect  which 
he  habitually  cherishes  for  the  Chief  Magis- 
trates of  the  several  States,  and  especially  for 
yourself.  He  regrets,  as  deeply  as  any  magis- 
trate or  citizen  of  the  country  can,  that  dem- 
onstrations against  the  safety  of  the  United 
States,  with  very  extensive  preparations  for 
the  effusion  of  blood,  have  made  it  his  duty 
to  call  out  the  force  to  which  you  allude. 


"The  force  now  sought  to  be  brought 
through  Maryland  is  intended  for  nothing 
but  the  defense  of  this  capital.  The  Presi- 
dent has  necessarily  confided  the  choice  of 
the  national  highway  which  that  force  shall 
take  in  coming  to  this  city  to  the  Lieuten- 
ant-General commanding  the  Army  of  the 
United  States,  who,  like  his  only  predeces- 
sor, is  not  less  distinguished  for  his  human- 
ity than  for  his  loyalty,  patriotism,  and  dis- 
tinguished public  services.  The  President 
instructs  me  to  add  that  the  national  high- 
way thus  selected  by  the  Lieutenant-General 
has  been  chosen  by  him,  upon  consultation 
with  prominent  magistrates  and  citizens  of 
Maryland,  as  the  one  which,  while  a  route 
is  absolutely  necessary,  is  furthest  removed 
from  the  populous  cities  of  the  State,  and 
with  the  expectation  that  it  would,  there- 
fore, be  the  least  objectionable  one. 

u  The  President  cannot  but  remember  that 
there  has  been  a  time  in  the  history  of  our 
country,  when  a  General  of  the  American 
Union,  with  forces  designed  for  the  defense 
of  its  Capital,  was  not  unwelcome  anywhere 
in  the  State  of  Maryland,  and  certainly  not 
at  Annapolis,  then,  as  now,  the  capital  of 
that  patriotic  State,  and  then,  also,  one  of 
the  capitals  of  the  Union. 

"If  eighty  years  could  have  obliterated  all 
the  other  noble  sentiments  of  that  age  in 
Maryland,  the  President  would  be  hopeful, 
nevertheless,  that  there  is  one  that  would 
forever  remain  there  and  everywhere.  That 
sentiment  is  that  no  domestic  contention 
whatever,  that  may  arise  among  the  parties 
of  this  Republic,  ought  in  any  case  to  be  re- 
ferred to  any  foreign  arbitrament — least  of 
all  to  the  arbitrament  of  an  European  mon- 
archy. 

"I  have  the  honor  to  be,  with  distin- 
guished consideration,  your  Excellency's 
most  obedient  servant, 

"William  H.  Sewaed." 

The  spirit  in  which  these  negotia- 
tions were  regarded  throughout  the 
loyal  States  is  very  fairly  exhibited 
in  the  following  letter : 

"New  Yoek,  April  25,  1861. 
"  To  the  President  of  the  United  States : 

"Sie:  The  people  of  the  Free  States  have 
now  been  for  some  time  cut  off  from  com- 
munication with  the  capital  of  their  coun- 
try by  a  mob  in  the  city  of  Baltimore.  The 
troops  of  the  General  Government  have 
been  attacked  and  shot  down  by  the  mob  in 
their  passage  through  that  city,  in  pursuance 
to  the  orders  of  the  Government.  The  lines 
of  communication  have  been  destroyed,  and 
the  authority  of  the  General  Government 
has  been  set  at  defiance.    This  state  of 


468 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


things  has  heen  permitted  to  continue  for 
nearly  a  week ;  and  our  troops  going  to  the 
capital  have  been  delayed,  and  have  had  to 
find  their  way  by  irregular  and  circuitous 
routes,  very  much  to  their  inconvenience. 
Citizens  of  the  Free  States  have  either  been 
prevented  altogether  from  visiting  the  capi- 
tal or  from  returning  thence  to  their  homes, 
or  have  been  compelled  to  run  the  gauntlet, 
been  subjected  to  all  sorts  of  insult  and  dan- 
ger, and  have  had  to  resort  to  the  most  cir- 
cuitous routes  by  private  conveyance  and  at 
exorbitant  expense.  All  facilities  by  mail 
and  telegraph  have  been  cut  off  by  the  same 
unlawful  assemblage  in  Baltimore  and  other 
parts  of  Maryland,  at  a  time  when  free  com- 
munication is  so  much  required  between  the 
Free  States  and  Washington. 

"The  public  mind  is  already  excited  to 
the  highest  point  that  this  state  of  things 
lias  been  so  long  tolerated ;  and  the  people 
are  determined  that  free  and  uninterrupted 
communication  with  the  seat  of  Government 
shall  be  immediately  established,  not  by  cir- 
cuitous routes,  but  by  the  direct  lines  of 
communication  that  they  have  heretofore 
traveled  over.  And  it  is  demanded  of  the 
Government  that  they  at  once  take  mea- 
sures to  open  and  establish  those  lines  of 
communication,  and  that  they  protect  and 
preserve  them  from  any  further  interruption. 
Unless  this  is  done,  the  people  will  be  com- 
pelled to  take  it  into  their  own  hands,  let 
the  consequences  be  what  they  may,  and  let 
them  fall  where  they  will.  It  is  certainly 
desirable  that  this  be  done  through  the  reg- 
ularly constituted  authorities  at  Washington; 
and  the  Government  is  earnestly  desired  to 
act  without  delay. 

u  There  is  entire  unanimity  on  the  part  of 
the  people  of  the  Free  States  to  sustain  the 
Government  and  maintain  the  Union. 

"I  trust,  Mr.  President,  that  this  letter 
will  not  be  received  unkindly ;  as,  in  writing 
it,  I  simply  do  what  I  feel  it  to  be  my  duty 
as  a  citizen  to  do  in  this  extraordinary  state 
of  things. 

"  I  have  the  honor  to  be,  Sir,  your  most 
obedient  servant,  Geoege  Law." 

Maryland,  as  we  have  seen,  was 
practically,  on  the  morning  of  the 
20th  of  April,  a  member  of  the 
Southern  Confederacy.  Her  Gov- 
ernor spoke  and  acted  the  bidding  of 
a  cabal  of  the  ablest  and  most  enven- 
omed traitors.  At  their  instance,  he 
summoned  the  Legislature  to  meet  in 
extra  session  at  Annapolis  on  the 
26th  ;  while  it  was  notorious  that  a 


majority  of  that  body  would  proba- 
bly vote  her  immediately  out  of  the 
Union,  and  would,  at  best,  proclaim 
her  neutral  in  the  struggle  now  open- 
ing—  would  forbid  the  passage  of 
Federal  troops  across  her  soil;  and 
not  only  forbid,  but  resist  it.  Balti- 
more was  a  Secession  volcano  in  full 
eruption ;  while  the  counties  south 
of  that  city  were  overwhelmingly  in 
sympathy  with  the  Slaveholders'  Re- 
bellion, and  their  few  determined 
Unionists  completely  overawed  and 
silenced.  The  counties  near  Balti- 
more, between  that  city  and  the  Sus- 
quehanna, were  actively  cooperating 
with  the  Rebellion,  or  terrified  into 
dumb  submission  to  its  behests.  The 
great  populous  counties  of  Frederick, 
Washington,  and  Alleghany,  compos- 
ing Western  Maryland — having  few 
slaves — were  preponderantly  loyal; 
but  they  were  overawed  and  para- 
lyzed by  the  attitude  of  the  rest  of 
the  State,  and  still  more  by  the  large 
force  of  rebel  Virginians — said  to  be 
5,000  strong — who  had  been  suddenly 
pushed  forward  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
and  who,  though  not  in  season  to 
secure  the  arms  and  munitions  there 
deposited,  threatened  Western  Mary- 
land from  that  commanding  position. 
Thus,  only  the  county  of  Cecil,  in  the 
extreme  north-east,  remained  fully 
and  openly  loyal  to  the  Union ;  that 
county  lying  this  side  of  the  Susque- 
hanna, and  being  connected  with  the 
Free  States  by  railroad  and  telegraph. 

The  Eighth  Massachusetts,  under 
Gen.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  reached 
Perryville,  on  the  east  bank  of  the 
Susquehanna,  on  the  20th,  and  found 
its  progress  here  arrested  by  burned 
bridges,  and  the  want  of  cars  on  the 
other  side.  But  Gen.  Butler  was 
not  a  man  to  be  stopped  by  such  im- 


WASHINGTON    RELIEVED   VIA  ANNAPOLIS. 


469 


pediments.  Seizing  the  spacious  and 
commodious  railroad  ferry  steamer 
Maryland,  lie  embarked  his  men 
thereon,  and  appeared  with  them 
early  next  morning  before  Annapo- 
lis, the  political  capital  of  Maryland, 
thirty  miles  south  of  Baltimore,  and 
about  equi- distant  with  that  city  from 
Washington,  wherewith  it  is  connect- 
ed by  a  branch  or  feeder  of  the  Bal- 
timore road.  He  found  this  city  vir- 
tually in  rebellion,  with  its  branch 
railroad  aforesaid  dismantled,  and 
partially  taken  up,  in  the  interest  of 
Secession.  Here,  too,  were  the  Na- 
val Academy  and  the  noble  old  frig- 
ate Constitution  ;  the  latter  without 
a  crew,  and  in  danger  of  falling,  at 
any  moment,  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  He  at  once  secured  the  frig- 
ate, landed  next  day  unopposed,  took 
possession  of  the  city,  and  was  soon 
reenforced  by  the  famous  Seventh 
regiment,  composed  of  the  flower  of 
the  young  chivalry  of  New  York 
City,  which  had  been  transported  from 
Philadelphia  direct  by  the  steam- 
boat Boston.  The  Maryland  returned 
forthwith  to  Perryville  for  still  fur- 
ther reinforcements,  munitions,  and 
supplies — no  one  in  Annapolis  choos- 
ing, or  daring,  for  some  time,  to  sell 
anything  to  the  Union  soldiers.  Gen. 
Butler  was  met  at  Annapolis  by  a  for- 
mal protest  from  Gov.  Hicks  against 
his  landing  at  that  place,  or  at  any 
other  point  in  Maryland ;  the  specific 
objection  to  his  occupying  Annapolis 
being  that  the  Legislature  had  been 
called  to  meet  there  that  week.  Gen. 
Butler,  in  reply,  suggested  that,  if 
he  could  obtain  means  of  transporta- 
tion to  Washington,  he  would  gladly 
"  vacate  the  capital  prior  to  the  sit- 
ting of  the  Legislature,  and  not  be 
under  the  painful  necessity  of  incom- 


moding your  beautiful  city  while  the 
Legislature  is  in  session." 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th — sev- 
eral  other  regiments  having  mean- 
time arrived — Gen.  Butler  put  his 
column  in  motion,  the  Massachusetts 
Eighth  in  advance,  closely  followed 
by  the  New  York  Seventh.  They 
kept  the  line  of  the  railroad,  repair- 
ing it  as  they  advanced.  A  disman- 
tled engine,  which  they  found  on  the 
way,  was  refitted  and  put  to  use. 
The  day  proved  intensely  hot.  Many 
of  the  men  had  had  little  or  nothing 
to  eat  for  a  day  or  two,  and  had 
scarcely  slept  since  they  left  Phila- 
delphia. Some  fell  asleep  as  they 
marched  ;  others  fell  out  of  the  ranks, 
utterly  exhausted ;  one  was  sunstruck, 
and  had  to  be  sent  back,  permanently 
disabled.  The  people  whose  houses 
they  passed  generally  fled  in  terror 
at  the  first  sight  of  the  Northern 
Goths,  who,  they  had  been  told,  had 
come  to  ravage  and  desolate  the 
South.  Nothing  to  eat  could  be 
bought ;  and,  as  they  did  not  choose 
to  take  without  buying,  they  hun- 
grily marched,  building  bridges  and 
laying  rails  by  turns,  throughout  the 
day  and  the  following  night.  The 
Seventy-first  New  York  followed  the 
next  day,  and  passed,  four  miles  out, 
the  camp  of  Gov.  Sprague's  Rhode 
Island  regiment,  by  whom  they  were 
generously  supplied  with  provisions. 
Arrived  at  the  Annapolis  Junction, 
the  soldiers  were  met  by  cars  from 
Washington,  in  which  they  proceeded 
on  the  25th — the  New  York  Seventh 
in  the  advance — to  that  city,  and  were 
hailed  with  rapture  by  its  loyal  deniT 
zens,  who  composed,  perhaps,  one- 
half  of  its  entire  population.  Wash- 
ington had,  for  a  week,  been  isolated 
from  the  North,  while  surrounded 


470 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  threatened  by  malignant  foes. 
A  spirited  body  of  .volunteers — tem- 
porary sojourners  at  or  casual  visit- 
ors to  the  capital — under  Cassius  M. 
Clay  as  Colonel,  had  stood  on  guard 
during  those  dark  days 13  and  darker 
nights  ;  and  these,  in  addition  to  the 
small  force  of  regulars  commanded 
by  Gen.  Scott,  had  constituted,  up  to 
this  time,  the  entire  defensive  force 
of  the  Federal  metropolis. 

The  Legislature  of  Maryland  con- 
vened in  extra  session,  in  accordance 
with  Gov.  Hicks's  call,  not  at  An- 
napolis, but  at  Frederick — far  from 
any  Union  force,  but  within  easy 
striking  distance  of  the  Confederates 
at  Harper's  Ferry.  Gov.  Hicks,  in 
his  Message  (April  27th),  recapitula- 
ted most  of  the  facts  just  related, 
adding  that  Gen.  Butler,  before  land- 
ing at  Annapolis,  asked  permission 
to  do  so,  but  was  refused.  lie  said  : 
"  The  people  of  Annapolis,  though 
greatly  exasperated,  acting  under 
counsel  of  the  most  prudent  citizens, 
refrained  from  molesting  or  obstruct- 

13  The  Richmond  Examiner,  of  April  23d,  con- 
tained this  article : 

"  The  capture  of  Washington  City  is  perfectly 
within  the  power  of  Virginia  and  Maryland,  if 
Virginia  will  only  make  the  effort  by  her  consti- 
tuted authorities;  nor  is  there  a  single  moment 
to  lose.  The  entire  population  pant  for  the  on- 
set; there  never  was  half  the  unanimity  among 
the  people  before,  nor  a  tithe  of  the  zeal,  upon 
any  subject,  that  is  now  manifested  to  take 
Washington,  and  drive  from  it  every  Black  Re- 
publican who  is  a  dweller  there. 

"From  the  mountain-tops  and  valleys  to  the 
shores  of  the  sea,  there  is  one  wild  shout  of  fierce 
resolve  to  capture  Washington  City,  at  all  and 
every  human  hazard.  That  filthy  cage  of  un- 
clean birds  must  and  will  assuredly  be  purified 
by  fire.  The  people  are  determined  upon  it,  and 
are  clamorous  for  a  leader  to  conduct  them  to  the 
•onslaught.  The  leader -will  assuredly  arise;  ay, 
and  that  right  speedily. 

'•  It  is  not  to  be  endured  that  this  flight  of 
Abolition  harpies  shall  come  down  from  the 
black  North  for  their  roosts  in  the  heart  of  the 
South,  to  defile  and  brutalize  the  land.  They 
come  as  our  enemies ;  they  act  as  our  most  deadly 


ing  the  passage  of  the  troops  through 
the  city."    Again : 

"  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  onr  most 
learned  and  intelligent  citizens  admit  the 
right  of  the  Government  to  transport  its 
troops  across  our  soil,  it  is  evident  that  a 
portion  of  the  people  of  Maryland  are  op- 
posed to  the  exercise  of  that  right.  I  have 
done  all  in  my  power  to  protect  the  citizens 
of  Maryland,  and  to  preserve  peace  within 
our  borders." 

Gov.  Hicks  admits  that  he  has 
been  somewhat  swerved  from  his 
true  course  by  "  the  excitement  pre- 
vailing among  our  people  during  the 
last  few  days;"  but  he  restates  his 
deliberate  and  well-considered  posi- 
tion, as  follows : 

u  It  is  of  no  consequence  now  to  discuss 
the  causes  which  have  induced  our  troubles. 
Let  us  look  to  our  distressing  present  and  to 
our  portentous  future.  The  fate  of  Mary- 
land, and,  perhaps,  of  her  sister  border  Slave 
States,  will  undoubtedly  be  seriously  affect- 
ed by  the  action  of  your  honorable  body. 
Therefore  should  every  good  citizen  bend  his 
energies  to  the  task  before  us ;  and  therefore 
should  the  animosities  and  bickerings  of  the 
past  be  forgotten,  and  all  strike  hands  in  the 
bold  cause  of  restoring  peace  to  our  State  and 
to  our  country.  I  honestly  and  most  earnestly 
entertain  the  conviction  that  the  only  safety 
of  Maryland  lies  in  maintaining  a  neutral 
position  between  our  brethren  of  the  North 


foes;  they  promise  us  bloodshed  and  fire;  and 
this  is  the  only  promise  they  have  ever  redeemed. 
The  fanatical  yell  for  the  immediate  subjugation 
of  the  whole  South  is  going  up  hourly  from  the 
united  voices  of  all  the  North;  and,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  making  their  work  sure,  they  have  de- 
termined to  hold  Washington  City  as  the  point 
whence  to  carry  on  their  brutal  warfare. 

"  Our  people  can  take  it — they  will  take  it — 
and  Scott,  the  arch-traitor,  and  Lincoln,  the 
Beast,  combined,  cannot  prevent  it.  The  just 
indignation  of  an  outraged  and  deeply  injured 
people  will  teach  the  Illinois  Ape  to  repeat  his 
race  and  retrace  his  journey  across  the  borders 
of  the  Free  negro  States  still  more  rapidly  than 
he  came ;  and  Scott,  the  traitor,  will  be  given 
the  opportunity,  at  the  same  time,  to  try  the  dif- 
ference between  4  Scott's  Tactics'  and  the  Shang- 
hai Drill  for  quick  movements. 

"Great  cleansing  and  purification  are  needed 
and  will  be  given  to  that  festering  sink  of  iniqui- 
ty, that  wallow  of  Lincoln  and  Scott — the  dese- 
crated city  of  Washington;  and  many  indeed 
will  be  the  carcasses  of  dogs  and  caitiffs  that  will 
blacken  the  air  upon  the  gallows  before  the  great 
work  is  accomplished.    So  let  it  be!" 


SECESSION    OVERBORNE    IN  MARYLAND. 


471 


and  of  the  South.  We  have  violated  no 
right  of  either  section.  "We  have  been  loyal 
to  the  Union.  The  unhappy  contest  be- 
tween the  two  sections  has  not  been  com- 
menced or  encouraged  by  us,  although  we 
have  suffered  from  it  in  the  past.  The  im- 
pending war  has  not  come  by  any  act  or 
wish  of  ours.  We  have  done  all  we  could  to 
avert  it.  We  have  hoped  that  Maryland  and 
other  Border  Slave  States,  by  their  conserva- 
tive position  and  love  for  the  Union,  might 
have  acted  as  mediators  between  the  extremes 
of  both  sections,  and  thus  have  prevented 
the  terrible  evils  of  a  prolonged  civil  war. 
Entertaining  these  views,  I  cannot  counsel 
Maryland  to  take  sides  against  the  General 
Government,  until  it  shall  commit  outrages 
upon  us  which  would  justify  us  in  resisting 
its  authority.  As  a  consequence,  I  can  give 
no  other  counsel  than  that  we  shall  array 
ourselves  for  Union  and  peace,  and  thus  pre- 
serve our  soil  from  being  polluted  with  the 
blood  of  brethren.  Thus,  if  war  must  be 
between  the  North  and  South,  we  may  force 
the  contending  parties  to  transfer  the  field 
of  battle  from  our  soil,  so  that  our  lives  and 
property  may  be  secure." 

The  Legislature,  thus  instructed, 
decided  not  to  secede  from  the  Union 
— unanimously  in  the  Senate — 53  to 
13  in  the  House;  but  proceeded  to 
pass  an  act  to  provide  for  the  public 
safety,  constituting  a  '  State  Board'  of 
seven,  whereof  all  were  rank  Seces- 
sionists but  Gov.  Hicks ;  which  Board 
was  to  have  full  control  over  the  or- 
ganization and  direction  of  the  mili- 
tary forces  of  Maryland ;  appointing 
all  officers  above  the  rank  of  captain. 
This  Board  was  to  have  full  power 
to  adopt  measures  for  the  safety,  peace 
and  defense  of  the  State ;  and  was 
directed  to  proscribe  no  officer  for 
"his  political  opinions."  Its  oath  of 
office  included  no  promise  of  allegi- 
ance to  the  Federal  Constitution  or 
Government.  The  purpose  of  this 
measure  was  more  fully  developed  by 
a  report  from  the  Committee  on 
Federal  Relations,  in  which  the  Pre- 
sident was  charged  with  acts  of 
tyranny  and  schemes  of  subjugation ; 
and  the  attempt  to  bring  the  State, 


step  by  step,  into  collision  with  the 
Federal  Government  clearly  revealed. 
But  by  this  time  the  strength  and  re- 
solution of  the  Free  States  had  been 
demonstrated,  and  the  sober  second 
thought  of  Maryland  began  to  assert 
its  ascendency.  The  violence  and 
preternatural  activity  of  the  Seces- 
sionists had,  for  a  time,  concealed  the 
paucity  of  their  numbers ;  but  it 
was  now  evident  that  they  were 
scarcely  a  third  of  the  entire  white 
population,  and  less  than  a  fourth  in 
all- that  major  portion  of  the  State 
lying  north  and  west  of  Baltimore. 

A  Home  Guard  of  Unionists  was 
organized  in  Frederick,  comprising 
her  most  substantial  citizens.  A 
great  Union  meeting  was  held  in 
Baltimore  on  the  evening  of  May 
4th ;  whereat  the  creation  of  the 
Board  of  Public  Safety,  and  all  kin- 
dred measures,  were  unsparingly  de- 
nounced. Next  day,  Gen.  Butler 
pushed  forward  two  regiments  from 
the  Annapolis  Junction  to  the  Belay 
House,  nine  miles  from  Baltimore, 
and  controlling  the  communications 
between  that  city  and  Frederick.  On 
the  9th,  a  force  of  1,300  men  from 
Perryville  debarked  at  Locust  Point, 
Baltimore,  under  cover  of  the  guns 
of  the  Harriet  Lane,  and  quietly 
opened  the  railroad  route  through 
that  city  to  the  Belay  House  and 
"Washington,  encountering  no  oppo- 
sition. Gen.  Butler  took  permanent 
military  possession  of  the  city  on  the 
13th,  while  a  force  of  Pennsylvanians 
from  Harrisburg  advanced  to  Cock- 
eysville,  reopening  the  Northern  Cen- 
tral railroad.  The  Legislature  adopt- 
ed, on  the  10th,  the  following : 

"  Whereas,  The  war  against  the  Confede- 
rate States  is  unconstitutional  and  repugnant 
to  civilization,  and  will  result  in  a  bloody 


472 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


and  shameful  overthrow  of  our  institutions  ; 
and,  while  recognizing  the  obligations  of 
Maryland  to  the  Union,  we  sympathize  with 
the  South  in  the  struggle  for  their  rights — 
for  the  sake  of  humanity,  we  are  for  peace 
and  reconciliation,  and  solemnly  protest 
against  this  war,  and  will  take  no  part  in  it. 

"Resolved,  That  Maryland  implores 'the 
President,  in  the  name  of  God,  to  cease  this 
unholy  war,  at  least  until  Congress  assem- 
bles ;  that  Maryland  desires  and  consents  to 
the  recognition  of  the  independence  of  the 
Confederate  States.  The  military  occupa- 
tion of  Maryland  is  unconstitutional,  and 
she  protests  against  it,  though  the  violent 
interference  with  the  transit  of  Federal 
troops  is  discountenanced  ;  that  the  vindi- 
cation of  her  rights  be  left  to  time  and  rea- 
son, and  that  a  Convention,  under  existing 
circumstances,  is  inexpedient." 

The  Federal  authority  having  been 
fully  reestablished  in  Baltimore,  and 
the  Union  troops  within  or  upon  her 
borders  decidedly  outnumbering  the 
Confederate,  the  Secession  fever  in 
the  veins  of  her  people  subsided  as 
rapidly  as  it  had  risen.  Having  been 
accustomed  from  time  immemorial  to 
acquiesce  in  whatever  the  slavehold- 
ing  interest  proposed,  and  seeing  that 
interest  thoroughly  affiliated  with  the 
plotters  of  Disunion,  the  great  ma- 
jority had  consulted  what  seemed  the 
dictates  of  prudence  and  personal 
safety  by  flocking  to  what  appeared, 
in  view  of  the  temporary  weakness 
and  paralysis  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment, the  strong  side — the  side  where- 
on were  evinced  confidence,  energy, 
and  decision.  Under  like  influences, 
Maryland  would  have  been  voted  out 
of  the  Union  as  promptly,  and  by  as 
decisive  a  majority,  as  Virginia  or 
Tennessee  was.  Another  week's  ex- 
hibition of  the  spirit  in  which  Mayor 
Brown  and  the  Young  Christians 
were  allowed  to  press  their  impudent 
demands  at  the  White  House,  and  to 
return  thence  to  Baltimore  not  even 
arrested,  would  have  thrown  her  head- 
long into  the  arms  of  treason. 


Her  Legislature  finally  adjourned 
on  the  14th,  after  having  sent  an  em- 
bassy to  Montgomery  in  quest  of 
'  peace  f  which  was  so  received  and 
answered  by  Davis  as  to  convey  to 
the  South  the  impression  that  Mary- 
land was  in  sympathy  with  the  "Re- 
bellion. On  the  14th,  also,  Gov.  Hicks 
issued  an  official  Proclamation,  calling 
for  four  regiments  of  volunteers,  in  an- 
swer to  the  President's  requisition. 
The  route  through  Baltimore  being 
fully  reopened,  and  communication 
restored  between  the  Free  States  and 
Washington,  the  safety  of  the  capital 
was  secured  ;  regiment  after  regiment 
pouring  into  it  by  almost  every  train, 
until,  by  the  end  of  May,  not  less  than 
fifty  thousand  men — raw  and  undis- 
ciplined, indeed,  but  mainly  of  the 
best  material  for  soldiers — held  the 
line  of  the  Potomac,  or  guarded  the 
approaches  to  the  capital.  And  still, 
from  every  side,  the  people  of  the 
loyal  States  were  urging  more  regi- 
ments upon  the  Government,  and 
begging  permission  to  swell  the 
ranks  of  the  Union  armies,  so  as  to 
overmatch  any  conceivable  strength 
of  the  rebels. 

Baltimore  was  still,  and  was  des- 
tined, for  years,  to  remain,  the  focus 
and  hiding-place  of  much  active 
though  covert  treason  ;  her  Confede- 
rates maintaining  constant  commu- 
nication with  Richmond,  and  con- 
tinually sending  men,  as  well  as  medi- 
cines, percussion  caps,  and  other 
pressingly  needed  supplies,  to  the 
Rebel  armies,  mainly  across  the  lower 
Potomac,  through  the  southern  coun- 
ties of  the  State ;  which,  being  thor- 
oughly '  patriarchal'  in  their  social 
and  industrial  polity,  preponderantly 
and  ardently  sympathized  with  the 
Rebel  cause. 


THE   NORFOLK   NAVY   YARD  ABANDONED. 


473 


XXX. 

PROGRESS    OF  SECESSION. 


The  Convention  of  Virginia, 
whereof  a  great  majority  had  been 
elected  as  Unionists,  was,  neverthe- 
less, bullied,  as  we  have  seen,  at  the 
Light  of  the  Southern  frenzy  which 
followed  the  reduction  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter, into  voting  their  State  out  of  the 
Union.1  In  order  to  achieve  this 
end,  it  was  found  necessary  to  con- 
sent to  a  submission  of  the  ordinance 
to  a  popular  vote ;  and  the  23d  of 
May  was  appointed  for  the  election. 
But,  in  utter  mockery  of  this  conces- 
sion, the  conspirators  proceeded  forth- 
with to  act  upon  the  assumption  that 
the  vote  of  the  Convention  was  con- 
clusive, and  the  State  already  defi- 
nitively and  absolutely  out  of  the 
Union.  Within  twenty-four  hours 
after  the  vote  of  the  Convention  to 
secede,  and  while  that  vote  was  still 
covered  by  an  injunction  of  secrecy, 
they  had  set  on  foot  expeditions  for 
the  capture  of  the  Federal  Arsenal, 
arms  and  munitions,  at  Harper's  i 
Ferry,  as  also  for  that  of  the  Norfolk 
Xavy  Yard.  So  early  as  the  night  of 
the  16th,  the  channel  of  Elizabeth 
River,  leading  up  from  Hampton 
Roads  to  Norfolk,  was  partially  ob- 
structed in  their  interest  by  sinking 
two  small  vessels  therein,  with  intent 
to  preclude  the  passage,  either  way, 
of  Federal  ships  of  war.  The  num- 
ber appears  to  have  been  increased 
during  the  following  nights ;  while  a 

'April  17th,  1861. 

*  That  is  to  say :  Capt.  McCauley  has  never 
renounced  the  service,  but  still  draws  the  pay 
of  an  officer  of  the  IT.  S.  Navy. 

s  The  Report  to  the  Senate  of  its  Select  Corn- 


hastily  collected  military  force,  under 
Gen.  Taliaferro — a  Virginia  brigadier 
who  reached  Norfolk  from  Richmond 
on  the  18th — was  reported  to  be  pre- 
paring to  seize  the  Navy  Yard  and 
Federal  vessels  during  the  night  of 
Saturday,  the  20th.  The  Southern 
officers  of  the  Yard,  having  done  the 
cause  of  the  Union  all  the  harm  they 
could  do  under  the  mask  of  loyalty, 
resigned  and  disappeared  in  the 
course  of  that  day.  The  Navy  Yard 
was  in  charge  of  Capt.  McCauley,  a 
loyal 2  officer,  but  a  good  deal  past 
the  prime  of  life.  A  young  Decatur 
or  Paul  Jones  would  have  easily  held 
it  a  week  against  all  the  Virginian 
Militia  that  could  have  been  brought 
within  range  of  its  guns,  and  would 
never  have  dreamed  of  abandoning 
it  while  his  cartridges  held  out.  No 
man  fit  to  command  a  sloop  of  war 
would  have  thought  of  skulking  away 
from  a  possession  so  precious  and  im- 
portant, until  he  had,  at  least,  seen 
the  whites  of  an  enemy's  eyes.  For 
here  were  the  powerful  forty-gun 
steam  frigate  Merrimac,  richly  worth 
a  million  dollars  even  in  time  of  peace, 
with  the  Cumberland,  the  German- 
town,  the  Plymouth,  the  Raritan,  the 
j  Columbia,  and  the  Dolphin,  beside 
i  the  huge  old  three-decker  Pennsyl- 
vania, the  dismantled  seventy-fours 
Delaware  and  Columbus,  with  near- 
ly two  thousand 3  cannon,  some  thou- 

mittee.  appointed  to  investigate  this  shameful 
transaction,  made  by  Hon.  John  P.  Hale,  April 
18th,  1862,  says: 

"According  to  the  returns  received  at  the 
Ordnance  bureau  of  the  Navy  Department,  it 
appears  that  there  were  seven  hundred  and 


474 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


sand  stand  of  arms,  and  immense 
quantities  of  munitions,  naval  stores, 
timber,  etc. ;  the  whole  having  cost, 


Federal  magazine,  just  below  Nor- 
folk, apparently  left  without  a  guard, 

sixty-eight  guns  in  the  Yard.  Other  evidence, 
however,  taken  by  the  Committee,  goes  to  show 
quite  conclusively  that  there  were  in  the  Yard 
at  the  time  of  the  evacuation  at  least  two  thou- 
sand pieces  of  heavy  ordnance,  of  which  about 
three  hundred  were  new  Dahlgren  guns,  and 
the  remainder  were  of  old  patterns.  Captain 
Paulding  walked  about  among  them  on  the  18th 
of  April,  and  estimated  that  there  were  between 
two  and  three  thousand.  Captain  McCauley, 
who  must  be  supposed  to  have  had  ample  means 
of  knowledge  on  the  subject,  thinks  there  were 
nearly  three  thousand  pieces  of  cannon.  Mr. 
James  H.  Clements,  a  reliable  and  intelligent 
man,  testifies  that  he  was  familiar  with  the 


in  peace,  more  than  ten  millions  of 
dollars,  while  its  value  at  this  time 
was  absolutely  incalculable.  The 


H 


had  been  broken  open  the  night  be- 
fore by  thg  Rebels,  and  robbed  of 

j  guns  at  the  Yard,  and  thinks  he  speaks  within 
bounds  when  he  puts  the  number  of  them  at 
eighteen  hundred ;  and  he  explains  very  satis- 
factorily the  discrepancy  between  the  account 
in  the  Ordnance  bureau  and  the  estimates  of 
the  witnesses  already  mentioned,  and  of  others 
who  appeared  before  the  Committee,  stating  tho 
number  of  guns  variously  at  from  fifteen  hun- 
dred to  three  thousand.  Upon  the  whole  evi- 
dence, the  Committee  are  forced  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  there  were  as  many  as  two  thousand 
pieces  of  artillery  of  all  calibers  in  and  about 
the  Yard  at  the  time  of  its  abandonment,  com- 
prising the  armaments  of  three  line-of-battlo 
ships  and  several  frigates." 


THE    NATIONAL   DISGRACE    AT  NORFOLK. 


475 


over  four  thousand  kegs  of  powder. 
Capt.  McCauley,  with  all  these  for* 
midable  ships  of  war,  cannon,  and 
munitions,  had  several  hundred  good 
and  true  men  under  his  command. 
He  had  received,  some  days  before, 
express  orders  to  send  the  Merrimac 
forthwith  to  Philadelphia,  and  had 
had  her  fitted  out  for  the  voyage, 
under  the  direction  of  Chief  Engi- 
neer Isherwood,  who  was  sent  thither 
from  Washington  on  purpose;  but, 
when  she  was  reported  all  ready  but 
her  guns,  he  declined  to  order  them 
on  board — or,  rather,  gave  the  order, 
but  very  soon  countermanded  it — 
excusing  his  vacillation  or  perplexity 
by  his  dread  of  exasperating  the 
Rebels,  and  referring  to  the  reported 
obstructions  sunk  in  the  channel, 
which  the  Merrimac,  properly  hand- 
led, would  have  crushed  like  an  egg- 
shell, and  thus  passed  over  without  a 
check  to  her  progress.  Finally,  on 
the  evening  of  the  20th,  he  gs^e  or- 
ders to  scuttle  all  the  ships  but  the 
Cumberland,  preparatory  to  flight — 
as  if  this  were  not  the  very  course 
to  preserve  them  for  the  future  use 
of  the  Rebels. 

The  steam  frigate  Pawnee,  Capt. 
Hiram  Paulding,  left  Washington  on 
the  evening  of  the  19th,  and  arrived, 
at  4  p.  m.  of  the  20th,  abreast  of 
Fortress  Monroe.  Here  she  took  on 
board  Col.  Wardrop's  regiment  of 
Massachusetts  volunteers,  450  strong, 
raising  her  fighting  force  to  some  six 
hundred  men.  She  now  steamed  cau- 
tiously and  slowly  up  the  river  to  the 
!STavy  Yard,  which  she  reached  soon 
after  8  o'clock.  Capt.  Paulding  had 
instructions  from  the  Secretary  of  the 
Navy,  directing  him  to  take  com- 
mand  at   Norfolk,  on  his  arrival 


there,  and  to  act  as  circumstances 
should  dictate ;  but,  at  all  events,  to 
save  the  public  property  from  falling 
into  the  hands  of  traitors.  He  found 
the  guns  in  the  Navy  Yard  rendered 
useless  by  Capt.  McCauley's  orders, 
and  nearly  all  the  ships  of  war  dis- 
abled— several  of  them  already  sink- 
ing. Among  the  scu  ttled  was  the  Mer- 
rimac— alone  worth  all  the  rest — bare- 
ly the  Cumberland  having  been  re- 
served to  bear  away  the  expectant 
fugitives.  Still,  Capt.  Paulding  might 
have  held  his  position  a  week  against 
all  the  traitors  yet  developed  in  Vir- 
ginia ;  and  that  week  would  have 
brought  at  least  30,000  men  to  his 
aid.  But,  without  awaiting  the  firing 
of  a  shot,  or  even  the  appearance  of 
a  foe,  he  proceeded  at  once  to  trans- 
fer, with  the  utmost  haste,  books,  pa- 
pers, money,  and  some  other  of  the 
most  portable  portions  of  the  public 
property,  to  the  Pawnee  and  the 
Cumberland;  not  even  saving  the 
small  arms,  of  which  his  Government 
stood  in  urgent  need.  The  cannon 
he  abandoned  were  (or  had  been)  par- 
tially spiked ;  but  so  inefficiently,  with 
nails,  etc.,  that  they  were  promptly 
and  easily  restored  by  the  Rebels  to 
a  serviceable  condition.  The  mus- 
kets, revolvers,  etc.,  were  broken,  and, 
with  great  quantities  of  shot  and  shell, 
thrown  into  the  water.  Several  hours 
were  spent  in  this  work — the  marine 
barracks,  in  the  center  of  the  Yard, 
being  set  on  fire,  about  midnight, 
to  give  light  for  its  continuance. 

Lieut.  H.  A.  Wise4  had  accompa- 
nied Capt.  Paulding  from  Washing- 
ton, and  was  detailed  by  him,  on  or 
before  their  arrival,  to  board  the 
Merrimac  and  bring  her  out,  if  pos- 
sible ;  and  he  was  accordingly  on  her 


4  Since,  of  the  Naval  Ordnance  Bureau. 


476 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


deck  at  the  earliest  moment.  He 
found  lier  partially  filled  with  water, 
and  rapidly  filling — a  block,  which 
he  threw  from  her  lower  deck  into 
her  hold,  indicating  by  the  splash 
that  the  water  was  already  over  her 
orlop  deck.  He  returned  immedi- 
ately, and  reported  the  fact  to  Capt. 
Paulding,  who  thereupon  decided  to 
desist  from  further  attempts  to  save 
her,  but  to  mutilate  the  guns  in  the 
Yard,  fire  the  vessels,  ship-houses, 
and  other  structures,  and  blow  up 
the  (stone)  dry  dock.  Some  of  the 
old  and  relatively  worthless  guns 
were  dismantled  by  knocking  off 
their  trunnions ;  but  the  new  Dahl- 
gren  guns  proved  so  tough  that  not 
one  of  them  was  or  could  thus  be 
rendered  useless.  Capt.  Paulding 
now  recalled  the  order  he  had  given 
Lieut.  Wise  to  blow  up  the  dry  dock, 
and  ordered  trains  to  be  laid  instead, 
so  that,  at  a  signal,  the  ships  might 
be  fired.  This  was  accordingly  done  ; 
but  the  previous  partial  submersion 
of  the  ships,  under  Capt.  McCauley's 
unaccountable  order  to  scuttle  them, 
of  course  prevented  their  destruction. 
Thus,  when  the  Plymouth  was  reached 
in  its  turn  by  Lieut.  "Wise,  she  had 
sunk  below  her  upper  deck,  so  flood- 
ing the  train  that  it  could  not  be 
fired.  Lieut.  Wise,  who  narrowly  es- 
caped with  a  scorching  from  the  in- 
conceivably rapid  combustion  of  the 
upper  portion  of  the  Merrimac,  when 
he  fired  his  train  while  on  board  of 
her,  pulled  down  the  channel  in  his 
small  boat  after  the  escaping  vessels, 
and  got  on  board  the  Pawnee  below 
Craney  Island,  when  seven  or  eight 
miles  on  her  way.  The  Pawnee,  tow- 
ing the  Cumberland,  moved  slowly 
down  the  river  at  4  a.  m.  (high  tide), 
brilliantly  lighted  on  their  course  by 


the  remaining  vessels  and  all  the 
•combustible  property  left  behind. 
The  Cumberland,  drawing  seventeen 
feet  of  water,  grounded  in  passing  one 
of  the  vessels  sunk  in  the  channel,  but 
was  got  off,  an  hour  or  two  afterward, 
uninjured.  No  molestation  was  of- 
fered them  by  the  Rebels,  who,  very 
naturally,  thought  themselves  fortun- 
ate in  so  easily  obtaining  possession  of 
what  was  left  behind.  Most  of  the 
vessels  were  destroyed  ;  but  the  Mer- 
rimac, the  best  of  them  all,  though 
badly  burned  above  the  water-line, 
was  saved  by  the  Rebels,  and,  in  due 
time,  metamorphosed  into  the  iron- 
clad Virginia,  with  which  such  mem- 
orable havoc  was  wrought  in  Hamp- 
ton Roads.  A  crowd  from  Norfolk 
and  Portsmouth  burst  into  the  Yard, 
so  soon  as  our  ships  had  fairly  depart- 
ed, and  saved  for  the  uses  of  treason 
whatever  they  could,  including  the 
dry  dock,  which  had  been  mined,  but 
not  fired,  and  was  readily  filled  with 
water.  At  6  o'clock,  a  volunteer 
company  had  taken  formal  possession 
in  the  name  of  Virginia,  and  raised 
her  flag  over  the  ruins.  By  7,  the 
work  of  unspiking  cannon  had  com- 
menced ;  and,  by  9,  several  guns  had 
been  planted  along  the  dock,  where 
they  might  serve  in  resisting  the  re- 
turn of  the  Yankees  under  some  more 
intrepid  leader  than  he  who  had  just 
slunk  away.  It  was  said  that  Gen. 
Taliaferro  was  drunk  throughout  the 
night,  and  was  with  difficulty  aroused 
at  6  in  the  morning  to  hear  that  all 
was  over.  Two  officers  of  the  Paw- 
nee, who  were  left  to  fire  the  Navy 
Yard,  were  cut  off  or  bewildered  by 
the  rapid  spread  of  the  conflagration, 
and  compelled  to  cross,  by  skiff,  to 
Norfolk,  where  they  were  instantly 
taken  prisoners.    No  lives  were  lost. 


HOW   VIRGINIA   WAS  LOST. 


477 


Thus  ended  the  most  shameful,  cow- 
ardly, disastrous  performance  that 
stains  the  annals  of  the  American 
JNavy.5 

Many,  perhaps  most,  of  the  Union 
delegates  to  the  Virginia  Conven- 
tion left  it  directly  after  the  passage 
of  the  Ordinance  of  Secession,  feeling 
that  they  had  no  longer  any  business 
in  such  company.  The  residue  pro- 
ceeded, in  utter  contempt  of  their 
own  vote  directing  the  submission  of 
the  act  to  the  people,  to  adopt  and 
ratify  the  Confederate  Constitution  ; 
and  to  enter6  into  a  convention  with 
the  Confederacy,  through  A.  Ii.  Ste- 
phens, whereby  all  the  public  prop- 
erty, naval  stores,  munitions  of  war, 
etc.,  acquired  by  their  State  at  Nor- 
folk and  elsewhere,  from  the  United 

5  It  is  impossible  to  interpret  the  course  of 
many  officers  of  the  Army  and  Navy  in  this  and 
similar  emergencies,  save  on  the  presumption 
that  they  were  in  doubt  as  to  whether  they 
ought,  as  loyal  men,  to  stand  by  the  '  Black  Re- 
publican' rulers  who  had  just  been  invested  with 
power  at  Washington  or  side  with  the  militant 
champions  of  that  Slave^  Power  which  had  some- 
how become  confounded,  in  their  not  very  lucid 
or  intelligent  conceptions,  with  the  Constitution 
and  the  Union.  At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that 
their  indecision  or  pusillanimity  potently  aided 
to  crush  out  -  the  Unionism  of  the  South,  and 
came  very  near  wrecking  the  Union  itself.  Mr. 
Hale's  Report,  already  cited,  says : 

"  The  aid  which  might  have  been  derived  from 
the  workmen  in  the  Yard,  and  other  loyal  citi- 
zens of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth,  is,  in  some  de- 
gree, a  matter  of  conjecture,  and  it  is  not  pro- 
posed to  introduce  it  as  an  element  in  the  decision 
of  this  question.  During  the  closing  days  of  the 
United  States  authority  at  Norfolk,  the  revolt 
had  acquired  such  strength,  momentum,  and  con- 
fidence, that  perhaps  no  material  assistance  of 
this  kind  was  to  be  depended  upon.  It  is  proper 
to  remark,  however,  that  there  was  abundant  evi- 
dence before  the  Committee  that  at  least  a  major- 
ity of  the  citizens  of  both  Norfolk  and  Ports- 
mouth were  on  the  side  of  the  Union,  and  would 
have  been  warmly  and  openly  so  had  the  Gov- 
ernment shown  a  strong  hand  and  a  timely  deter- 
mination to  defend  itself.  An  election  for  mayor 
was  held  in  Portsmouth  a  few  days  previous  to  the 


States,  were  turned  over  to  said  Con- 
federacy ;  and  it  was  agreed  that 

"the  whole  military  force  and  military 
operations,  offensive  and  defensive,  of  said 
Commonwealth,  in  the  impending  conflict 
with  the  United  States,  shall  be  under  the 
chief  control  and  direction  of  the  President 
of  said  Confederate  States,  upon  the  same 
principles,  basis,  and  footing,  as  if  said  Com- 
monwealth were  now,  and  during  the  inter- 
val, a  member  of  said  Confederacy." 

This  agreement  was  approved  and 
ratified  by  the  Convention  on  the 
25th;  although,  so  early  as  April 
20fh,  the  movement  of  Confederate 
troops,  from  Alabama,  Georgia,  and 
South  Carolina,  to  Richmond,  had 
commenced.  The  treaty  of  offen- 
sive and  defensive  alliance  negotiated 
by  Vice-President  Stephens  did  not, 
therefore,  inaugurate  that  movement : 
it  could  but  regulate  and  perhaps 
augment  it. 

surrender,  at  which  the  Union  candidate  was  elected 
by  an  overwhelming  majority.  A  voluntary  mili- 
tary association,  considerable  in  numbers  and  in- 
fluence, was  formed  in  Norfolk  for  the  exclusive 
purpose  of  assisting  in  the  defense  of  the  Yard 
against  the  insurgents,  proffered  their  services, 
and  offered  such  tests  of  their  fidelity  as  should 
have  at  once  secured  their  acceptance  by  the  au- 
thorities of  the  Yard.  How  suicidal  a  policy  was 
pursued,  all  know  and  remember.  The  Govern- 
ment exhibited  such  utter  feebleness  and  irresolu- 
tion, and  the  enemy  so  much  vigor  and  fierce  pur- 
pose, unencumbered  by  scruples  of  any  kind,  that 
it  is  not  strange  that  the  friends  of  the  Union,  find- 
ing themselves  unsupported  by  the  Government 
they  were  anxious  to  serve  and  protect,  should 
finally  yield  to  the  tempest  of  treason  and  pas- 
sion surging  around  them,  and  find,  in  a  compul- 
sory submission  and  in  silence,  at  least  a  refugo 
from  the  insults  and  outrages  of  a  ferocious  rev- 
olutionary mob.  But,  so  irrepressible  was  the 
loyal  feeling  of  many  of  the  citizens  of  Norfolk, 
that,  on  the  evening  of  the  20th  of  April,  they 
greeted  the  arrival  of  the  "Pawnee"  at  the  dock  with 
cheer  on  cheer,  under  the  supposition  that  she  had 
come  to  reenforce  and  hold  the  Yard,  and  bring 
them  deliverance  from  the  perils  and  dishonor  of  a 
war  against  that  Union  which  they  loved.  That 
hope  was  cruelly  disappointed  by  the  hasty  at- 
tempt to  destroy  the  Yard ;  and  the  Government 
afforded  the  loyal  men  at  Norfolk — as,  indeed, 
everywhere  else  at  that  time — every  possible  rea- 
son for  the  conviction  that  the  Rebellion  was  the  win- 
ning side,  and  that  devotion  to  the  Government  could 
end  only  in  defeat,  loss,  and  death." 

6  April  24th. 


478 


THE    AM  ERIC 


AN  CONFLICT. 


A  complete  reign  of  terror  had,  by 
this  time,  been  established  through- 
out Eastern  or  Old  Yirginia.  Immi- 
grants from  Free  States  were  hunted 
out  on  suspicion  of  Unionism,  -un- 
less they  chose  to  enlist  at  once  in 
the  Rebel  army ;  and  only  the  most 
violent  and  obstreperous  sympathy 
with  Secession  could  save  them  from 
personal  outrage.  Appeals  from  those 
who  had  formerly  figured  as  inflexi- 
ble Unionists  were  circulated  through 
the  journals,  calling  upon  all  true 
Virginians  to  stand  by  the  action 
of  their  State,  and  thereby  preserve 
her  from  the  horrors  of  an  intestine 
war.  Thus,  Mr.  A.  H.  H.  Stuart — a 
leading  Whig  of  other  days,  an  eminent 
member  of  Congress,  afterward  Sec- 
retary of  the  Interior  under  President 
Fillmore — who  had  been  elected  to 
the  Convention  as  a  Unionist  from 
the  strong  Whig  county  of  Augusta, 
and  had  opposed  Secession  to  the  last, 
now  wrote  a  letter  to  The  Staunton 
Spectator,  maintaining  this  position  : 

"  In  my  judgment,  it  is  the  duty  of  all 
good  citizens  to  stand  by  the  action  of  the 
State.  It  is  no  time  for  crimination  or  re- 
crimination. We  cannot  stop  now  to  inquire 
who  brought  the  troubles  upon  us,  or  why. 
It  is  enough  to  know  that  they  are  upon  us ; 
and  we  must  meet  them  like  men.  We  must 
stand  shoulder  to  shoulder.  Our  State  is 
threatened  with  invasion,  and  we  must  repel 
it  as  best  we  can.  The  only  way  to  preserve 
peace  is  to  present  a  united  front.  If  we 
show  divisions  among  ourselves,  the  enemy 
will  be  encouraged  by  them,  and  may  make 
them  the  pretext  for  sending  armies  into  our 
borders  for  the  purpose  of  sustaining  the 
hands  of  the  disaffected.  Our  true  policy, 
then,  is  to  stand  together  as  one  man  in  the 
hour  of  danger,  and  leave  our  family  feuds 
to  be  adjusted  after  the  contest  is  over." 

To  the  same  effect,  but  a  little 

more  boldly,  Mr.  James  M.  Mason, 

late  a  Senator  of  the  United  States, 

wrote  as  follows : 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  Winchester  Virginian : 

"  The  question  has  been  frequently  put  to 
me—'  What  position  will  Virginia  occupy, 


should  the  Ordinance  of  Secession  be  re- 
jected by  the  people  at  the  approaching 
election  V  And  the  frequency  of  the  ques- 
tion may  be  an  excuse  for  giving  publicity 
to  the  answer. 

r  The  Ordinance  of  Secession  withdrew 
the  State  of  Virginia  from  the  Union,  with 
all  the  consequences  resulting  from  the 
separation.  It  annulled  the  Constitution 
and  laws  of  the  United  States  within 
the  limits  of  this  State,  and  absolved  the 
citizens  of  Virginia  from  all  obligations  and 
obedience  to  them. 

"  Hence,  it  follows,  if  this  Ordinance  be 
rejected  by  the  people,  the  State  of  Vir- 
ginia will  remain  in  the  Union,  and  the 
people  of  the  State  will  remain  bound  by 
the  Constitution  of  the  United  States ;  and 
obedience  to  the  government  and  laws  of 
the  United  States  will  be  fully  and  rightfully 
enforced  against  them. 

MIt  follows,  of  course,  that,  in  this  war 
now  carried  on  by  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  against  the  seceding  States, 
Virginia  must  immediately  change  sides,  and, 
under  the  orders  of  that  Government,  turn 
her  arms  against  her  Southern  sisters. 

u  From  this,  there  can  be  no  escape.  As 
a  member  of  the  Union,  all  her  resources 
of  men  and  money  will  be  at  once  at  the 
command  of  the  Government  of  the  Union. 

"  Again  :  for  mutual  defense,  immediately 
after  the  Ordinance  of  Secession  passed,  a 
treaty  or  '  military  league '  was  formed  by 
the  Convention  in  the  name  of  the  people 
of  Virginia,  with  the  Confederate  States  of 
the  South,  by  which  the  latter  were  bound 
to  march  to  the  aid  of  our  State  against  the 
invasion  of  the  Federal  Government.  And 
we  have  now  in  Virginia,  at  Harper's  Ferry 
and  at  Norfolk,  in  face  of  the  common  foe, 
several  thousands  of  the  gallant  sons  of 
South  Carolina,  of  Alabama,  of  Louisiana, 
Georgia  and  Mississippi,  who  hastened  to 
fulfill  the  covenant  they  made,  and  are  ready 
and  eager  to  lay  down  their  lives,  side  by 
side  with  our  sons,  in  defense  of  the  soil  of 
Virginia. 

M  If  the  Ordinance  of  Secession  is  rejected, 
not  only  will  this  '  military  league '  be  an- 
nulled, but  it  will  have  been  made  a  trap  to 
inveigle  our  generous  defenders  into  the 
hands  of  their  enemies. 

"  Virginia  remaining  in  the  Union,  duty 
and  loyalty  to  her  obligations  to  the  Union 
will  require  that  those  Southern  forces  shall 
not  be  permitted  to  leave  the  State,  but 
shall  be  delivered  up  to  the  Government 
of  the  Union ;  and  those  who  refuse  to  do 
so  will  be  guilty  of  treason,  and  be  justly 
dealt  with  as  traitors. 

M  Treason  against  the  United  States  con- 
sists as  well  '  in  adhering  to  its  enemies 
and  giving  them  aid'  as  in  levying  war. 


EAST   AXD  WE 


ST  VIRGINIA. 


479 


"  If  it  be  asked — '  What  are  those  to  do, 
who,  in  their  consciences,  cannot  vote  to 
separate  Virginia  from  the  United  States  V — 
the  answer  is  simple  and  plain :  Honor  and 
duty  alike  require  that  they  should  not  vote 
on  the  question ;  if  they  retain  such  opinions, 
they  must  leaye  the  State.  * 
"None  can  doubt  or  question  the  truth 
of  what  I  have  written  ;  and  none  can  vote 
against  the  Ordinance  of  Secession,  who  do 
not  thereby  (whether  ignorantly  or  other- 
wise) vote  to  place  himself  and  his  State  in 
the  position  I  have  indicated.  J.  M.  Mason. 
44  Winchester,  Va.,  J/rtylG,  1861." 

Under  the  influence' of  such  incul- 
cations, backed  by  corresponding  ac- 
tion, the  more  conspicuous  Unionists 
being  hunted  out,  and  the  greater 
number  silenced  and  paralyzed,  the 
election  was  a  perfect  farce,7  through- 
out both  Eastern  and  South- Western 
Virginia.  Even  Alexandria — always, 
hitherto,  strongly  Union — gave  but 
106  Union  votes  to  over  900  Seces- 
sion ;  while  in  lower  Virginia  scarce- 
ly a  Union  vote  was  polled.  Thus, 
when  the  conspirators  came  to  an- 
nounce the  result,  they  reported  that, 
including  the  votes  taken  in  camp, 
125,950  had  been  cast  for  Secession 
to  20,373  for  the  Union  ;  but  they 
significantly  added  that  this  did  not 
include  the  vote  of  several  "Western 
counties,  which  were  in  such  a  state 
of  confusion  that  no  returns  there- 
from had  been  received ! 

North- Western  Virginia,  including 
more  than  a  third  of  the  geographi- 
cal area  of  the  State,  with  from  one- 
fifth  to  one-fourth  of  its  white  popu- 
lation, had,  for  many  years,  chafed 
under  the  sway  of  the  slaveholding  oli- 

7  The  Louisville  Journal  of  June  1st,  said: 

"  The  vote  of  Virginia  last  week  on  the  ques- 
tion of  Secession  was  a  perfect  mockery.  The 
State  was  full  of  troops  from  other  States  of  the 
Confederacy ;  while  all  the  Virginia  Secessionists, 
banded  in  military  companies,  were  scattered  in 
various  places  to  overawe  the  friends  of  Union 
or  drive  them  from  the  polls.  The  Richmond 
Convention,  in  addition  to  other  acts  of  usurpa- 
tion, provided  that  polls  should  be  opened  in  all 


garchy  in  the  East.  Eepeated  strug- 
gles respecting  bases  of  legislative  ap- 
portionment, of  taxation,  etc.,  and  on 
questions  of  internal  improvement, 
had  clearly  indicated  that  the  an- 
tagonism between  the  East  and  the 
West  was  founded  in  natural  causes, 
and  could  not  be  compromised  nor 
overcome.  When  opportunity  pre- 
sented, the  West  had  repeatedly  pro- 
tested against  the  perpetuation  of 
Slavery,  but  still  more  earnestly 
against  the  subordination  of  all  her 
interests  and  rights  to  the  incessant 
exactions  of  the  Slave  Power ;  though 
her  ruling  politicians  and  presses  were 
usually  held  in  subjection  to  the  domi- 
nant interest  by  the  preponderating 
power  of  the  East.  Her  people  had 
but  to  look  across  the  Ohio,  whereto 
their  streams  tended  and  their  sur- 
plus produce  was  sent,  to  convince 
them  that  their  connection  with  the 
Old  Dominion  was  unfortunate  and 
injurious* 

Ten  years  prior  to  this,  Muscoe  R. 
H.  Garnett,8  a  leading  politician  of 
Old  Virginia,  writing  privately  to  his 
friend  and  compatriot,  William  H. 
Trescott,9  of  South  Carolina,  who  had 
sounded  him  with  regard  to  the  aid 
to  be  expected  from  Virginia,  in  case 
South  Carolina  should  then  secede 
from  the  Union,  had  responded  10  as 
follows : 

"  I  believe  thoroughly  in  onr  own  theories, 
and  that,  if  Charleston  did  not  grow  quite  so 
fast  in  her  trade  with  other  States,  yet  the 
relief  from  Federal  taxation  would  vastly 


the  military  encampments,  besides  the  ordinary 
voting  places.  *  *  *  No  man  voted  against 
Secession  on  Thursday  last  but  at  the  peril  of 
being  lynched  or  arrested  as  an  incendiary 
dangerous  to  the  State." 

8  Democratic  representative  in  Congress  from 
1857  to  1861 ;  since  then,  in  the  Rebel  Congress. 

9  Assistant  Sec'ry  of  State  under  Buchanan. 

10  Richmond,  May  3,  1851. 


480  THE  AMERICA 

stimulate  your  prosperity.  If  so,  the  pres- 
tige of  the  Union  would  be  destroyed,  and 
you  would  be  the  nucleus  for  a  Southern 
confederation  at  no  distant  day.  But  I  do 
not  doubt,  from  all  I  have  been  able  to 
learn,  that  the  Federal  Government  would 
use  force,  beginning  with  the  form  most 
embarrassing  to  you,  and  least  calculated  to 
excite  sympathy:  I  mean  a  naval  blockade. 
In  that  event,  could  you  withstand  the  re- 
action of  feeling  which  the  suffering  com- 
merce of  Charleston  would  probably  mani- 
fest ?  Would  you  not  lose  that  in  which 
your  strength  consists,  the  union  of  your 
people?  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  an 
opinion;  I  only  ask  the  question.  If  you 
force  this  blockade,  and  bring  the  Govern- 
ment to  direct  force,  the  feeling  in  Virginia 
would  be  very  great.  I  trust  in  God  it 
would  bring  her  to  your  aid.  But  it  would 
be  wrong  in  me  to  deceive  you  by  speaking 
certainly.  I  cannot  express  the  deep  morti- 
fication I  have  felt  at  her  course  this  winter. 
But  I  do  not  believe  that  the  course  of  the 
Legislature  is  a  fair  expression  of  the  popu- 
lar feeling.  In  the  East,  at  least,  the  great 
majority  believe  in  the  right  of  Secession, 
and  feel  the  deepest  sympathy  with  Caro- 
lina in  opposition  to  measures  which  they 
regard  as  she  does.  But  the  west — West- 
ern Virginia — there  is  the  rub!  Only 
G0,000  slaves  to  494,000  whites.11  When  I 
consider  this  fact,  and  the  kind  of  argument 
which  we  have  heard  in  this  body,12 1  cannot 
but  regard  with  the  greatest  fear,  the  ques- 
tion whether  Virginia  would  assist  Carolina 
in  such  an  issue." 

Mr.  Garnett  had  clearly  and  truly 
foreseen  that  Western  Virginia  must 
necessarily  constitute  a  formidable 
obstacle  to  the  triumph  of  Secession. 
The  forty-two  counties  which  now 
compose  the  State  of  West  Virginia, 
had,  in  1860,  a  free  population  of 
349,642,  with  only  12,771  slaves,  or 
but  one  slave  to  nearly  thirty  white 
persons ;  and  even  this  small  number 
of  slaves  were,  in  good  part,  held  in 
the  counties  of  Greenbrier,  Monroe 
and  Hampshire,  lying  on  the  south- 
ern verge  of  the  new  State,  and,  for 
the  most  part,  adhering  to  old  Vir- 
ginia in  the  struggle  for  Disunion. 
In  the  nature  of  things,  this  people 


N  CONFLICT. 

were  not,  and  could  not  be,  disposed 
to  divide  the  Republic,  and  place 
themselves  on  the  most  exposed  and 
defenseless  frontier  of  a  far  smaller 
and  weaker  nation,  in  the  interest, 
and  for  the  supposed  benefit,  of  human 
Slavery.  And  yet  this  enormous 
sacrifice  was  required  of  them  by  the 
slaveholding  conspiracy,  which,  since 
it  could  not  hope  to  win  them  by 
persuasion,  was  preparing  to  subject 
them  to  its  sway  by  force  of  arms : 
and  it  was  a  secret  condition  of  the 
adhesion  of  Virginia  to  the  Confed- 
eracy that  her  territorial  area  was,  in 
no  case,  to  be  curtailed  by  any  treaty 
of  peace  that  might  ultimately  be 
made  with  the  Union. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  accession 
of  Virginia  to  the  Confederacy  had 
rendered  a  peaceful  concession  of 
Southern  independence  a  moral,  and 
well  nigh  a  geographical,  impossibil- 
ity. West  Virginia — but  more  espe- 
cially that  long,  narrow  strip,  strange- 
ly interposed  between  Pennsylvania 
and'  Ohio,  (locally  designated  "  The 
Panhandle,'7)  could  not  be  surren- 
dered by  the  Union  without  involv- 
ing the  necessity  of  still  further  na- 
tional disintegration.  For  this  "  Pan- 
handle" stretches  northerly  to  within 
a  hundred  miles  of  Lake  Erie,  nearly 
severing  the  old  from  the  new  Free 
States,  and  becoming,  in  the  event  of 
its  possession  by  a  foreign  and  hostile 
power,  a  means  of  easily  interposing 
a  military  force  so  as  to  cut  off  all 
communication  between  them.  If 
the  people  of  the  Free  States  could 
have  consented  to  surrender  their 
brethren  of  West  Virginia  to  their 
common  foes,  they  could  not  have 
relinquished  their  territory  without 


11  Mr.  Garnett  counts  the  Taller  (Shenandoah,) 
as  a  portion  of  Western  Virginia. 


"Mr.  G.  was  then  a  member  of  a  Virginia 
State  Convention. 


TENNESSEE    UNIONISM  BETRAYED. 


481 


consenting  to  their  own  ultimate  dis- 
ruption and  ruin.  "West  Virginia  was 
thus  the  true  key-stone  of  the  Union 
arch. 

The  Legislature  of  Tennessee, 
which  assembled  at  Nashville  January 
7th,  1861,  and  elected  Breckinridge 
Democrats  for  officers  in  both  Houses, 
had,  on  the  19th,  decided  to  call  a 
State  Convention,  subject  to  a  vote 
of  the  people.  That  vote  was  taken 
early  in  March;  and,  on  the  10th,  the 
result  was  officially  proclaimed  as 
follows  :  for  the  Union  91,803 ;  for 
Disunion  24,749;  Union  majority 
67,054.  Several  counties  did  not 
render  their  returns :  and  it  was  said 
that  their  vote  would  reduce  the 
Union  majority  to  something 


over 

50,000  ;  but  the  defeat  of  the  Seces- 
sionists was  admitted  to  be  complete 
and  overwhelming. 

Still,  the  conspirators  for  Disunion 
kept  actively  plotting  and  mining ; 
and,  by  means  of  secret  societies,  and 
all  the  machinery  of  aristocratic  sedi- 
tion, believed  themselves  steadily 
gaining.  They  had  no  hope,  how- 
ever, of  hurling  their  State  into  the' 
vortex  of  treason,  save  on  the  back 
of  an  excitement  raised  by  actual 
collision  and  bloodshed.  Up  to  the 
hour  of  the  bombardment  of  Sumter, 
though  the  Governor  and  a  majority 
of  the  Legislature  were  fully  in  their 
interest,  they  remained  a  powerless 
minority  of  the  people. 

"When  the  news  of  that  bombard- 
ment was  received,  and  the  excite- 
ment created  by  it  was  at  its  hight, 
the  leaders  of  the  6  conservative'  or 
Union  party  were  beguiled  into  a 
fatal  error.  On  the  18th,  they  issued 
from  Nashville  an  address  to  the  peo- 
ple of  Tennessee,  wherein,  after  glan- 
31 


cing  at  the  leading  events  which  had 
just  occurred  on  the  seaboard,  they 
proceeded  to  say : 

"  Tennessee  is  called  upon  by  tho  Presi- 
dent to  furnish  two  regiments  ;  and  the  State 
has,  through  her  Executive,  refused  to  com- 
ply with  the  call.  This  refusal  of  our  State 
ice  fully  approve.  We  commend  the  wis- 
dom, the  justice,  and  the  humanity,  of  the 
refusal.  We  unqualifiedly  disapprove  of 
secession,  both  as  a  constitutional  right,  and 
as  a  remedy  for  existing  evils ;  we  equally 
condemn  the  policy  of  the  Administration 
in  reference  to  the  seceded  States.  But, 
while  we,  without  qualification,  condemn 
the  policy  of  coercion,  as  calculated  to  dis- 
solve the  Union  forever,  and  to  dissolve  it  in 
the  blood  of  our  fellow-citizens,  and  regard 
it  as  sufficient  to  justify  the  State  in  refusing 
her  aid  to  the  Government,  in  its  attempt 
to  suppress  the  revolution  in  the  seceded 
States,  we  do  not  think  it  our  duty,  consider- 
ing her  position  in  the  Union,  and  in  view 
of  the  great  question  of  the  peace  of  our  dis- 
tracted country,  to  take  sides  against  the 
Government.  Tennessee  has  wronged  no 
State  nor  citizen  of  this  Union.  She  has  vio- 
lated the  rights  of  no  State,  north  or  south. 
She  has  been  loyal  to  all  where  loyalty  was 
due.  She  has  not  brought  on  this  war  by  any 
act  of  hers.  She  has  tried  every  means  in  her 
power  to  prevent  it.  She  now  stands  ready 
to  do  any  thing  within  her  reach  to  stop  it. 
And  she  ought,  as  we  think,  to  decline  join- 
ing either  party.  For,  in  so  doing,  she 
would  at  once  terminate  her  grand  mission 
as  peace-maker  between  the  States  of  the 
South  and  the  General  Government.  Nay, 
-t^nore :  the  almost  inevitable  result  would 
be  the  transfer  of  the  war  within  her  own 
borders ;  the  defeat  of  all  hopes  of  reconcili- 
ation ;  and  the  deluging  of  the  State  with 
the  blood  of  her  own  people. 

"  The  present  duty  of  Tennessee  is  to 
maintain  a  position  of  independence — taking 
sides  with  the  Union  and  the  peace  of  the 
country  against  all  assailants,  whether  from 
the  North  or  the  South.  Her  position  should 
be  to  maintain  the  sanctity  of  her  soil  from 
the  hostile  tread  of  any  party. 

"  We  do  not  pretend  to  foretell  the  future 
of  Tennessee,  in  connection  with  the  other 
States,  or  in  reference  to  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment. We  do  not  pretend  to  be  able  to 
tell  the  future  purposes  of  the  President  and 
Cabinet  in  reference  to  the  impending  war. 
But,  should  a  purpose  be  developed  by  the 
Government  of  overrunning  and  subjugating 
our  brethren  of  the  seceded  States,  we  say, 
unequivocally,  that  it  will  be  the  duty  of  the 
State  to  resist  at  all  hazards,  at  any  cost, 
and  by  arm6i  any  such  purpose  or  attempt. 


4:82 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


And,  to  meet  any  and  all  emergencies,  she 
ought  to  be  fully  armed  ;  and  we  would  re- 
spectfully call  upon  the  authorities  of  the 
State  to  proceed  at  once  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  this  object. 

"  Let  Tennessee,  then,  prepare  thorough- 
ly and  efficiently  for  coining  events.  In  the 
mean  time,  let  her,  as  speedily  as  she  can, 
hold  a  conference  with  her  sister  slavehold- 
ing  States  yet  in  the  Union,  for  the  purpose 
of  devising  plans  for  the  preservation  of  the 
peace  of  the  land.  Fellow-citizens  of  Ten- 
nessee !  we  entreat  you  to  bring  yourselves 
up  to  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis.  Look  in 
the  face  impending  calamities !  Civil  war — 
what  is  it  ?  The  bloodiest  and  darkest  pages 
of  history  answer  this  question.  To  avert 
this,  who  would  not  give  his  time,  his  talents, 
his  untiring  energy — his  all  ?  There  may  be 
yet  time  to  accomplish  every  thing.  Let  us 
not  despair.  The  Border  Slave  States  may 
prevent  this  civil  war  :  and  why  shall  they 
not  do  it  ?" 

Of  course,  these  gentlemen  were, 
though  unconsciously,  on  the  high 
road  to  open  treason,  whither  they 
all  arrived  ere  the  lapse  of  many 
weeks.  How  they  saved  their  State 
from  the  woes  of  civil  war,  and  pre- 
served her  soil  from  the  tread  of  hos- 
tile armies,  is  already  well  known. 
Of  the  many  who  weakly,  culpably 
allowed  themselves  to  be  beguiled  or 
hurled  into  complicity  in  the  crime 
of  dividing  and  destroying  their  coun- 
try, there  is  no  name  whereon  will 
rest  a  deeper,  darker  stigma  than 
that  of  John  Bell. 

Conservatism  having  thus  bound 
itself  hand  and  foot,  and  cast  its  fet- 
tered and  helpless  form  at  the  feet  of 
rampant,  aggressive  treason,  the  re- 
sult was  inevitable.  An  emissary 
from  the  Confederate  traitors,  in  the 
person  of  Henry  W.  Hilliard,13  of 
Alabama,  forthwith  appeared  upon 
the  scene.  The  Legislature  secretly 
adopted14  a  resolve  that  the  Governor 
might  or  should  appoint  "  three  Com- 
missioners on  the  part  of  Tennessee 
to  enter  into  a  military  league  with 


the  authorities  of  the  Confederate 
States,  and  with  the  authorities  of 
such  other  slaveholding  States  as 
may  wish  to  enter  into  it ;  having  in 
view  the  protection  and  defense  of 
the  entire  South  against  the  war 
which  is  now  being  carried  on  against 
it."  The  Governor  appointed  as 
such  Commissioners  Messrs.  Gustavus 
A.  Henry,  Archibald  O.  W.  Totten, 
and  Washington  Barrow ;  who  lost 
no  time  in  framing  a  Convention 
"  between  the  State  of  Tennessee  and 
the  Confederate  States  of  America," 
whereof  the  vital  provisions  are  as 
follows : 

"First:  Until  the  said  State  shall  be- 
come a  member  of  said  Confederacy,  accord- 
ing to  the  Constitutions  of  both  powers,  the 
whole  military  force  and  military  operations, 
offensive  and  defensive,  of  said  State,  in  the 
impending  conflict  with  the  United  States, 
shallbe  under  the  chief  control  and  direction 
of  the  Confederate  States,  upon  the  same 
basis,  principles  and  footing,  as  if  said  State 
were  now  and  during  the  interval  a  mem- 
ber of  said  Confederacy.  Said  force,  to- 
gether witli  those  of  the  Confederate  States, 
is  to  be  employed  for  the  common  defense. 

"Second:  The  State  of  Tennessee  will, 
upon  becoming  a  member  of  said  Confeder- 
acy, under  the  permanent  Constitution  of 
said  Confederate  States,  if  the  same  shall 
occur,  turn  over  to  said  Confederate  States 
all  the  public  property,  naval  stores  and 
munitions  of  war,  of  which  she  may  then 
be  in  possession,  acquired  from  the  United 
States,  on  the  same  terms  and  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  other  States  of  said  Confed- 
eracy have  done  in  like  cases." 

This  convention — concluded  on  the 
Tth — was  submitted  to  the  Legisla- 
ture, still  in  secret  session,  and  rati- 
fied :  in  Senate,  Yeas  14 ;  Nays  6 ; 
absent  or  not  voting,  5.  In  the  House, 
Yeas  43 ;  Nays  15 ;  absent  or  not 
voting,  18.  This  Legislature  had,  on 
the  preceding  day, passed  an  ordinance 
of  Secession,  whereof  the  first  two,  and 
most  essential,  articles  are  as  follows : 

"First:    We,  the  people  of  the  State  of 


18  Formerly  a  Whig  member  of  Congress. 


"May  1,  1SG1. 


TENNESSEE'S  PRAU 


DULENT  SECESSION. 


483 


Tennessee,  waiving  an  expression  of  opinion 
as  to  the  abstract  doctrine  of  secession,  but 
asserting  the  right,  as  a  free  and  independ- 
ent people,  to  alter,  reform  or  abolish  our 
form  of  government  in  such  manner  as  we 
think  proper,  do  ordain  and  declare  that  all 
the  laws  and  ordinances  by  which  the  State 
of  Tennessee  became  a  member  of  the  Fede- 
ral Union  of  the  United  States  of  America 
are  hereby  abrogated  and  annulled,  and  that 
all  obligations  on  our  part  be  withdrawn 
therefrom  ;  and  we  do  hereby  resume  all  the 
rights,  functions  and  powers,  which,  by  any 
of  said  laws  and  ordinances,  were  conveyed 
to  the  Government  of  the  United  States,  and 
absolve  ourselves  from  all  the  obligations, 
restraints  and  duties,  incurred  thereto ;  and 
do  hereby  henceforth  become  a  free,  sover- 
eign and  independent  State. 

" Second:  We,  furthermore,  declare  and 
ordain  that  Article  10,  sections  1  and  2  of 
the  Constitution  of  the  State  of  Tennessee, 
which  requires  members  of  the  General  As- 
sembly, and  all  officers,  civil  and  military, 
to  take  an  oath  to  support  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  be,  and  the  same  are 
hereby,  abrogated  and  annulled,  and  all  parts 
of  the  Constitution  of  the  State  of  Tennessee 
making  citizenship  of  the  United  States  a 
qualification  for  office,  and  recognizing  the 
Constitution  of  the  United  States  as  the 
supreme  law  of  this  State,  are,  in  like  man- 
ner, abrogated  and  annulled." 

This  Ordinance,  with  a  pendant 
providing  for  the  adoption  of  the 
Confederate  Constitution,  was  nomi- 
nally submitted  to  a  popular  vote  of 
the  State,  to  be  taken  on  the  8th  of 
June  ensuing ;  but  such  a  submission, 
after  "  all  the  public  property,  naval 
stores  and  munitions  of  war"  and  the 
whole  "  military  operations,  offensive 
and  defensive,  of  the  said  State," 
were  placed  "  under  the  chief  control 
and  direction  of  the  President  of  the 
Confederate  States,"  was,  of  course, 
a  farce.15 

15  The  Louisville  Journal  of  May  13th,  said: 
"The  spirit  of  Secession  appears  to  have 
reached  its  culminating  point  in  Tennessee. 
Certainly,  the  fell  spirit  has,  as  yet,  reached  no 
higher  point  of  outrageous  tyranny  The  whole 
of  the  late  proceeding  in  Tennessee  has  been  as 
gross  an  outrage  as  ever  was  perpetrated  by 
the  worst  tyrant  of  all  the  earth.  The  whole 
Secession  movement,  on  the  part  of  the  Legisla- 
ture of  that  State,  has  been  lawless,  violent  and 


The  network  of  railroads  checker- 
ing the  State,  and  especially  the  great 
line  connecting  Virginia,  through 
Knoxville  and  Chattanooga,  with  the 
Cotton  States,  was  instantly  covered 
with  Rebel  soldiers,  and  all  freedom 
of  opinion  and  expression,  on  the  side 
of  the  Union,  completely  crushed  out. 
Gov.  Harris,  on  the  24th  of  June,  is- 
sued his  proclamation,  declaring  that 
the  vote  of  the  8th  had  resulted  as 
follows : 

Separation.   2fo  Separation. 

East  Tennessee   14,780  32,923 

Middle    "       ....  58,265  8,198 

West      "       ....  29,127  6,117 

Military  Camps   2,741  (none) 


Total   104,913  47,238 

But  a  Convention  of  the  people 
of  East  Tennessee — a  region  wherein 
the  immense  preponderance  of  Union 
sentiment  still  commanded  some  de- 
gree of  freedom  for  Unionists — held 
at  Greenville  on  the  17th,  and  where- 
in thirty-one  counties  were  represent- 
ed by  delegates,  adopted  a  declaration 
of  grievances,  wherein  they  say : 

"  We,  the  people  of  East  Tennessee,  again 
assembled  in  a  Convention  of  our  delegates, 
make  the  following  declaration  in  addition 
to  that  heretofore  promulgated  by  us  at 
Knoxville,  on  the  30th  and  31st  days  of  May 
last: 

"  So  far  as  we  can  learn,  the  election  held 
in  this  State  on  the  8th  day  of  the  present 
month  was  free,  with  but  few  exceptions,  in 
no  part  of  the  State,  other  than  East  Ten- 
nessee. In  the  larger  portion  of  Middle  and 
West  Tennessee,  no  speeches  or  discussions 
in  favor  of  the  Union  were  permitted.1" 
Union  papers  were  not  allowed  to  circulate. 
Measures  were  taken,  in  some  parts  of  West 
Tennessee,  in  defiance  of  the  Constitution 
and  laws,  which  allow  folded  tickets,  to  have 


tumultuous.  The  pretense  of  submitting  the 
Ordinance  of  Secession  to  the  vote  of  the  people 
of  the  State,  after  placing  her  military  power 
and  resources  at  the  disposal  and  under  the 
command  of  the  Confederate  States  without  any 
authority  from  the  people,  is  as  bitter  and  inso- 
lent a  mockery  of  popular  rights  as  the  human 
mind  could  invent." 

16  An  attempt,  a  short  time  before  the  election, 


484 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


the  ballots  numbered  in  such  manner  as  to 
mark  and  expose  the  Union  voters.  A  Dis- 
union paper,  The  Nashville  Gazette,  in  urg- 
ing the  people  to  vote  an  open  ticket,  de- 
clared that  4  a  thief  takes  a  pocket-book  or 
effects  an  entrance  into  forbidden  places  by 
stealthy  means — a  tory,  in  voting,  usually 
adopts  pretty  much  the  same  mode  of  pro- 
cedure.' Disunionists,  in  many  places,  had 
charge  of  the  polls ;  and  Union  men,  when 
voting,  were  denounced  as  Lincolnites  and 
Abolitionists.  The  unanimity  of  the  votes 
in  many  large  counties,  where,  but  a  few 
weeks  ago,  the  Union  sentiment  was  so 
strong,  proves  beyond  doubt  that  Union 
men  were  overawed  by  the  tyranny  of  the 
military  law,  and  the  still  greater  tyranny 
of  a  corrupt  and  subsidized  press.  *  *  * 
Volunteers  were  allowed  to  vote  in  and  out 
of  the  State,  in  flagrant  violation  of  the  Con- 
stitution. From  the  moment  the  election 
was  over,  and  before  any  detailed  statement 
of  the  vote  in  the  different  counties  had 
been  published,  and  before  it  was  possible 
to  ascertain  the  result,  it  was  exultingly 
proclaimed  that  Separation  had  been  carried 
by  from  fifty  to  seventy  thousand  votes.  This 
was  to  prepare  the  public  mind,  to  enable 
the  Secessionists  to  hold  possession  of  the 
State,  though  they  should  be  in  a  minority. 
The  final  result  is  to  be  announced  by  a  Dis- 
union Governor,  whose  existence  depends 
upon  the  success  of  Secession ;  and  no  pro- 
vision is  made  by  law  for  an  examination  of 
the  vote  by  disinterested  persons,  or  even  for 
contesting  the  election.  For  these  and  other 
causes,  we  do  not  regard  the  result  of  the 
election  as  expressive  of  the  will  of  a  major- 
ity of  the  freemen  of  Tennessee." 17 

The  people  of  East  Tennessee — a 
mountainous,  pastoral  region,  like 
New  Hampshire  or  the  Tyrol,  where- 
in Slavery  never  had  and  never  could 
have  any  substantial  foothold  —  she 
having  about  one  slave  to  twenty 

to  hold  a  Union  meeting  at  Paris,  Tenn.,  resulted 
in  the  death  of  two  Union  men — shot  by  the 
Disunionists;  and  a  notice  that  Hon.  Emerson 
Etheridge  would  speak  at  Trenton,  Tenn.,  elicited 
the  following  correspondence : 

"Trenton,  Tenn.,  April  16,  1861. 
"To  J.  D.  C.  Atkins  and  R.  G.  Payne  : 

"  Etheridge  speaks  here  on  Friday.  Be  here 
to  answer  him  Friday  or  next  day.'' 

The  following  is  the  answer  to  the  above : 
"Memphis,  April  16,  1861. 

"  To  Messrs.   ;    I  can't  find  Atkins. 

Can't  come  at  that  time.  If  Etheridge  speaks 
for  the  South,  we  have  no  reply.    If  against  it, 


freemen  —  earnestly  petitioned  and 
entreated  permission  to  remain  in 
the  Union ;  and,  if  the  residue  of  the 
State  were  resolved  to  go  out,  then 
they  asked  of  it  to  be  set  off  and 
quit-claimed,  so  that  they  might  en- 
joy "the  right,  as  a  free  and  inde- 
pendent people,  to  alter,  reform,  or 
abolish  our  form  of  government  in 
such  manner  as  we  see  proper,"  which 
the  legislators  of  their  State,  in  their 
Ordinance  of  Secession,  had  solemnly 
asserted.  But  they  were  at  once  given 
to  understand  that  this  could  not  be 
granted.  The  right  aforesaid  was 
recognized  by  the  Confederates  as 
inhering  in  all  who  sought  to  destroy 
the  Union,  not  in  those  who  essayed 
to  preserve  or  adhere  to  it.  So  East 
Tennessee — isolated  from  her  natural 
allies  by  the  shameful  neutrality  of 
Kentucky — was  ruthlessly  trampled 
under  the  iron  heel  of  the  Rebellion. 
Her  bolder  Unionists  were  shot  down 
like  wolves,  or  hung  by  scores  like 
sheep-stealing  dogs ;  while  those  more 
cautious  or  reticent  were  outlawed 
and  hunted  from  their  State.  For 
weary  months  and  years,  she  lay 
helpless  and  bleeding  in  the  grasp 
of  her  blood-thirsty  foes,  while  thou- 
sands of  her  sons  were  torn  from  their 
homes  by  a  merciless  conscription, 
and  compelled  to  fight  and  die  for 
the  traitorous  cause  they  abhorred. 

our  only  answer  to  him  and  his  backers  must  be 
cold  steel  and  bullets.  R.  G.  Payne." 

17  Parson  Brownlow,  in  his  "  Experiences 
among  the  Rebels,"  says: 

"For  Separation  and  Representation  at  Rich- 
mond, East  Tennessee  gare  14,700  votes.  One- 
half  of  that  number  were  Rebel  troops,  having  no 
authority  under  the  Constitution  to  vote  at  any  elec- 
tion. For  No  Separation  and  No  Representa- 
tion, East  Tennessee  gave  33,000  straight-out 
Union  votes,  with  at  least  5,000  quiet  citizens 
deterred  from  coming  out  by  threats  of  violence 
and  by  the  presence  of  drunken  troops  at  the 
polls  to  insult  them." 


SECESSION   OF  X 


ORTH  CAROLINA. 


485 


The  State  of  Nokth  Carolina, 
though  never  deliberately  and  intel- 
ligently hostile  to  the  Union,  became 
a  much  easier  prey  to  the  conspira- 
tors. Her  Democratic  Legislature — 
reconvened  at  Ealeigh,  November 
19th,  1860  —  had  refused,  a  month 
later,  to  pass  a  bill  to  arm  the  State, 
though  visited  and  entreated  to  that 
end  by  Hon.  Jacob  Thompson,  then 
a  member  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  Cabi- 
net; and  had  adjourned18  without 
even  calling  a  Convention.  This,  as 
we  have  seen,  did  not  prevent  Gov. 
Ellis  taking  military  possession  of  the 
Federal  forts  near  Beaufort  and  Wil- 
mington (January  2d),  on  the  pretext 
that,  if  he  did  not  do  it,  a  mob  would ! 
lie  proceeded  to  reconvene  the  Legis- 
lature in  extra  session,  and  to  worry 
it  into  calling  a  Convention ;  for 
which,  an  election  was  duly  held.19 
But  the  act  making  this  call  provi- 
ded that  the  people,  when  electing 
delegates,  might  vote  that  the  Con- 
vention should  or  should  not  meet. 
They  profited  by  the  gracious  per- 
mission, and,  while  electing  a  Union 
Convention  by  an  immense  majority, 
voted — to  guard  against  accidents — 
that  the  Convention  should  not  meet : 
their  vote — quite  a  heavy  one — stand- 
ing: For  holding,  46,672;  Against 
holding,  47,323 :  majority  for  ~No  Con- 
vention, 651.  This  vote  temporarily 
checked  all  open,  aggressive  move- 
ments in  the  interest  of  Disunion,  but 
did  not  arrest  nor  diminish  the  efforts 
of  its  champions.  On  the  contrary,  a 
great  State  Rights  Convention  was 
assembled  at  Raleigh  on  the  22d  of 
March,  and  largely  attended  by  lead- 
ing Disunionists  from  South  Carolina, 
Virginia,  and  other  States.  Its  spirit 
and  its  demonstrations  left  no  doubt 


of  the  fixed  resolve  of  the  master- 
spirits to  take  their  State  out  of  the 
Union,  even  in  defiance  of  a  majority 
of  her  voters.  But  they  concluded 
to  await  the  opportunity  which  South 
Carolina  was  preparing.  This  oppor- 
tunity was  the  taking  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter; when  Gov.  Ellis  proceeded  to 
seize  the  U.  S.  Branch  Mint  at  Char- 
lotte20 and  the  Federal  Arsenal  at  Fay- 
etteville  ;21  and  thereupon22  to  call  an 
extra  session  of  the  Legislature.  This 
session  commenced  May  1st,  and  in 
a  few  days  thereafter  resulted  in  the 
passage  of  the  following: 

"  Whereas,  By  an  unwarranted  and  unpre- 
cedented usurpation  of  power  by  the  Ad- 
ministration at  Washington  City,  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  of  America  has 
been  subverted ;  and  ichereas,  the  honor,  dig- 
nity, and  welfare,  of  the  people  of  North  Car- 
olina imperatively  demand  that  they  should 
resist,  at  all  hazards,  such  usurpation ;  and 
whereas,  there  is  an  actual  state  of  revolu- 
tion existing  in  North  Carolina,  and  our  sis- 
ter State  of  Virginia,  making  common  cause 
with  us,  is  threatened  with  invasion  by  the 
said  Administration ;  now,  therefore, 

"Resolved,  That  his  Excellency,  the  Gov- 
ernor, be  authorized  to  tender  to  Virginia,  or 
to  the  Government  of  the  Confederate  States, 
such  portion  of  our  volunteer  forces  now,  or 
that  may  be  hereafter,  under  his  command, 
as  may  not  be  necessary  for  the  immediate 
defense  of  North  Carolina." 

The  Legislature  proceeded  at  once 
to  call  a  Convention;  delegates  to  be 
elected  on  the  13th,  and  the  Conven- 
tion to  assemble  on  the  20th.  On 
that  day,  the  Convention  assembled 
— having  been  elected  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Fort  Sumter  efferves- 
cence and  of  such  assertions  as  are 
contained  in  the  preamble  just  quo- 
ted. Mr.  Thomas  L.  Clingman,  late 
of  the  U.  S.  Senate,  having  been 
delegated  by  the  Legislature  to  the 
Confederate  Congress  at  Montgom- 
ery, on  the  14th,  submitted  to  that 
body  the  following : 


December  22d.        19  January  30,  1861.       20  April  20th.       21  April  22d.      22  April  26th. 


486  THE  AMERICA 

"  Resolution,  authorizing  the  Governor  to 
use  all  the  powers  of  the  State,  civil  and 
military,  consistent  with  the  Constitution, 
to  protect  the  persons  and  property  of  our 
citizens,  and  to  maintain  and  defend  the 
honor  of  North  Carolina. 

"  Whereas,  The  Constitution  of  the  United 
States  has  been  entirely  subverted,  and  its 
Government  has  been  converted  into  a  mili- 
tary despotism,  by  the  usurpations  of  the 
Administration  of  Abraham  Lincoln ;  And 
whereas,  the  said  Abraham  Lincoln  has  pro- 
mulgated a  proclamation  declaring  the  ports 
of  North  Carolina  in  a  state  of  blockade, 
and  directing  our  ships  engaged  in  lawful 
commerce  to  be  seized  ;  And  whereas,  such 
measures  are,  by  the  laws  of  civilized  na- 
tions, only  to  be  resorted  to  against  a  foreign 
State,  and  one  against  which  war  has  been 
declared ;  And  whereas,  North  Carolina  has 
no  alternative,  consistent  with  her  safety 
and  honor,  but  to  accept  the  position  thus 
assigned  to  her,  as  being  that  of  an  inde- 
pendent and  foreign  State : 

"  Therefore,  be  it  resolved,  That  the  Gov- 
ernor is  hereby  authorized  to  use  all  the 
powers  of  the  State,  civil  and  military,  con- 
sistent with  the  Constitution,  to  protect  the 
persons  and  property  of  our  citizens,  and  to 
maintain  and  defend  the  honor  of  North 
Carolina. 

"  A  true  copy,  from  the  minutes  of  the 
House  of  Commons  of  North  Carolina. 

"  Edwaed  Cantwell,  C.  H.  C." 

By  such  statements,  wholly  un- 
contradicted, the  loyalty  and  patriot- 
ism of  North  Carolina  were,  for  the 
moment,  utterly  paralyzed.  The  peo- 
ple, assured  by  those  they  had  learned 
to  trust  that  the  Federal  Government 
had  been  utterly  subverted  by  usurp- 
ation, and  that  a  military  despotism, 
headed  by  Abraham  Lincoln,  was 
making  unprovoked  war  upon  them, 
which  their  honor  and  their  interests 
alike  required  them  to  resist,  were 
passive,  bewildered  and  helpless  in- 
struments in  the  hands  of  the  con- 
spirators. The  Convention,  on  the 
very  day  of  its  assembling,  passed  an 
Ordinance  of  Secession  by  a  unani- 
mous vote,  and  forthwith  linked  the 
efforts  and  fortunes  of  North  Carolina 
with  those  of  the  traitors,  by  adopting 


.K  CONFLICT. 

and  ratifying  the  Confederate  Consti- 
tution. 

It  has  been  widely  represented, 
and,  to  some  extent,  believed,  that 
the  failure  of  the  Peace  Conference 
or  Congress,  so  called,  with  the  re- 
fusal of  the  Republicans  to  pass  the 
Crittenden  Compromise,  backed  by 
President  Lincoln's  Inaugural,  was 
generally  received  throughout  the 
Slave  States  as  a  declaration  of  war 
on  the  South,  and,  as  such,  resented 
by  large  and  controlling  acquisitions 
to  the  ranks  of  the  Disunionists  in  the 
hitherto  unseceded  States.  The  true 
view  is  widely  different  from  this. 
We  have  seen  that  the  Virginia  Con- 
vention refused,  so  late  as  April  4th, 
by  a  vote  of  nearly  two  to  one,  to 
pass  an  Ordinance  of  Secession. 

The  Arkansas  Convention  assem- 
bled about  the  1st  of  March ;  and, 
on  the  16th,  was  waited  on  by  Wil- 
liam S.  Oldham,  a  member  of  the 
Confederate  Congress  and  a  Com- 
missioner from  Jefferson  Davis,  bear- 
ing a  message  from  that  potentate, 
dated  March  9th — four  days  after  the 
adjournment  of  Congress,  and  when 
the  contents  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  In- 
augural were  familiar  to  the  entire 
South.  The  Convention  listened  to 
Mr.  Davis's  letter,  wherein  he  dilated 
on  the  identity  of  institutions  and  of 
interests  between  his  Confederacy  and 
the  State  of  Arkansas,  urging  the 
adhesion  of  the  latter  to  the  former ; 
and,  after  taking  two  days  to  delibe- 
rate, a  majority — 39  to  35 — voted 
not  to  secede  from  the  Union.  The 
Convention  proceeded,  however,  to 
resolve  that  a  vote  of  the  people  of 
their  State  should  be  taken  on  the 
1st  of  August  ensuing — the  ballots 
reading  "  Secession  "  or  "  Codpera- 


ARKANSAS    ON  IRRE 


YOCABLE    COMPACTS.  487 


tion" — the  Convention  to  stand  ad- 
journed to  August  17th ;  when,  if  it 
should  appear  that  Secession  had  re- 
ceived a  majority,  this  should  be 
regarded  as  an  instruction  from  their 
constituents  to  pass  the  Ordinance, 
which  they  had  now  rejected ;  and 
so,  having  elected  five  delegates  to  a 
proposed  Conference  of  the  Border 
States,  at  Frankfort,  Ky.,  May  27th, 
the  Convention  stood  adjourned.23 
Yet  this  identical  Convention  was 
reconvened  upon  the  reception  of 
the  news  from  Fort  Sumter,  and 
proceeded,  with  little  hesitation,  to 
pass  an  Ordinance  of  Secession,24 
by  a  vote  of  69  to  1.  That  Ordi- 
nance asserts  that  this  Convention, 
by  resolves  adopted  March  11th,  had 
pledged  "  the  State  of  Arkansas  to 
resist  to  the  last  extremity  any  at- 
tempt on  the  part  of  such  power  to 
coerce  any  State  that  seceded  from 
the  old  Union."  The  Ordinance 
proceeds  to  set  forth  that  the  Legis- 
lature of  Arkansas  had,  on  the  18th 
of  October,  1836,  by  virtue  of  au- 
thority vested  therein  by  the  Con- 
vention which  framed  the  State  Con- 
stitution, adopted  certain  propositions 
made  to  that  State  by  Congress,  which 
propositions  "  were  freely  accepted, 
ratified,  and  irrevocably  confirmed, 
as  articles  of  compact  and  union  be- 
tween the  State  of  Arkansas  and  the 
United  States;"  which  irrevocable 
compact  this  Convention  proceeded 
formally  to  revoke  and  annul,  and  to 
declare  "  repealed,  abrogated,  and 
fully  set  aside,"  by  the  identical  act 
which  withdraws  Arkansas  from  the 
Union  and  absolves  its  citizens  from 
all  allegiance  to  its  Government ! 

The  meaning  of  this  may  not  be 
understood  without  explanation.  The 


soil  or  public  lands  of  Arkansas, 
before  there  was  any  such  State  or 
Territory,  had  belonged  fully  and 
absolutely  to  the  Union,  having  been 
acquired  by  it  in  the  purchase  of  Loui- 
siana. To  that  soil,  thus  purchased 
and  paid  for,  and  the  Indian  title 
thereto  at  a  still  further  cost  ex- 
tinguished, Congress  had  not  chosen 
either  to  alienate  or  imperil  its  title 
by  the  creation  and  admission  of 
the  State  of  Arkansas.  As  a  prere- 
quisite, therefore,  of  such  admission, 
said  State  was  required  to  enter  into 
an  irrevocable  compact  never  to  claim 
nor  exercise  ownership  of  said  public 
lands,  until  that  title  should  be  ceded 
and  conveyed,  upon  due  considera- 
tion, by  the  Union,  to  individual  or 
other  purchasers.  Having  thus  be- 
come a  State  and  been  admitted  into 
the  Union  by  virtue  of  this  irre- 
vocable compact,  Arkansas  proceeds 
to  revoke  the  compact  and  seize  the 
lands ! 

The  '  conservatives'  in  the  Conven- 
tion— that  is,  those  who  were  opposed 
to  Secession  at  its  earlier  meeting — 
now  issued  an  address,  justifying 
their  change  of  position  by  the  fact 
that  the  Federal  Government  had 
determined  to  use  force  against  the 
seceded  States,  and  adding  : 

"  The  South  is  1  our  country;'  and,  while 
we  are  satisfied  that,  up  to  the  moment 
when  the  Government  committed  the  folly 
and  wickedness  of  making  war  upon  the 
seceded  States,  the  conservative  party  in 
Arkansas  was  largely  in  the  ascendant,  we 
cannot  believe  that  her  soil  is  polluted  by  a 
being  base  and  cowardly  enough  to  stop  to 
consider,  in  casting  his  lot  in  the  unequal 
struggle  in  which  she  is  engaged,  whether 
she  is  '  right  or  wrong.'  " 

The 6  conservatism'  of  these  gentle- 
men, it  seems,  had  not  been  shocked 
by  the  military  seizure  by  Secession- 


23  March  22d. 


May  6,  186 L 


438  THE  AMERICA 

ists,  two  weeks  previous,  of  the  Fede- 
ral arsenal  at  Napoleon,"  containing 
12,000  Springfield  muskets  and  a  large 
amount  of  munitions  and  stores ;  nor 
by  that  of  Fort  Smith,26  also  con- 
taining valuable  deposits  of  arms, 
munitions,  and  Indian  goods.  These, 
and  many  kindred  acts  of  violence 
and  outrage  on  the  side  of  disunion, 
had  been  committed  without  a  shadow 
of  disguise,  and  with  no  other  excuse 
than  the  treason  of  the  perpetrators 
— Solon  Borland,  late  U.  S.  Senator, 
having  led  the  party  that  captured 
Fort  Smith.  '  Coercion '  was  ab- 
horred and  execrated  only  when  ex- 
ercised in  defense  of  the  Union. 

Missouri  was  found  in  a  most  an- 
omalous condition  on  the  breaking 
out  of  the  great  struggle,  destined  so 
severely  to  try  her  integrity,  as  well 
as  that  of  the  nation.  Though  her 
slaves  were  less  than  a  tenth  of  her 
total  population,  and  her  real  inter- 
ests were  bound  up  in  the  triumph 
of  Free  Labor  and  the  maintenance 
of  the  Union,  yet  her  managing  poli- 
ticians, of  the  Calhoun  or  extreme 
pro-slavery  school,  had  contrived  for 
years  to  wield  and  enjoy  her  power 
and  patronage,  by  keeping  a  firm 
and  skillful  hold  on  the  machinery  of 
the  Democratic  party.  They  had 
thus  succeeded,  through  a  long  and 
bitter  canvass,in  hunting  Col.  Thomas 
H.  Benton — once  the  autocrat  of  the 
State — out  of  the  Senate,  and,  ulti- 
mately, out  of  public  life.  In  ac- 
cordance with  their  settled  policy, 
the  most  of  them  had  professed  to 
support  Senator  Douglas  for  Presi- 
dent in  1860  ;  and,  on  the  strength 
of  their  regularity  as  Democrats,  had 
elected  Claiborne  F.  Jackson  as  Gov- 

34  April  23d.    28  April  24th.     "Jan.  5th,  1  SCI. 


N  CONFLICT. 

ernor,  Thomas  C.  Reynolds  as  Lieut. 
Governor,  and  a  Legislature  either 
thoroughly  committed  or  easily  mold- 
ed to  their  ultimate  schemes. 

Of  this  Legislature,  the  Senate  had 
instructed27  its  Committee  on  Federal 
Relations  to  report  a  bill  calling  a 
State  Convention,  which,  in  due  time, 
became  a  law.28  The  Convention 
was  accordingly  chosen  and  held ; 
but,  when  it  came  to  assemble,  not 
one  avowed  Disunionist  was  found 
among  its  members.  Even  Sterling 
Price,  a  Democratic  ex-Governor, 
who  in  due  time  became  one  of  the 
ablest  and  most  successful  of  Rebel 
Generals,  had  secured  his  election 
only  by  a  profession  of  Unionism. 
Its  Committee  on  Federal  Relations, 
through  its  Chairman,  Judge  H.  R. 
Gamble,29  reported  at  length,  on  the 
9th  of  March — four  days  after  Mr. 
Lincoln's  Inaugural  had  been  read 
all  over  the  country — in  pointed  op- 
position to  the  views  of  the  Dis- 
unionists.  After  discussing  the  ques- 
tions which  agitated  the  country  from 
a  Southern  point  of  view,  with  the 
usual  complaints  of  Northern  fanati- 
cism, intermeddling,  and  aggression, 
condemning  coercion,  whether  em- 
ployed by  or  against  the  seceded 
States,  and  warmly  indorsing  the 
Crittenden  Compromise,  the  Conven- 
tion, on  the  report  of  this  Committee, 

"Resolved,  That  at  present,  there  is  no 
adequate  cause  to  impel  Missouri  to  dissolve 
her  connection  with  the  Federal  Union; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  she  will  labor  for  such 
an  adjustment  of  the  existing  troubles  as 
will  secure  peace,  rights,  and  equality,  to  all 
the  States. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  people  of  this  State 
are  devotedly  attached  to  the  institutions  of 
our  country,  and  earnestly  desire  that,  by  a 
fair  and  amicable  adjustment,  the  present 
causes  of  disagreement  may  be  removed, 

2?  Jan.  1  Gth.     59  Afterward  made  Governor. 


MISSOURI  LURED 


TO    THE  BRINK. 


489 


the  Union  perpetuated,  and  peace  and  har- 
mony restored  between  the  North  and  the 
South." 

And  hereupon  the  Convention  ad- 
journed30 to  the  third  Monday  in 
December,  after  appointing  seven  del- 
egates to  the  proposed  Border- State 
Convention,  and  a  Committee  with 
power  to  call  an  earlier  meeting  of 
this  body,  if  deemed  necessary. 

The  Legislature,  however,  remain- 
ed in  session,  completely  under  the 
control  of  Gov.  Jackson  and  fhis  Dis- 
union allies;  and  one  of  its  most 
notable  acts  provided  a  metropolitan 
police  for  the  city  of  St.  Louis,  under 
the  control  of  five  Commissioners,  to 
be  appointed  by  the  Governor ;  who, 
of  course,  took  care  that  a  decided 
majority  of  them  should  be  Seces- 
sionists. Thus,  the  practical  control 
of  the  chief  city  of  the  State,  and  of 
the  entire  Missouri  valley,  was  seized 
by  the  enemies  of  the  Union. 

Fort  Sumter  having  been  captured, 
and  a  most  insulting,  defiant  refusal 
returned  to  the  President's  requisition 
for  troops  by  Gov.  Jackson,  he  pro- 
ceeded31 to  call  an  extra  session  of 
his  Legislature,  to  begin  May  2d, 
"for  the  purpose  of  enacting  such 
laws  and  adopting  such  measures  as 
may  be  necessary  for  the  more  per- 
fect organization  and  equipment  of 
the  Militia  of  this  State,  and  to  raise 
money  and  such  other  means  as  may 
be  required  to  place  the  State  in  a 
proper  attitude  of  defense."  Orders 
Were  issued  by  his  Adjutant-General, 
Hough,  to  the  Militia  officers  of  the 
State,  to  assemble  their  respective 
commands  May  3d,  to  go  into  encamp- 

30  March  2 2d.  31  April  2 2d. 

32  Of  the  1 14,965  slaves  held  in  1860  in  the  en- 
tire State,  no  less  than  50,280  were  held  in  twelve 
Counties  stretching  along  the  Missouri  river: 
viz:  Boone,  5,034;  Callaway,  4,527;  Chariton, 


ment  for  a  week.  The  Legislature 
having  been  on  that  day  reconvened 
by  him,  the  Governor  transmitted 
to  it  a  Message,  denouncing  the  Pre- 
sident's call  for  troops  as  "  unconsti- 
tutional and  illegal,  tending  toward 
a  consolidated  despotism."  Though 
he  did  not  venture,  directly,  to  ad- 
vocate secession,  he  did  all  he  could 
and  dared  to  promote  it ;  urging  the 
Legislature  to  appropriate  a  large 
sum  to  arm  the  State  and  place  it  in 
a  posture  of  defense.    He  said  : 

"  Our  interests  and  sympathies  are  identi- 
cal with  those  of  the  slaveholding  States, 
and  necessarily  unite  our  destiny  with  theirs. 
The  similarity  of  our  social  and  political  in- 
stitutions, our  industrial  interests,  our  sym- 
pathies, habits,  and  tastes,  our  common  ori- 
gin, territorial  congruity,  all  concur  in  point- 
ing out  our  duty  in  regard  to  the  separation 
now  taking  place  between  the  States  of  the 
old  Federal  Union. " 

The  Legislature  obsequiously  obey- 
ed his  behests  ;  giving  him,  so  far  as 
it  could,  the  entire  control  of  the 
military  and  pecuniary  resources  of 
the  State. 

Had  not  these  machinations  been 
countervailed,  Missouri  would  have 
soon  fallen  as  helplessly  and  passively 
into  the  hands  of  the  Confederates 
as  did  North  Carolina  or  Arkansas. 
Her  slaveholders,  though  not  numer- 
ous, constituted  her  political  and  so- 
cial aristocracy.  They  were  large 
landholders,  mainly  settled  in  the 
fertile  counties 38  stretched  along  both 
banks  of  the  Missouri  river,  through 
the  heart  of  the  State,  and  exerting  a 
potent  control  over  the  poorer,  less 
intelligent,  and  less  influential  pio- 
neers, who  thinly  overspread  the  ru- 
ral counties  north  and  south  of  them. 

2,837;  Clay,  3,456;  Cooper,  3,800;  Howard, 
5,889;  Jackson,  3,944;  Lafayette,  6,36? ;  Pike, 
4,056;  Platte,  3,313;  St.  Charles,  2,181 ;  Saline, 
4,876.  Probably  two-thirds  of  all  the  slaves  in 
the  State  were  held  within  20  miles  of  that  river. 


490  THE  AMERICA 

The  mercantile  aristocracy  of  St. 
Louis  was  predominantly  devoted  to 
their  supposed  interests  and  docile  to 
their  commands.  But  for  St.  Louis 
on  one  side  and  Kansas  on  the  other, 
Missouri  could  scarcely  have  been 
saved.  But  Kansas  had  a  population 
whom  the  rough  experiences  of  pre- 
vious years  had  educated  into  deadly 
hostility  to  the  Slave  Power  ;  while 
St.  Louis  possessed,  in  her  liberty- 
loving  Germans,  in  her  intelligent 
and  uncompromising  citizens  of  east- 
ern lineage,  and  in  The  St.  Louis 
Democrat — a  journal  of  high  charac- 
ter and  extensive  influence,  which 
could  neither  be  bought  nor  fright- 
ened into  recreancy  to  the  interests 
of  Free  Labor — the  elements  of  pow- 
erful resistance  to  the  meditated  trea- 
son. Although  the  Governor  had  so 
promptly  and  abusively  repelled  Pre- 
sident Lincoln's  requisition,  a  full 
regiment  had  been  raised  by  Col. 
Frank  P.  Blair,  while  four  others 
were  in  process  of  formation  in  St. 
Louis,  within  ten  days  from  the  issue 
of  the  President's  call. 

The  Federal  Arsenal  in  "Western 
Missouri  was  located  at  Liberty,  Clay 
County,  in  the  midst  of  a  strongly  pro- 
Slavery  population.  As  it  had  been 
often  robbed  with  impunity  to  arm 
the  border  Puffians'  for  their  re- 
peated raids  into  Kansas,  it  was  natu- 
rally supposed  that  it  might  now  be 
drawn  upon  for  its  entire  contents  in 
behalf  of  what  was  essentially  the 
same  cause.  Accordingly,  on  the 
20th,  it  was  seized  by  a  strong  force, 
and  the  guns  and  munitions  therein 
deposited  carried  off  to  arm  and  equip 
the  gathering  hosts  of  treason. 

But  the  Federal  Arsenal  at  St. 
Louis  had  a  garrison  of  several  hun- 
dred regulars,  under  the  command  of 


N  CONFLICT. 

Capt.  Nathaniel  Lyon,  who  promptly 
made  arrangements,  not  to  destroy, 
but  to  protect  and  defend,  its  stores 
of  arms  and  munitions.  During  the 
night  of  the  25th  of  April,  the  great 
bulk  of  these  were  quietly  but  rapid- 
ly transferred  to  a  steamboat,  and 
removed  to  Alton,  111.,  whence  they 
were  mainly  conveyed  to  Springfield, 
the  capital  of  that  State,  foiling  the 
Secessionists,  who  were  organizing  a 
'  State  Guard'  in  the  vicinity  with  a 
view  to  their  capture,  and  who  had, 
for  several  days,  been  eagerly  and 
hopefully  awaiting  the  right  moment 
to  secure  these  arms.  Having  thus 
sent  away  all  that  were  not  needed, 
Capt.  Lyon  and  Col.  Blair,  on  the 
morning  of  May  10th,  suddenly  sur- 
rounded the  State  Guard  at  Camp 
J ackson,  at  the  head  of  6,000  armed 
Unionists  and  an  effective  battery, 
and  demanded  their  surrender — al- 
lowing half  an  hour  for  compliance 
with  this  peremptory  request.  Gen. 
D.  M.  Frost,  in  command  of  the 
camp,  being  completely  surprised, 
had  no  alternative  but  compliance. 
Twenty  cannon,  twelve  hundred  new 
rifles,  several  chests  of  muskets,  large 
quantities  of  ammunition,  etc.,  most 
of  which  had  recently  been  received 
from  the  Baton  Pouge  Arsenal,  now 
in  Confederate  hands,  were  among 
the  £  spoils  of  victory.' 

The  news  of  this  exploit  preceded 
the  return  of  the  Unionists  from  the 
camp  to  the  city ;  and  the  chagrin  of 
the  embryo  Pebels  impelled  them  to 
proceed  from  insults  to  violence.  At 
length,  one  of  the  Unionist  regi- 
ments (German)  were  impelled  to 
fire  upon  its  assailants,  when  twenty- 
two  persons  fell  dead — one  of  them 
a  woman.  A  furious  excitement  was 
aroused  by  this  tragedy,  but  inquiries 


GOV.    JACKSON   FIGUKING   FOR  SECESSION. 


491 


established  the  endurance  and  forbear- 
ance of  the  volunteers,  so  long  as  pa- 
tience was  a  virtue. 

The  rage  and  hate  of  the  Seces- 
sionists were  intensified  by  this  se- 
rious blow ;  but  they  took  care  not  to 
provoke  further  collision.  The  un- 
questioned fact  that  the  streets  and 
alleys  of  the  discomfited  State 
Guard's  (  Camp  Jackson'  were  named 
after  Davis,  Beauregard,  etc.,  was  not 
needed  to  prove  the  traitorous  char- 
acter of  the  organization.  Capt.  Lyon 
was  made  Brigadier-General  of  the 
First  Brigade  of  Missouri  Volunteers. 

Gen.  William  S.  Harney  returned 
from  the  East  to  St.  Louis  on  the 
12th,  and  took  command  of  the  Union 
forces.  Nine  days  thereafter,  he  en- 
tered into  a  truce  or  compact  with 
Gen.  Sterling  Price,  whereof  the  ob- 
ject was  the  pacification  of  Missouri. 
But  this  did  not  prevent  the  traitors 
from  hunting  and  shooting  Unionists 
in  every  part  of  the  State  where 
Slavery  and  treason  were  locally  in 
the  ascendant — thousands  having 
been  driven  in  terror  from  their 
homes  before  the  end  of  May.  Some 
of  them  were  served  with  notices 
from  one  or  another  of  the  secret 
societies  of  Rebels  overspreading  the 
State.  In  at  least  one  instance,  a 
citizen  was  arrested  and  sent  to  Jef- 
ferson City,  to  be  tried  by  Court 
Martial  on  a  charge  of  raising  a 
Union  company ;  and,  on  the  22d, 
the  American  flag  was  taken  down 
from  its  staff  in  front  of  the  Post 
Office  in  St.  Joseph,  and  the  authori- 
ties of  that  city  (in  the  Northwest 
corner  of  the  State)  formally  resolved 
that  no  American  flag  should  be 
planted  within  its  limits.  Gen.  Har- 
ney's compact  with  Price,  proving  a 


protection  to  treason  only,  was  repu- 
diated at  Washington,  and  Gen. 
Harney  himself  superseded  in  the 
command  of  the  department  by  Gen. 
Lyon. 

Gov.  Jackson  thereupon 33  issued  a 
circular,  professing  to  regard  the 
Harney  compact  as  still  in  force,  and 
insisting  that  "  the  people  of  Missouri 
should  be  permitted,  in  peace  and  se- 
curity, to  decide  upon  their  future 
course ;  that  they  could  not  be  subju- 
gated^' etc.,  etc.  Very  soon,34  an  in- 
terview was  had,  at  St.  Louis,  between 
Gen.  Price,  on  behalf  of  the  Govern- 
or, and  Gen.  Lyon  and  Col.  Blair,  on 
the  side  of  the  Union  ;  whereat  Gen. 
Price  demanded,  as  a  vital  condition 
of  peace,  that  no  Federal  troops 
should  be  stationed  in,  or  allowed 
to  pass  through,  the  State.  Gen. 
Lyon  peremptorily  refused  compli- 
ance. Jackson  and  Price  returned 
that  night  to  Jefferson  City ;  and  the 
next  morning  brought  tidings  to  St. 
Louis  that  the  Gasconade  railroad 
bridge  had  been  burnt,  as  also  a  por- 
tion of  the  bridge  over  the  Osage 
river,  and  the  telegraph  wires  cut, 
under  the  direction  of  a  son  of  the 
Governor.  On  the  back  of  this  came 
a  proclamation  from  Jackson,  calling 
out  50,000  State  Militia  to  repel  Fed- 
eral invasion,  and  closing  as  follows : 

"In  issuing  this  proclamation,  I  hold  it  to 
be  my  most  solemn  duty  to  remind  you  that 
Missouri  is  still  one  of  the  United  States; 
that  the  Executive  department  of  the  Slate 
Government  does  not  arrogate  to  itself  the 
power  to  disturb  that  relation  ;  that  power 
has  been  wisely  vested  in  the  Convention, 
which  will,  at  the  proper  time,  express  your 
sovereign  will ;  and  that,  meanwhile,  it  is 
your  duty  to  obey  all  constitutional  require- 
ments of  the  Federal  Government.  But  it 
is  equally  my  duty  to  advise  you  that  your 
first  allegiance  is  due  to  your  own  State,  and 
that  you  are  under  no  obligation  whatever 


33  June  4th. 


"Juno  11th. 


492  T HE  AMERICA 

to  obey  the  unconstitutional  edicts  of  the 
military  despotism  which  has  introduced  it- 
self at  Washington,  nor  submit  to  the  infa- 
mous and  degrading  sway  of  its  wicked  min- 
ions in  this  State.  No  brave-hearted  Mis- 
sourian  will  obey  the  one  or  submit  to  the 
other.  Rise,  then,  and  drive  out  ignomini- 
ously  the  invaders,  who  have  dared  to  dese- 
crate the  soil  which  your  labors  have  made 
fruitful,  and  which  is  consecrated  by  your 
homes." 

Thus,  though  Missouri  had  authori- 
tatively and  overwhelmingly  refused 
to  leave  the  Union,  her  Governor 
made  war  upon  it,  and,  mustering  all 
the  forces  of  Slavery  and  treason, 
proceeded  openly  to  cast  in  his  and 
their  lot  with  the  fortunes  of  the  Great 
Rebellion. 

Kentucky,  despite  the  secret  affili- 
ation of  her  leading  politicians  with 
the  traitors,  whom  many  of  them 
ultimately  joined,  refused  from  the 
outset,  through  the  authentic  action  of 
her  people,  to  unite  her  fortunes  with 
those  of  the  Rebellion.  Though  she 
had,  for  some  years,  been  a  '  Demo- 
cratic' State — casting  her  Presiden- 
tial vote  for  Buchanan  and  Breckin- 
ridge, in  1856,  by  some  seven  thou- 
sand majority35 — the  cloven  foot  of 
treason  had  no  sooner  been  exhibited, 
by  the  disruption  of  the  Democratic 
party  at  Charleston,  than  her  people 
gave  unmistakable  notice  that  they 
would  acquiesce  in  no  such  purpose. 
Her  State  Election  occurred  not 
long  afterward,36  when  Leslie  Combs, 
4  Union'  candidate  for  Clerk  of  her 
highest  Court  (the  only  office  filled  at 
this  election  by  the  general  vote  of  the 
State),  was  chosen  by  the  magnificent 
majority  of  23,223  over  his  leading 

35  Buchanan  74,642;  Fillmore  6 7, 41 6;  Fre- 
mont 314.  88  August  6,  1860. 

37  Combs  68,165;  M'Clarty  (Breckinridge) 
44,942;  Boiling  (Douglas)  10,971 ;  Hopkins  (Lin- 
coln) 829. 


N  CONFLICT. 

competitor,  and  11,423  over  the  com- 
bined votes  of  all37  others.  If  Maj. 
Breckinridge  had  been  made  their 
candidate  for  President  by  the  bolt- 
ers with  any  idea  of  thereby  seducing 
'  the  home  of  Henry  Clay'  from  her 
loyalty,  that  hope  was  ill-grounded, 
as  the  Presidential  election  more  con- 
clusively demonstrated — Bell  and  Ev- 
erett carrying  the  State  by  a  large 
plurality.38  Yet  her  Democratic  Gov- 
ernor, Magoffin,39  though  he  forcibly 
protested 40  against  the  headlong  im- 
petuosity wherewith  South  Carolina 
persisted  in  dragging  the  South  into 
Disunion — summoned  her41  Legisla- 
ture to  meet  in  extra  session,  and, 
on  its  assembling,42  addressed  to  it  a 
Message,  urging  the  call  of  a  State 
Convention,  wherein  he  premises  that 

"  "We,  the  people  of  the  United  States,  are 
no  longer  one  people,  united  and  friendly. 
The  ties  of  fraternal  love  and  concord, 
which  once  hound  us  together,  are  sun- 
dered. Though  the  Union  of  the  States 
may,  by  the  abstract  reasoning  of  a  class,  be 
construed  still  to  exist,  it  is  really  and  prac- 
tically— to  an  extent,  at  least — fatally  im- 
paired. The  confederacy  is  rapidly  resolv- 
ing itself  into  its  original  integral  parts,  and 
its  loyal  members  are  intent  upon  contract- 
ing wholly  new  relations.  Reluctant  as  we 
may  be  to  realize  the  dread  calamity,  the 
great  fact  of  revolution  stares  us  in  the  face, 
demands  recognition,  and  will  not  be  theo- 
rized away.  Nor  is  the  worst  yet  told. 
We  are  not  yet  encouraged  to  hope  that  this 
revolution  will  be  bloodless.  A  collision  of 
arms  has  even  occurred  between  the  Federal 
Government  and  the  authorities  of  a  late 
member  of  the  Union,  and  the  issue  threat- 
ens to  involve  the  whole  country  in  fratrici- 
dal war.  It  is  under  these  circumstances 
of  peculiar  gloom  that  you  have  been  sum- 
moned. *  *  *  In  view  of  the  partial  dis- 
ruption of  the  Union,  the  secession  of  eight 
or  ten  States,  the  establishment  of  a  South- 
ern Confederated  Eepublic,  and  the  adminis- 

38  Bell  66,058;  Breckinridge  53,143;  Douglas 
25,651 ;  Lincoln  1,364. 

39  Elected  in  1859.  40  See  page  340. 
41  December  27,  1860.  48  January  17,  1861. 


KENTUCKY'S  PEC 


ULIAE  LOYALTY. 


493 


tration  of  this  Government  upon  the  princi- 
ples of  the  Chicago  Platform — a  condition  of 
our  country,  most  likely,  near  at  hand — what 
attitude  will  Kentucky  hold,  and  by  virtue 
of  what  authority  shall  her  external  relations 
be  determined  ?  Herein  are  involved  issues 
of  momentous  consequence  to  the  people.  It 
is  of  vital  importance  to  our  own  safety  and 
domestic  peace  that  these  questions  be  solved 
in  accordance  with  the  will  of  a  majority  of 
our  people.  *  *  *  The  ordinary  departments 
of  the  Government  are  vested  with  no  power 
to  conduct  the  State  through  such  a  revolu- 
tion. Any  attempt,  by  either  of  these  de- 
partments, to  change  our  present  external 
relations,  would  involve  a  usurpation  of  pow- 
er, and  might  not  command  that  confidence 
and  secure  the  unanimity  so  essential  to  our 
internal  safety." 

The  Legislature  heard  him  patient- 
ly, but  refused  to  follow  him.  It  de- 
clined to  call  a  State  Convention,  but 
proposed  instead  a  National  Conven- 
tion to  revise  the  Federal  pact,  and  a 
6  Peace  Conference'  at  Washington; 
which  latter  was  duly  held,  as  we 
have  already  seen.  ~No  action  look- 
ing to  Disunion  could  be  extracted 
from  that  Legislature,  which  ad- 
journed soon  afterward.  And,  though 
the  Secessionists  sought  to  atone  for 
their  paucity  of  numbers  by  preter- 
natural activity,  especially  through 
their  secret  organizations,  as  *  Knights 
of  the  Golden  Circle,'  etc.,  and  called 
a  6  State  Rights'  Convention,  to  meet 
at  Frankfort  on  the  22d  of  March, 
by  a  secret  circular,  wherein  they  as- 
sumed that  Disunion  was  an  accom- 
plished fact,  nothing  of  importance 
had  been  effected  by  them  when  the 
roar  of  the  batteries  encircling  Fort 
Sumter  called  the  nation  to  arms. 

Gov.  Magoffin,  having  refused,  with 
insult,  to  respond  to  the  President's 
call  for  Militia  to  maintain  the  Union, 
summoned  the  Legislature  to  meet 
once  more,  in  extra  session,  assign- 
ing, as  one  reason  therefor,  the  ne- 
cessity of  promptly  putting  the  State 
in  a  complete  position  for  defense. 


His  call  was  issued  April  ISth;  and, 
on  the  evening  of  that  day,  an  im- 
mense Union  meeting  was  held  at 
Louisville,  whereof  James  Guthrie, 
Archibald  Dixon,  and  other  '  con- 
servatives,' were  the  master-spirits. 
This  meeting  resolved  against  Seces- 
sion, and  against  any  forcible  resist- 
ance thereto — in  favor  of  arming  the 
State,  and  against  using  her  arms  to 
put  down  the  rampant  treason  at  that 
moment  ruling  in  Baltimore  as  well 
as  in  Richmond,  and  ostentatiously 
preparing  for  a  speedy  rush  upon 
Washington.  Two  of  its  resolves 
will  sufficiently  exhibit  the  inconse- 
quence and  unreason  of  this  species 
of  conservatism :  viz  : 

"  Resolved,  First :  That,  as  the  Confede- 
rate States  have,  by  overt  acts,  commenced, 
war  against  the  United  States,  without  con- 
sultation with  Kentucky  and  their  sister 
Southern  States,  Kentucky  reserves  to  her- 
self the  right  to  choose  her  own  position  ; 
and  that,  while  her  natural  sympathies  are 
with  those  who  have  a  common  interest  in 
the  protection  of  Slavery,  she  still  acknowl- 
edges her  loyalty  and  fealty  to  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  United  States,  which  she  will 
cheerfully  render  until  that  Government 
becomes  aggressive,  tyrannical,  and  regard- 
less of  our  rights  in  slave  property. 

"  Second :  That  the  National  Government 
should  be  tried  by  its  acts ;  and  that  the 
several  States,  as  its  peers  in  their  appropri- 
ate spheres,  will  hold  it  to  a  rigid  account- 
ability, and  require  that  its  acts  should  be 
fraternal  in  their  efforts  to  bring  back  the 
seceded  States,  and  not  sanguinary  or  coer- 
cive." 

The  red-hot  balls  fired  into  Sumter 
by  the  traitors  had  hardly  cooled, 
when  Kentucky  Unionism  insulted 
the  common-sense  and  nauseated  the 
loyal  stomach  of  the  Nation  by  this 
astounding  drivel.  The  consequences 
may  well  be  imagined.  Not  a  single 
Rebel  in  all  the  State  was  induced 
by  it  to  relax  his  efforts  in  behalf  of 
slaveholding  treason;  and  men,  mu- 
nitions, and  supplies  were  openly,  and 


494  THE  AMERICA 

almost  daily,  dispatched  to  the  mus- 
tering Rebel  hosts  in  the  South  and 
Southeast ;  while,  for  months,  noth- 
ing was  done  by  that  State  for  the 
cause  of  the  Union.  The  first  regi- 
ment of  Kentuckians  raised  for  the 
Union  armies  was  encamped  on  the 
free  side  of  the  river,  in  deference 
to  urgent  representations  from  pro- 
fessed Unionists  and  to  Kentucky's 
proclaimed  neutrality. 

The  meeting  further  resolved: 

"  Eighth :  That  we  look  to  the  young  men 
of  the  Kentucky  State  Guard  as  the  bul- 
warks of  the  safety  of  our  Commonwealth ; 
and  we  conjure  them  to  remember  that  they 
are  pledged  equally  to  fidelity  to  the  United 
States  and  to  Kentucky." 

That  6  State  Guard,'  organized  by 
Gen.  Simon  B.  Buckner,  under  the 
auspices  of  Gov.  Magoffin,  became  a 
mere  recruiting  and  drilling  conven- 
ience of  the  Rebel  chiefs — its  mem- 
bers being  dispatched  southward  so 
fast  as  ripened  for  their  intended 
service.  Ultimately,  having  corrupt- 
ed all  he  could,  Buckner  followed 
them  into  the  camp  of  open  treason,43 
and  was  captured  at  the  head  of  a 
portion  of  them  at  the  taking  of 
Fort  Donelson. 

The  Legislature  having  reassem- 
bled,4* Magoffin  read  them  another 
lecture  in  the  interest  of  the  Re- 
bellion. The  Union  was  gone — the 
Confederacy  was  a  fixed  fact  —  it 
would  soon  be  composed  of  ten,  and 
perhaps  of  thirteen,  States ;  Presi- 
dent Lincoln  was  a  usurper,  "  mad 
with  sectional  hate,"  and  bent  on 
subjugating   or    exterminating  the 

43  The  Louisville  Journal  of  Sept.  27th  de- 
nounced the  treachery  of  Buckner  in  the  fol- 
lowing terms  : 

"Away  with  your  pledges  and  assurances — 
with  your  protestations,  apologies,  and  procla- 
mations, at  once  and  altogether!  Away,  parri- 
cide I     Away,  and  do  penance  forever !  —  be 


N  CONFLICT. 

South.  The  Federal  Government 
was  rolling  up  a  frightful  debt, 
which  Kentucky  would  not  choose 
to  help  pay,  etc.,  etc.  Whereupon, 
he  again  urged  the  call  of  a  Con- 
vention, with  a  view  to  State  inde- 
pendence and  self-protection. 

The  Legislature  had  been  chosen 
in  1859,  and  had  a  Democratic  ma- 
jority in  either  House,  but  not  a  Dis- 
union majority.  It  could  not  be  in- 
duced to  call  a  Convention,  nor  even 
to  favor  such  neutrality  as  Magoffin 
proposed.  Yet  he  presumed  to  issue45 
a  Proclamation  of  Neutrality,  de- 
nouncing the  war  as  a  "  horrid,  un- 
natural, lamentable  strife,"  forbid- 
ding either  the  Union  or  the  Con- 
federate Government  to  invade  the 
soil  of  Kentucky,  and  interdicting 
all  "hostile  demonstrations  against 
either  of  the  aforesaid  sovereignties" 
by  citizens  of  that  State,  "  whether 
incorporated  in  the  State  Guard  or 
otherwise."  Had  he  been  an  auto- 
crat, this  might  have  proved  effectual. 
But  the  Legislature  refused  to  indorse 
his  Proclamation  ;  refused  to  vote  him 
Three  Millions  wherewith  to  "  arm 
the  State;"  and  so  amended  the 
Militia  Law  as  to  require  the  4  State 
Guard'  to  swear  allegiance  to  the 
Union  as  well  as  to  Kentucky. 
Senator  Louis  H.  Rousseau,46  among 
others,  spoke47  decidedly,  boldly,  in 
opposition  to  all  projects  of  Dis- 
union or  semi-Disunion ;  saying  : 

"  "When  Kentucky  goes  down,  it  will  be  in 
blood.  Let  that  be  understood.  She  will 
not  go  as  other  States  have  gone.  Let 
the  responsibility  rest  on  you,  where  it  be- 


shriven  or  be  slain — away!  You  have  less 
palliation  than  Attila  —  less  boldness,  magna- 
nimity, and  nobleness  than  Coriolanus.  Tou  are 
the  Benedict  Arnold  of  the  day !  You  are  the 
Catiline  of  Kentucky;   Go,  then,  miscreant!" 

44  April  23th.        46  May  20th. 
40  Since,  a  gallant  Union  General    47  May  22<L 


FIXAL    'PEACE'    EFFORT   IN    THE  WEST. 


495 


longs.  It  is  all  your  work,  and  whatever 
happens  will  be  your  work.  We  have  more 
right  to  defend  our  Government  than  you 
have  to  overturn  it.  Many  of  us  are 
sworn  to  support  it.  Let  our  good  Union 
brethren  at  the  South  stand  their  ground. 
I  know  that  many  patriotic  hearts  in  the 
seceded  States  still  beat  warmly  for  the  old 
Union — the  old  flag.  The  time  will  come 
when  we  shall  all  be  together  again.  The 
politicians  are  having  their  day.  The  people 
will  yet  have  theirs.  I  have  an  abiding 
confidence  in  the  right,  and  I  know  this 
Secession  movement  is  all  wrong.  There  is, 
in  fact,  not  a  single  substantial  reason  for  it. 
If  there  is,  I  should  be  glad  to  hear  of  it ; 
our  Government  has  never  oppressed  us 
with  a  feather's  weight.  The  direst  oppres- 
sion alone  could  justify  what  has  brought 
all  our  present  suffering  upon  us.  May  God, 
in  His  mercy,  save  our  glorious  Eepublic!" 

The  Legislature  adjourned  on  the 
24th — the  Senate  having  just  resolved 
that 

"  Kentucky  will  not  sever  connection  with 
the  National  Government,  nor  take  up  arms 
for  either  belligerent  party ;  but  arm  herself 
for  the  preservation  of  peace  within  her 
borders;"  and  tendering  their  services  as 
mediators  to  effect  a  just  and  honorable 
peace. 

Rev.  Robert  J.  Breckinridge  — 
always  a  devoted  Unionist,  because 
never  a  devotee  of  Slavery — in  an 
address  at  Cincinnati,  one  year  later, 
declared  that  Kentucky  was  saved 
from  the  black  abyss  by  her  prox- 
imity to  loyal  Ohio,  Indiana,  and 
Illinois,  whose  Governors,  it  was 
known,  stood  pledged  to  send  ten 
thousand  men  each  to  the  aid  of  her 
Unionists  whenever  the  necessity  for 
their  presence  should  be  indicated. 
Had  she  been  surrounded  as  Tennes- 
see and  North  Carolina  were,  she 
must  have  fallen  as  they  did.  She 
would  have  so  fallen,  not  because  a 
majority  of  her  people  were  disloyal, 
but  because  the  traitors  were  better 
organized,  more  determined,  more 
belligerent,  and  bent  on  success  at 
any  cost. 

They  would  have  succeeded,  be- 


cause the  behests  of  the  slaveholding 
caste  are  habitually  accepted  and 
obeyed  as  law  in  every  slaveholding 
community. 

An  election  for  delegates  to  the 
proposed  "Peace  Convention"  was 
held  May  4th,  and  resulted  in  an 
immense  Union  majority — 7,000  in 
Louisville,  and  over  50,000  in  the 
State.  The  Secessionists,  ascertain- 
ing their  numerical  weakness,  and. 
unwilling  to  expose  it,  withdrew 
their  tickets  a  few  days  previously, 
and  took  no  part  in  the  election. 

The  "  Peace  Convention"  assem- 
bled May  27th;  but  Virginia,  at 
whose  instance  it  was  called,  sent  no 
delegates,  and  none  were  present  but 
from  Kentucky,  save  four  from  Mis- 
souri and  one  from  Tennessee.  John 
J.  Crittenden  presided.  Among  the 
delegates  were  some  who  have  since 
proved  traitors ;  but  the  great  ma- 
jority were  earnestly  devoted  to  the 
Union.  And  yet,  this  Convention 
failed  to  assert  the  imperative  duty 
of  obedience  to  its  constituted  au- 
thority, without  which  the  Union  is 
but  a  name  for  anarchy.  It  depre- 
cated civil  war  as  abhorrent  and 
ruinous,  and  exhorted  the  people  to 
"  hold  fast  to  that  sheet  anchor  of 
republican  liberty,  the  principle  that 
the  will  of  the  majority,  constitution- 
ally and  legally  expressed,  must  gov- 
ern ;"  yet  failed  to  charge  those  who, 
defying  this  principle,  were  plunging 
the  whole  land  into  confusion  and 
carnage,  with  the  full  responsibility 
of  their  acts,  or  to  call  on  the  people 
to  put  them  down.  It  still  harped 
on  the  wrongs  of  the  South,  though 
condemning  her  rebellion  ;  exhorted 
the  North  to  "  discard  that  sectional 
and  unfriendly  spirit,  which  has  con- 
tributed so  much  to  inflame  the 


496  THE  AMEBIC 

feelings  of  the  Southern  people;" 
proposed  a  voluntary  Convention  of 
all  the  States,  to  devise  "measures 
of  peaceable  adjustment and  indi- 
cated what  those  measures  should,be, 
by  gravely  recommending 

"  First :  That  Congress  shall  at  once  pro- 
pose such  constitutional  amendments  as  will 
secure  to  slaveholders  their  legal  rights,  and 
allay  their  apprehensions  in  regard  to  pos- 
sible encroachments  in  the  future. 

"Second:  If  this  should  fail  to  bring 
about  the  results  so  desirable  to  us,  and  so 
essential  to  the  best  hopes  of  our  country, 
then  let  a  voluntary  Convention  be  called, 
composed  of  delegates  from  the  people  of 
all  the  States,  in  which  measures  of  peace- 
able adjustment  may  be  devised  and  adopted, 
and  the  nation  rescued  from  the  continued 
horrors  and  calamities  of  civil  war." 

While  '  conservatives'  were  thus  dis- 
coursing, the  bolder  traitors  went  on 
arming  and  drilling,  until  the  south- 
western half  of  the  State  was  virtu- 
ally subject  to  their  sway;  while, from 
every  quarter,  troops  were  forwarded 
to  their  armies  in  the  field ;  and  the  tri- 
umphant Secessionists  of  Tennessee, 
from  their  grand  camp  at  Nashville, 
were  threatening  to  open  the  road  to 
Louisville,  whence  supplies  were  not 
sent  them  so  freely  as  they  deemed 
required  by  their  needs  or  their 
dignity. 

The  climax  was  reached  when48 
Gen.  Buckner  proclaimed  that  he 
had  entered  into  a  compact  with 
Gen.  McClellan,  commanding  the 
Federal  department  of  the  Ohio, 
whereby  .the  latter  stipulated  that  no 
Union  troops  should  press  the  soil  of 
Kentucky,  which  State  should  be 
sustained  in  her  chosen  attitude  of 
neutrality  ;  and,  in  case  '  the  South  ' 
should  plant  an  army  on  her  soil, 
Kentucky  should  be  required  to 
show  them  out — if  they  did  not  go, 
or,  if  she  failed  to  expel  them,  then 


AN  CONFLICT. 

the  United  States  might  interpose; 
but  our  forces  must  be  withdrawn  so 
soon  as  the  Rebels  had  been  expelled ! 
Gen.  McClellan  promptly  denied  that 
he  had  made  any  such  treaty — or,  in 
fact,  any  treaty  at  all.  He  had  had 
an  interview  with  Buckner,  at  the 
request  of  the  latter,  who  had  prom- 
ised to  drive  out  any  Confederate 
force  that  should  invade  Kentucky — 
that  was  all.  No  doubt  remained 
that  Buckner  had  drawn  largely 
on  his  imagination ;  proclaiming,  as 
agreed  on,  much  that  he  had  scarcely 
ventured  to  propose. 

Gov.  Magoffin  having  appointed 
June  20th  as  the  day  for  electing 
Representatives  in  Congress,  in  defer- 
ence to  the  President's  call  of  an 
Extra  Session,  the  election  was  held 
accordingly,  and  resulted  in  the  choice 
of  nine  Unionists  to  one  Secessionist 
(H.  C.  Burnett,  who  fled  to  the  Reb- 
els, after  serving  through  the  called 
session.)  The  vote  of  the  State 
showed  an  aggregate  of  92,365  for  the 
'  Union'  to  36,995  for  the  Secession 
candidates,  giving  a  majority  of 
55,370  for  the  former.  And  this 
election  was  held  when  no  Federal 
soldier  trod  the  soil  of  Kentucky ; 
under  a  Governor  at  heart  with  the 
Rebels ;  and  after  every  effort  had 
been  exhausted  to  win  her  to  the  side 
of  treason.  The  Southern  frenzy 
had  affected  but  a  small  minority  of 
her  people  ;  while  the  terrorism 
which  had  coerced  so  many  States 
into  submission  to  the  will  of  the 
conspirators  was  rendered  powerless 
by  the  proximity  of  loyal  and  gallant 
communities.  Kentucky  voted  as 
nearly  every  Slave  State  would  have 
done,  but  for  the  amazing  falsehoods 


June  10th,  1861. 


JEFFERSON   DATIS   OX  'PEACE.' 


winch  were  diffused  among  their 
people,  while  none  dared  to  contra- 
dict them — while  thousands  dared 
not  be  loyal  to  their  country,  because 
the  more  reckless  minions  of  the 


497 

Slave  Power  stood  ready  to  execute 
its  condign  vengeance  on  all  who 
dared  oppose  its  darling  project,  or 
who  should  in  any  manner  dispute 
its  sway. 


XXXI. 

THE  FOECES  IX  COXFLICT. 


Mr.  Jeffeeson  Davis,  in  his  Spe- 
cial Message  to  his  Congress,1  wherein 
he  asserts  that  war  has  been  declared 
against  the  Confederacy  by  President 
Lincoln's  Proclamation  of  April  15th, 
heretofore  given,  with  more  plausi- 
bility asserts  that  the  Democratic 
party  of  the  Free  States  stands  pub- 
licly committed  to  the  principles 
which  justify  the  secession  and  con- 
federation of  the  States  owning  his 
sway,  by  its  reiterated  affirmation 
and  adoption  of  "  the  Resolutions  of 
'98  and  '99,',a  and  that  the  whole 
country  had  ratified  this  committal 
by  large  majorities,  in  the  reelection 
as  President  of  Mr.  Jefferson,  in  the 
first  election  of  Mr.  Madison,  and  in 
the  election  of  Gen.  Pierce.  Assum- 
ing this  as  a  basis,  Mr.  Davis  had  no 
difficulty  in  convincing  those  whom 
he  more  immediately  addressed,  that, 
for  his  confederates  to  surprise,  cap- 
ture, or  otherwise  obtain,  through  the 
treachery  of  their  custodians,  the 
forts,  arsenals,  armories,  custom-hous- 
es, mints,  sub-treasuries,  etc.,  etc.,  of 


the  Union,  in  their  respective  States 
— even  (as  in  the  case  of  Xorth  Caro- 
lina and  Arkansas)  those  which  had 
not  seceded — was  a  peaceful,  regular, 
legitimate,  legal  procedure  ;  while  to 
resist  such  spoliation  and  maintain 
the  right  of  the  Union  to  possess  and 
control  the  property  it  had  created  • 
and  hitherto  enjoyed,  was  unjusti- 
fiable aggression  and  unprovoked 
war.  Mr.  Lincoln  (said  Mr.  Davis) 
had  no  constitutional  right  to  issue 
"  the  declaration  of  war  against  this 
Confederacy  which  has  prompted  me 
to  convoke  you."  It  was  his  duty  to 
have  quietly  let  the  Confederates  help 
themselves,  by  virtue  of  shot  and 
shell,  to  such  portions  of  the  prop- 
erty of  the  Union  as  they  should  see 
fit  to  touch  and  take.  In  fact,  this 
whole  Message,  like  several  which  suc- 
ceeded it,  evinces  the  consciousness  of 
its  author  that  he  had  no  longer  to 
square  his  assertions  by  what  was 
regarded,  out  of  the  Confederacy,  as 
historic  truth,  or  his  deductions  by 
whaCthe  civilized  world  had  estab- 


1  Montgomery,  April  29,  1861.  party  of  the  United  States  repeated,  in  its  suc- 

a  He  says:  cessful  canvass  of  1836,  the  declaration,  made  in 

•"From  a  period  as  early  as  1798,  there  had  numerous  previous  political  contests,  that  it 

existed  in  all  the  States  a  party,  almost  uninter-  would  faithfully  abide  by  and  uphold  the  prin- 

ruptedly  in  the  majority,  based  upon  the  creed  clPles  laid  down  in  the  Kentucky  and  Virginia 

that  each  State  was,  in  the  last  resort,  the  sole  Legislatures  of  [1798  and]  1799,  and  that  it 

judge,  as  well  of  its  wrongs  as  of  the  mode  and  adopts  those  principles  as  constituting  one  of  the 
measure  of  redress.  *  *  *  The  Democratic  i  main  foundations  of  its  political  creed.'' 

32 


493 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


lished  as  the  dictates  of  human  rea- 
son. Thus,  he  does  not  hesitate  to 
assert  that 

"  In  the  Inaugural  Address  delivered  by 
President  Lincoln,  in  March  last,  he  asserts 
a  maxim,  which  he  plainly  deems  to  be  un- 
deniable, that  the  theory  of  the  Constitu- 
tion requires,  in  all  cases,  that  the  majority 
shall  govern."  *  *  *  * 

"The  climate  and  soil  of  the  Northern 
States  soon  proved  unpropitious  to  the  con- 
tinuance of  Slave  Labor ;  while,  the  reverse 
being  the  case  at  the  South,  *  *  *  the  North- 
ern States  consulted  their  own  interests  by 
selling  their  Slaves  to  the  South  and  prohib- 
iting Slavery  within  their  limits.'1'' 

Now,  not  one- fifth  of  the  slaves 
held  in  the  Northern  States,  just  be- 
fore or  at  the  time  they  respectively 
abolished  Slavery,  were  sold  to  the 
South — as  hundreds  of  them,  still  liv- 
ing, can  bear  witness ;  nor  is  it  true 
that  Slavery  was  ever  proved  unsuit- 
ed  to  or  unprofitable  in  the  North,  in 
the  judgment  of  her  slaveholders. 
Had  the  slaveholding  caste  been  as 
omnipotent  here  as  in  the  South,  con- 
trolling parties,  politics,  and  the  press, 
Slavery  would  have  continued  to  this 
day.  It  was  by  the  ?w>?i-slaveholding 
possessors  of  influence  and  power, 
here  as  everywhere  else,  that  Slavery 
was  assailed,  exposed,  reprobated,  and 
ultimately  overthrown.  No  class  ever 
yet  discovered  that  aught  which  min- 
istered so  directly  and  powerfully  to 
its  own  luxury,  sensuality,  indolence, 
and  pride,  as  Slavery  does  to  those 
of  the  slaveholders,  was  either  unjust, 
pernicious,  or  unprofitable. 

With  greater  truth  and  plausibil- 
ity, Mr.  Davis  assured  his  Congress 
that 

"  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that,  at 
no  distant  day,  other  States,  identical  in  po- 
litical principles  and  community  of  interest 
with  those  which  you  represent,  will  join 
this  Confederacy."1' 

This  expectation  was,  in  good  part, 


fulfilled.  When  Mr.  Davis  was  next' 
called  to  address  his  Congress — which 
had  meantime  adjourned  from  Mont- 
gomery to  Richmond — in  announcing 
the  transfer  of  the  Executive  depart- 
ments likewise  to  the  new  capital,  he 
said : 

"Gentlemen  of  the  Congress  of  the  Confeder- 
ate States  of  America: 

"My  Message  addressed  to  you  at  the 
commencement  of  the  last  session  contained 
such  full  information  of  the  state  of  the  Con- 
federacy as  to  render  it  unnecessary  that  I 
should  now  do  more  than  call  your  attention 
to  such  important  facts  as  have  occurred 
during  the  recess,  and  the  matters  connected 
with  the  public  defense. 

11 1  have  again  to  congratulate  you  on  the 
accession  of  new  members  to  our  Confedera- 
tion of  free  and  equally  sovereign  States. 
Our  beloved  and  honored  brethren  of  North 
Carolina  and  Tennessee  have  consummated 
the  action  foreseen  and  provided  for  at  your 
last  session  ;  and  I  have  had  the  gratification 
of  announcing  by  Proclamation,  in  confor- 
mity with  the  law,  that  these  States  were 
admitted  into  the  Confederacy.  The  people 
of  Virginia  also,  by  a  majority  previously  un- 
known in  our  history,  have  ratified  the  ac- 
tion of  her  Convention  uniting  her  fortunes 
with  ours.  The  States  of  Arkansas,  North 
Carolina,  and  Virginia,  have  likewise  adopt- 
ed the  permanent  Constitution  of  the  Con- 
federate States ;  and  no  doubt  is  entertained 
of  its  adoption  by  Tennessee,  at  the  election 
to  be  held  early  in  next  month." 

The  Confederacy  having  thus  at- 
tained its  full  proportions  prior  to 
any  serious  collision  between  its  ar- 
mies and  those  of  the  Union,  we  may 
now  properly  consider  and  compare 
the  relative  strength  of  the  opposing 
parties  about  to  grapple  in  mortal 
combat. 

I.  The  total  population  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  as  returned  by  the  Census 
of  1860,  somewhat  exceeded  Thirty- 
one  Millions,*  whereof  the  Free  States, 
with  all  the  territories,  contained  Nine- 
teen,* and  the  Slave  States,  including 
the  District  of  Columbia,  over  Twelve* 
Millions.    As  the  Free  States  all  ad- 


3  July  20,  1SG1. 


4  31,443,790 


6 10,128,143. 


6  12,315,372. 


EUROPEAN    DEMOCRACY   IN    OUR  STRUGGLE. 


499 


hered  to  the  Union,  while,  of  the 
Slave  States,  Delaware,  Maryland, 
Kentucky,  and  Missouri1,  did  not 
unite  with  the  Confederacy,  the  pre- 
ponderance of  population  in  the  ad- 
hering over  that  of  the  seceded  States 
was  somewhat  more  than  two  to  one. 
The  disparity  in  wealth  between  the 
contending  parties  was  at  least  equal 
to  this  ;  so  that  there  was  plausibility 
in  the  claim  of  the  Confederates  to 
that  sympathy  which  the  generous 
usually  extend  to  the  weaker  party  in 
a  life-and-death  struggle.  In  Manu- 
factures, Commerce,  Shipping,  etc., 
the  preponderance  was  immensely  on 
the  side  of  the  Union. 

II.  The  prestige  of  regularity,  of 
legitimacy,  and  of  whatever  the  Old 
World  implies  by  the  comprehensive 
term  'Order,'  was  likewise  on  the 
side  of  the  Union.  The  Confederacy 
appeared  as  a  disturber  of  preexisting 
arrangements,  and  thus  of  the  gen- 
eral peace.  Its  fundamental  theories 
of  State  Sovereignty,  Eight  of  Seces- 
sion, etc.,  were  utter  novelties  to  the 
mass  of  mankind,  and  were  at  war 
with  the  instincts  and  prepossessions 
of  nearly  all  who  could  understand 
them.  The  greatness  and  security, 
wealth  and  power,  of  England  were 
based  on  the  supersedure  of  the  Hep- 
tarchy by  the  Realm,  and  on  the 
conversion  of  Scotland  and  Ireland, 
respectively,  from  jealous  and  hostile 
neighbors  into  integral  portions  of 
the  British  commonwealth.  France, 
feeble  and  distracted  while  divided 
into  great  feudatories,  became  strong 
and  commanding  from  the  hour  that 
these  were  absorbed  into  the  power 
and  influence  of  the  monarchy,  and 
Burgundy,  Picardy,  Anjou,  etc.,  be- 


came mere  geographical  designations 
of  portions  of  the  nation  'one  and 
indivisible.'  Italy,  through  her  at 
length  half-realized  aspirations  of  so 
many  weary  centuries  —  Germany, 
still  in  fragments,  in  defiance  of  her 
ardent  hopes  and  wishes,  the  impo- 
sing and  venerable  anarchy  that  Vol- 
taire pronounced  her,  four  genera- 
tions back — Poland,  through  her  la- 
mentable partition — and  nearly  every 
great  calamity  which  modern  history 
had, taught  mankind  to  deplore — pro- 
tested against  such  disintegrations  as 
the  Confederacy  had  initiated,  and  not 
less  against  the  principles  on  which 
they  were  justified.  And  especially 
did  the  Democracy  of  Europe — the 
party  of  Progress  and  Reform  of 
whatever  country — instinctively  re- 
volt against  doctrines  and  practices 
which  tended  unmistakably  backward 
to  the  ages  alike  of  national  and  of 
individual  impotence,  wherein  peo- 
ples were  weak,  though  castes  were 
strong;  to  the  ages  of  barbarism  and 
of  feudalism,  wherein  nobles  and 
chieftains  were  mighty,  but  laws  and 
magistrates  of  small  account.  The 
Democracy  of  Europe  were  never  for 
one  moment  misled  or  confused  by 
the  Confederates'  pretensions  as  to 
reserved  rights  and  constitutional 
liberty.  Their  instinct  at  once  rec- 
ognized their  deadly  foe  through  all 
his  specious  disguises.  Men  who 
had,  as  conspirators  and  revolution- 
ists, been  tenanting  by  turns  the  dun- 
geons and  dodging  the  gibbets  of 
'Divine  Bight'  from  boyhood,  repu- 
diated with  loathing  any  affiliation 
with  th  is  rebellion ;  and  no  word  of 
cheer  ever  reached  the  ears  of  its 
ma>ter-spirits  from  Kossuth,  Mazzini, 


7  Kentucky  and  Missouri  are  claimed  as  having 
done  so ;  and,  hence,  were  both  represented, 


from  an  early  day,  in  the  Confederate  Congress. 
But  the  claim  is  baseless  and  impudent. 


500 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Yictor  Hugo,  Ledru  Roll  in,  Louis 
Blanc,  Garibaldi,  or  any  other  of  those 
who,  defying  the  vengeance  of  des- 
pots, have  consecrated  their  lives  and 
sacrificed  personal  enjoyment  to  the 
championship  of  the  Rights  of  Man. 

III.  The  Confederates  had  vastly 
the  advantage  in  the  familiarity  of 
their  people  with  the  use  of  arms,8  and 
in  their  addiction  to  and  genius  for 
the  art  of  war.  The  Northern  youth 
of  1860  were  not  nearly  so  familiar 
with  the  use  of  the  hunter's  rifle  or 
fowling-piece  as  were  their  ancestors 
of  1770.  The  density  of  our  popu- 
lation had  expelled  desirable  game 
almost  entirely  from  all  the  New- 
England  States  but  Maine  ;  in  the 
prairie  States,  it  rapidly  disappears 
before  the  advancing  wave  of  civilized 
settlement  and  cultivation.  Our  In- 
dian wars  of  the  present  century  have 
nearly  all  been  fought  on  our  western 
and  south-western  borders  ;  our  last 
war  with  Great  Britain  was  condemn- 
ed as  unwise  and  unnecessary  by  a 
large  proportion  of  the  Northern 
people ;  so  was  the  war  upon  Mex- 
ico :  so  that  it  may  be  fairly  said 
that,  while  the  South  and  South- West 
had  been  repeatedly  accustomed  to 
hostilities  during  the  present  century. 

8  A  Southern  gentleman,  writing  from  Au- 
gusta, Ga.,  in  February,  18G1,  said: 

"Nine-tenths  of  our  youth  go  constantly 
armed ;  and  the  common  use  of  deadly  weapons 
is  quite  disregarded.  No  control  can  be  exer- 
cised over  a  lad  after  he  is  fourteen  or  fifteen 
years  of  age.  He  then  becomes  '  Mr.'  so-and-so, 
and  acknowledges  no  master." 

The  street-fights,  duels,  etc.,  so  prominent 
among  the  '  peculiar  institutions'  of  the  South, 
doubtless  conduced  to  the  ready  adaptation  of 
her  whites  to  a  state  of  war. 

9 Pollard,  in  his  "Southern  History"  of  our 
struggle,  smartly,  if  not  quite  accurately,  says : 

"In  the  war  of  1812,  the  North  furnished 
58,552  soldiers;  the  South  96,812 — making  a 
majority  of  31,030  in  favor  of  the  South.  Of 
the  number  furnished  by  the  North — 


the  North  and  East  had  known  very 
little 9  of  war  but  by  hearsay  since  the 
peace  which  secured  our  independ- 
ence, eighty  years  ago. 

IV.  The  Kebels  had  a  decided  ad- 
vantage in  the  fact  that,  on  the  main 
question  underlying  the  great  issue 
they  had  made  up^-the  question  of 
upholding,  strengthening,  extending, 
and  perpetuating  Slavery,  or  (on  the 
other  hand)  restricting,  confining, 
weakening  it,  with  a  view  to  its  ulti- 
mate extinction — they  had  the  active 
sympathy  of  a  decided  majority  of 
the  American  people.  The  vote  for 
President  in  1860  10  had  shown  that 
scarcely  more  than  two-fifths  of  the 
American  People  were  even  so  far 
hostile  to  Slavery  to  wish  its  farther 
diffusion  arrested.  Had  political  ac- 
tion been  free  in  the  Slave  States, 
they  would  probably  have  swelled 
Mr.  Lincoln's  poll  to  fully  Two  Mil- 
lions; but,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
hopeless  distraction  and  discourage- 
ment of  the  pro-Slavery  forces  so 
paralyzed  effort  on  that  side,  by  de- 
monstrating its  futility,  as  seriously 
to  diminish  the  anti-Lincoln  vote. 
Had  there  been  but  one  instead  of 
three  pro-Slavery  tickets  in  the  field, 
its  vote  in  Maine,  New  Hampshire, 


Massachusetts  furnished  3,1 10 

New  Hampshire     "    897 

Connecticut  "    387 

Rhode  Island        "    637 

Vermont  "    181 

In  all  5,102 

While  the  State  of  South  Carolina  furnished  5,696. 
In  the  Mexican  War, 

Massachusetts  furnished  1,047 

New  Hampshire     "    1 

The  other  New  England  States.  .0,000 
In  all  1,048 


The  whole  number  of  troops  contributed  by 
the  North  to  the  Mexican  War  was  23,054;  while 
the  South  contributed  43,630 — very  nearly  dou- 
ble— and,  in  proportion  to  her  population,  four 
times  as  many  soldiers  as  the  North." 

"Lincoln  1,S57,G10;  all  others  2,787,780. 


SLAVERY    THE    RE  LI  G 


ION    OF    'THE  SOUTH.' 


501 


Connecticut,  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,  Il- 
linois, and  (in  fact)  nearly  every  Free 
State,  would  have  been  far  heavier 
than  that  actually  returned;  so  it 
will  be  but  fair  to  estimate  the  pro- 
Slavery  voters  of  the  entire  Union  as 
preponderating  in  just  about  the  pro- 
portion of  Three  Millions  to  Two. 
In  other  words,  three-fifths  of  the  en- 
tire American  People  (the  Blacks 
being  then  of  little  more  account, 
politically,  than  so  many  cattle)  sym- 
pathized with  the  Rebellion  in  so  far 
as  its  animating  purpose  was  the  for- 
tification, diffusion,  and  aggrandize- 
ment of  Slavery. 

And  this  explains  that  exaggeration 
of  the  importance  as  well  as  of  the 
beneficence  of  human  chattelhood 
which  is  seen  to  pervade  all  the  ear- 
lier harangues,  manifestoes,  and  State 
papers,  circulated  or  uttered  in  the 
interest  of  Disunion.  He  would  un- 
derrate the  sagacity  of  the  conspira- 
tors, and  impute  to  them  a  blind 
fanaticism  which  they  never  felt, 
who  should  fail  to  take  into  account 
the  state  of  antecedent  opinion  where- 
on these  were  designed  to  operate. 
Let  him  but  consider  that,  through- 
out thirteen  of  the  fifteen  Slave  States, 
no  journal  of  any  note  or  influence 
had  for  many  years  been  issued  which 
was  not  an  ardent  champion  and  eu- 
logist of  Slavery — that  no  man  could 
be  chosen  to  Congress  from  any  dis- 
trict in  those  thirteen  States,  and 
none  from  more  than  two  districts 
of  the  entire  fifteen,  who  was  not 
a  facile  and  eager  instrument  of  the 
Slave  Power,  even  though  (as  in 
West  Virginia)  their  inhabitants  well 

11  Of  the  sermons  with  which  the  South  was 
carpeted—'  thick  as  Autumnal  leaves  that  strew 
the  brooks  in  Yallombrosa' — between  November, 
I860,  and  May,  1861,  that  entitled  "  Slavery  a 


understood  that  Slavery  was  to  them 
a  blight  and  a  curse — that  every 
prominent  and  powerful  religious  or- 
ganization throughout  the  South  was 
sternly  pro-Slavery,  its  preachers 
making  more  account  in  their  prelec- 
tions of  Ham  and  Onesimus  than  of 
Isaiah  and  John  the  Baptist — and  he 
will  be  certain  to  render  a  judgment 
less  hasty  and  more  just.  There 
were  probably  not  a  hundred  white 
churches  south  of  the  Potomac  and 
Ohio  which  would  have  received  an 
avowed  Abolitionist  into  their  com- 
munion, though  he  had  been  a  Jona- 
than Edwards  in  Orthodoxy,  a  Wes- 
ley in  piety,  or  a  Bunyan  in  religious 
zeal.  The  Industry,  Commerce,  and 
Politics  of  the  South  were  not  more 
squarely  based  on  Slavery  than  was 
its  Religion.  Every  great  national 
religious  organization  had  either  been 
rendered  pliant  and  subservient  to  the 
behests  of  Slavery  or  had  been  shiv- 
ered by  its  resistance  thereto.  And 
no  sooner  had  Secession  been  inau- 
gurated in  the  South  than  the  great 
Protestant  denominations  which  had 
not  already  broken  their  connection 
with  the  North  proceeded  unani- 
mously and  with  emphasis  to  do  so — 
the  Protestant  Episcopalians,  who 
had  never  received  a  word  of  reproof 
for  slaveholding  from  their  Northern 
brethren,  unanimously  taking  the 
lead,  followed  by  the  still  more  nur 
merous  Baptists.  And  even  the 
Southern  Press,  incendiary  and  vio- 
lent as  it  was,  was  outstripped  by  the 
Southern  pulpit  in  the  unanimity  and 
vehemence  of  its  fulminations  in  be- 
half of  Secession.11 

Divine  Trust,"  by  Rev.  B.  M.  Palmer,  of  New- 
Orleans,  was  perhaps  the  most  forcible  and  note- 
worthy.   In  it,  Mr.  Palmer  says : 

"  In  determining  our  duty  in  this  emergency, 


502 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


And  not  in  the  South  only,  but  in 
the  North  also,  had  the  temples  and 
organizations  of  religion  been  gradu- 
ally molded  and  manipulated  into  a 
more  guarded  but  not  less  effective 
subserviency  to  the  Slave  Power. 
Of  the  many  periodicals  edited  and 
issued  in  the  interest  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  faith  and  polity,  hardly  one 
had  ever  indicated  even  a  wish  that 
Slavery  should  fall ;  while  a  large 
majority  were  among  its  most  vehe- 
ment, unshrinking  champions.  The 
case  was  scarcely  better  with  those 
sustained  by  the  Protestant  Episco- 
palians ;  while,  among  the  organs  of 
the  other  great  denominations,  Sla- 
very had  about  as  many  apologists 
as  assailants.  The  godless  ruffianism 
and  rowdy  lawlessness  of  the  North 
were,  of  course,  as  thoroughly  pro- 
Slavery  as  those  of  the  South — con- 
scious baseness  and  ill-deserving  al- 
ways requiring  somewhat  to  look  down 
upon  and  to  trample  underfoot ;  and 
he  who  has  nothing  else  to  boast  of  al- 
ways seeking  to  make  the  most  of  the 
[constructive]  whiteness  of  his  skin. 


It  thus  chanced  that,  in  this,  as  in 
some  other  controversies,  the  sleek 
sanctity  and  the  rough  rascality  at 
the  respective  extremities  of  the 
social  scale  were  found  acting  in 
concert,  as  when  the  Jewish  hierarchy 
were  aided  in  compassing  the  death 
of  Jesus  by  the  rabble  cry  of '  Crucify 
him!'  alternated  with  clamors  for 
the  release  of  Barabbas  the  robber. 

V.  The  Rebellion  had,  at  the  outset 
of  the  struggle,  the  immense  advan- 
tage always  enjoyed  by  the  belligerent 
who  alone  has  a  positive  creed,  a 
definite  purpose,  and  is  moving  di- 
rectly, consistently,  toward  his  pro- 
claimed goal.  It  said,  ' 1  stand  for 
Slavery — strike  for  Slavery — put  all 
at  risk  for  Slavery — and  I  demand 
the  sympathy  and  succor  of  all  who 
concur  with  me  in  regarding  Slavery 
as  just  and  beneficent.'  And  what 
it  thus  boldly  and  reasonably  de- 
manded it  naturally  and  generally 
secured.  There  were  slaveholders  of 
the  Revolutionary  school — relics  of 
the  era  or  inheritors  of  the  faith  of 
Washington  and  Jefferson — who  re- 


it  is  necessary  that  we  should  first  ascertain  the 
nature  of  the  trust  providentially  committed  to 
us.  *  *  The  particular  trust  assigned  to  such  a 
people  becomes  the  pledge  of  Divine  protection ; 
and  their  fidelity  to  it  determines  the  fate  by 
which  it  is  overtaken.  *  *  * 

"  If,  then,  the  South  is  such  a  people,  what, 
at  this  juncture,  is  their  providential  trust?  I 
answer,  that  it  is  to  conserve  and  perpetuate  the 
institution  of  domestic  Slavery  as  now  existing.  *  * 
For  us,  as  now  situated,  the  duty  is  plain,  of 
conserving  and  transmitting  the  system  of  Sla- 
very, with  the  freest  scope  for  its  natural  devel- 
opment and  extension.  *  *  * 

"  TJiis  duty  is  bounden  upon  us  again,  as  the 
constituted  guardians  of  the  slaves  themselves.  Our 
lot  is  not  more  implicated  in  theirs  than  is  their 
lot  in  ours ;  in  our  mutual  relations,  we  survive 
or  we  perish  together.  The  worst  foes  of  the 
black  race  are  those  who  have  intermeddled  in 
their  behalf.  We  know,  better  than  others,  that 
every  attribute  of  their  character  fits  them  for 
dependence  and  servitude. 

"  By  nature,  the  most  affectionate  and  loyal  of 
all  races  beneath  the  sun,  they  are  also  the  most 
helpless ;  and  no  calamity  can  befall  them  great- 


er than  the  loss  of  that  protection  they  enjoy 
under  this  patriarchal  system.  *  *  * 

"Last  of  all,  in  this  great  struggle,  we  defend 
the  cause  of  God  and  of  religion.  The  Abolition 
spirit  is  undeniably  atheistic.  *  *  It  is  nowhere 
denied  that  the  first  article  in  the  creed  of  the 
dominant  party  is  the  restriction  of  Slavery 
within  its  present  limits.  *  *  * 

"  This  argument,  then,  which  sweeps  over  the 
entire  circle  of  our  relations,  touches  the  four 
cardinal  points  of  duty  to  ourselves,  to  our  slaves, 
to  the  world,  and  to  Almighty  God.  It  establishes 
the  nature  and  solemnity  of  our  present  trusts  to 
preserve  and  transmit  our  existing  system  of  domestic 
servitude,  with  the  right,  unchanged  by  man,  to  go 
and  root  itself  wherever  Providence  and  nature  may 
carry  it.  This  trust  we  will  discharge,  in  the 
face  of  the  worst  possible  peril.  Though  war 
be  the  aggregation  of  all  evils,  yet,  should  the 
madness  of  the  hour  appeal  to  the  arbitration  of 
the  sword,  we  will  not  shrink,  even  from  the 
baptism  of  fire.  If  modern  crusaders  stand  in 
serried  ranks  upon  some  plain  of  Esdraelon, 
there  shall  we  be  in  defense  of  our  trust.  Not 
till  the  last  man  has  fallen  behind  the  last  ram- 
part, shall  it  drop  from  our  hands." 


THE    FRIENDS   AND  TH 


E    FOES    OF  SECESSION. 


503 


pudiated  Secession  and  clung  to  the 
Union ;  but  there  was  not  an  earnest 
devotee  of  human  chattelhood  — 
whether  in  the  South  or  in  the 
North — whether  in  America  or  in 
Europe — whether  a  Tory  aristocrat, 
scorning  and  fearing  the  unwashed 
multitude,  or  an  Irish  hod-carrier,  of 
the  latest  importation,  hating  '  nay- 
gurs,'  and  wishing  them  all  '  sint 
back  to  Africa,  where  they  belong' — 
whose  heart  did  not  throb  in  open 
or  secret  sympathy  with  the  Slave- 
holders' Rebellion.  Many  did  this 
whose  judgments  told  them  that 
Secession  was  a  mistake  —  a  rash, 
headlong  staking  of  momentous  in- 
terests on  the  doubtful  chances  of 
a  mortal  strife  that  might  easily 
and  safely  have  been  avoided ;  but, 
after  all,  the  truth  remained,  that 
whoever  really  loVed  Slavery  did  not 
and  could  not  regard  the  Rebellion 
otherwise  than  with  tenderness,  with 
forbearance,  with  that  6  fellow  feel- 
ing '  that  '  makes  wondrous  kind,' 
and  insists  that  the  mistakes  it  sees 
and  admits  shall  be  regarded  and 
treated  with  generous  allowance. 
There  were  thousands  in  the  Free 
States,  never  really  for  bondage, 
whom  party  ties  and  party  necessities 
had  held  in  silent,  passive  complicity 
with  the  Slave  Power  through  years, 
whose  bonds  were  snapped  like  glass 
by  the  concussion  of  the  first  cannon- 
shot  of  the  war ;  but  whoever  was 
really  pro-Slavery  was  at  heart  an 
apologist  for  if  not  an  active  partisan 
of  the  Slaveholders'  Rebellion — not 
merely  at  first,  but  so  long  as  his 
affections  were  unweaned  from  the 
grim  and  gory  idol  of  their  early  love. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Unionists 
were  fettered,  their  unity  threatened, 
their  enthusiasm  chilled,  their  effi- 


ciency impaired,  by  the  complication 
of  the  struggle  with  the  problem  of 
Slavery.  They  stood  for  Law,  Or- 
der, and  Established  Right ;  all  which 
were  confidently,  plausibly  claimed 
as  guarantors  of  Slavery.  They  were 
struggling  to  preserve  the  Union ; 
yet  their  efforts,  even  in  their  own 
despite,  tended  to  unsettle  and  en- 
danger that  which,  in  the  conception 
of  many,  was  the  Union's  chief  end 
and  function.  Even  the  loyal  Mil- 
lions were  not  ripe,  at  the  outset — 
though  they  might,  by  a  heroic  leader, 
have  been  surely  and  rapidly  ripen- 
ed— for  stern  dealing  with  the  source 
of  all  our  woes.  Hence,  the  proffer 
of  new  concessions,  new  guarantees 
to  Slavery,  backed  by  vehement  prot- 
estations of  devotion  to  its  chartered 
rights,  which  marked  the  initial  sta- 
ges of  the  struggle.  The  reflecting 
few  remembered  how  kindred  profes- 
sions— doubtless  sincere — of  unsha- 
ken, invincible  loyalty  to  the  British 
Crown,  were  constantly  reiterated  by 
our  fathers  in  all  the  earlier  stages  of 
their  Revolutionary  struggle ;  and 
how  like  protestations  of  loyalty  to 
the  throne  and  person  of  Louis  XVI. 
were  persisted  in  by  the  leaders  of 
the  French  in  their  great  convulsion, 
down  to  within  a  short  period  of  the 
abolition  of  the  monarchy,  closely 
followed  by  the  execution  of  the  mon- 
arch. So  History  repeats  its  great 
lessons,  and  must,  so  long  as  the  na- 
ture of  Man  remains  essentially  un- 
changed. The  Republicans  of  1860 
purposed  no  more  than  the  Secession- 
ists a  speedy  and  violent  overthrow 
of  Slavery.  Each  were  but  instru- 
ments in  the  hands  of  that  benign, 
inscrutable  Power  which  '  shapes  our 
ends,  rough-hew  them  as  we  will 
but,  in  their  common  blindness,  the 


504 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


advantage  was  with  those  who  seemed 
to  be  struggling  more  directly,  logical- 
ly, fearlessly  toward  their  avowed  end. 

YI.  The  strong  reliance  of  the 
Rebels  on  their  Cotton,  as  so  vitally 
necessary  to  the  maritime  Powers  of 
Europe  that  it  would  compel  them 
speedily  to  recognize  the  independ- 
ence of  the  Confederacy,  and  even  to 
aid  in  its  achievement,  by  forcibly 
raising  the  foreseen  blockade  of  their 
ports,  was  not  justified  by  the  event. 
Communities,  like  individuals,  are 
apt  to  magnify  their  own  conse- 
quence, and  to  fancy  the  rest  of  man- 
kind subsisting  by  their  favor,  if  not 
on  their  bounty.  ("  Soldiers !"  said 
a  General,  going  into  battle,  "re- 
member that  you  are  Portuguese !") 
The  Southrons,  in  their  impetuosity 
and  conceit,  seem  not  to  have  duly 
considered  that  their  dependence  on 
others  was  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the 
dependence  of  others  on  them,  and 
that  Europe  could  dispense  with  their 
Cotton  with  (at  least)  as  little  incon- 
venience as  they  could  forego  the  re- 
ceipt of  whatsoever  its  proceeds  might 
purchase.  Yet  it  is  manifest  that  a 
region  which  produced  for  sale  only 
a  few  great  staples,  which  western 
Europe  could  not  produce  and  must 
largely  buy,  and  which  bought  freely 
of  whatever  Europe  most  desired  to 
sell,  would  be  regarded  with  partial- 
ity by  her  manufacturing  and  trading 
classes,  when  contrasted  with  an  ad- 
versary who  largely  bought  Cotton 
and  Tobacco,  and  made  Wares  and 
Fabrics  to  sell.  It  is  but  stating  the 
most  obvious  truth  to  assert  that — 
regarding  the  Southrons  as  generous, 
lavish  customers,  and  the  Yankees  as 
sharp,  close-fisted,  tricky,  dangerous 
rivals,  the  responsible  authors  of  the 
American  tariffs,  whereby  their  ex- 


ports to  the  New  World  were  re- 
stricted and  their  profits  seriously 
curtailed — the  fabricating,  trading, 
banking  classes  across  the  Atlantic 
were,  for  the  most  part,  early  and 
ardent  partisans  of  Disunion. 

VII.  That  the  ingrain  Tories,  Aris- 
tocrats, and  Reactionists  of  the  Old 
World  should  be  our  instinctive,  im- 
placable foes,  was  inevitable.  For 
eighty  years,  this  Republic  had  been 
not  only  a  standing  but  a  growing 
refutation  of  their  most  cherished 
theories,  their  vital  dogmas.  A  New 
England  town  meeting,  wherein  the 
shoemaker  moves  that  $6,000  be  this 
year  raised  by  it  for  the  support  of 
common  schools,  and  is  seconded  by 
the  blacksmith  —  neither  of  them 
worth,  perhaps,  the  shop  wherein  by 
daily  labor  he  earns  his  daily  bread 
— the  wagon-maker  moving  to  amend 
by  raising  the  sum  to  $S,000,  and 
the  doctor  making  a  five-minutes' 
speech  to  show  why  this  should  or 
should  not  prevail — when  the  ques- 
tion is  taken,  first  on  the  amendment, 
then  on  the  main  proposition — either 
of  them  standing  or  falling  as  a  ma- 
jority of  those  present  shall  decide — 
such  is  a  spectacle  calculated  to  strike 
more  terror  to  the  soul  of  Kingcraft 
than  would  the  apparition  of  a  score 
of  speculating  Rousseaus  or  fighting 
Garibaldis ;  and  its  testimony  to  the 
safety  and  beneficence  of  intelligent 
democracy  increases  in  weight  with 
every  year  of  its  peaceful  and  pros- 
perous endurance.  When  it  has  qui- 
etly braved  unharmed  the  shocks  and 
mutations  of  three-quarters  of  a  cen- 
tury, assertions  of  its  utter  insecurity 
and  baselessness — solemn  assurances 
that  it  cannot  possibly  stand,  and 
must  inevitably  topple  at  the  first 
serious  trial — sound  very  much  like 


ADVANTAGE  OF 


THE  DEFENSIVE. 


505 


fresh  predictions  of  a  repeatedly  post- 
poned, but  still  confidently  expected, 
i  end  of  the  world.'  Carlyle  once  re- 
marked that  the  British  people,  hav- 
ing considered  and  condemned  all 
the  arguments  for  retaining  the  Corn- 
Laws  that  could  be  expressed  in  lan- 
guage, were  still  waiting  to  see 
whether  there  might  not  be  some 
reasons  therefor  quite  ^utterable. 
So  the  people  of  Europe,  having 
endured  the  burdens  and  fetters  of 
Aristocracy  and  Privilege  throughout 
three  generations,  on  the  strength  of 
assurances  that  all  democracies  were 
necessarily  violent,  unstable,  regard- 
less of  the  rights  of  Property,  inimi- 
cal to  Social  Order,  and  incompatible 
with  tranquillity  and  thrift,  had  be- 
gun very  generally  to  direct  the  atten- 
tion of  their  self-appointed  guides  and 
rulers -to  the  actual  condition  of  the 
Model  Republic,  and  to  ask  them  how 
they  reconciled  their  theories  with 
that.  The  question  was  an  ugly  one, 
to  which  not  even  a  plausible  answer 
could  be  given,  until  Jefferson  Davis 
supplied  one.  Hope  and  gratitude 
on  the  one  hand,  apprehension  and 
dread  on  the  other,  made  the  heredi- 
tary masters  and  chief  priests  of  the 
Old  World  the  natural,  instinctive 
allies  of  the  Slaveholders'  Rebellion. 
Hence,  of  all  the  British  military  or 
naval  officers,  the  high-born  function- 
aries, who  visited  our  country  during 
the  struggle,  few  even  affected  neu- 
trality or  reserve,  while  the  great 
majority  were  the  open,  ardent  par- 
tisans of  the  Rebel  cause. 

VIII.  The  vastness  of  the  territory 
occupied  by  the  belligerents,  the 
rugged  topography  of  much  of  the 
country  over  which  the  contest  was 
fought,  the  general  badness  of  Ameri- 
can roads,  with  the  extraordinary 


facilities  newly  afforded  to  military 
operations  by  the  Railroad  and  the 
Electric  Telegraph,  secured  enormous 
advantages  to  the  party  standing 
generally  on  the  defensive.  The 
Confederate  President,  sitting  in  his 
cabinet  at  Montgomery  or  Richmond, 
could  thence  dispatch  a  message  to  his 
lieutenant  in  Florida  or  on  the  Rio 
Grande,  and  receive  a  response  the 
next  day — perhaps  the  next  hour — 
while  our  President  or  General-in- 
Chief  could  not  hear  of  operations 
at  Pensacola  or  JS"ew  Orleans  for  a 
week  or  more,  and  so  could  not  give 
seasonably  the  orders  required  to  re- 
pair a  disaster  or  improve  a  victory. 
The  recovery  of  New  Orleans  was 
first  learned  in  Washington  through 
Richmond  journals  ;  and  so  of  many 
other  signal  Union  triumphs.  A 
corps  could  be  sent  from  Virginia  to 
Tennessee  or  Mississippi,  by  the  Con- 
federates, in  half  the  time  that  was 
required  to  countervail  the  move- 
ment on  our  side.  If  they  chose  to 
menace  Newbern,  C,  or  our 
forces  on  the  Sea  Islands  of  South 
Carolina,  they  could  do  so  with  troops 
drawn  from  Richmond  or  Chattanoo- 
ga before  we  could  learn  that  any  had 
started.  True,  as  the  war  wore  on, 
and  their  railroads  wore  out — more 
especially  after  their  territory  was 
cut  in  two  by  the  opening  of  the 
Mississippi — this  advantage  was  ma- 
terially lessened  ;  but  the  ruggedness 
of  the  country  remained ;  while  the 
badness  of  American,  especially  of 
Southern,  roads,  afforded  undimin- 
ished, and,  to  a  European,  inconceiv- 
ably, great  advantages  to  the  party 
acting  on  the  defensive. 

IX.  The  Confederates  had  a 
superiority  from  the  first  in  this, 
that  their  leaders  and  officers  were 


50G  THE  AMERICA 

thoroughly  in  earnest.  Their  chief 
had  been  educated  at  West  Point, 
had  fought  through  the  Mexican 
"War,  had  been  four  years  at, the 
head  of  the  War  Department,  and 
been  succeeded  therein  by  Floyd,  a 
man  after  his  own  heart,  who  left 
the  service,  at  the  close  of  1860,  in 
precisely  that  state  which  was  deemed 
most  favorable  to  their  great  design. 
One,  if  not  both,  of  them  knew  per- 
sonally almost  every  officer  in  our 
service ;  knew  the  military  value  of 
each ;  knew  that  he  was  pliant  or 
otherwise  to  the  behests  of  slave- 
holding  treason.  They  knew  whom 
to  call  away  to  help  organize  and 
lead  their  own  forces,  and  who,  even 
if  loyal,  would  serve  them  better  in 
our  armies  than  he  could  do  in  their 
own.  The  immense  advantages  they 
thus  secured  can  never  be  overesti- 
mated. Their  Generals  exposed  their 
lives  in  leading  or  repelling  charges 
with  a  reckless  courage  which  made 
promotions  rapid  in  their  ranks  ;  and, 
where  the  troops  on  both  sides  are 
raw  and  undisciplined,  the  bravest 
and  most  determined  officers,  if 
capable,  are  seldom  beaten.  In  the 
course  of  the  war,  eminent  courage 
and  conspicuous  cowardice  were  often 
displayed  on  either  side ;  but  the 
Rebels  were  seldom  beaten  through 
the  pusillanimity,  never  through  the 
treachery,  of  their  leaders. 

On  the  other  hand,  President  Lin- 
coln, without  military  education  or 
experience,  found  himself  suddenly 
plunged  into  a  gigantic  and,  to  him, 
most  unexpected  war,  with  no  single 

"  "Mr.  Lincoln."  said  an  officer  who  called  at 
the  White  House  during  the  dark  days,  when 
Washington  was  isolated  and  threatened  from 
every  side,  "  every  one  else  may  desert  you,  but  / 
never  will."  Mr.  Lincoln  thanked  and  dismissed 


N  CONFLICT. 

member  of  his  Cabinet  even  pretend- 
ing to  military  genius  or  experience, 
and  with  the  offices  of  his  army 
filled  to  his  hand  by  those  who  were 
now  the  chiefs  of  the  Rebellion. 
His  officers  were  all  strangers  to  him  ; 
many  of  them  superannuated  and  ut- 
terly inefficient,  yet  bearing  names 
associated  with  remembered  heroism, 
and  not  to  be  shelved  without  in- 
voking popular  as  well  as  personal 
reprobation.  How  should  an  Illi- 
nois lawyer,  fresh  from  comparative 
obscurity,  and  who  never  witnessed 
the  firing  of  a  platoon  or  read  a  page 
of  Vauban,  presume  to  say,  even 
had  he  dared  to  think,  that  the  il- 
lustrious Lieutenant-General  at  the 
head  of  our  armies,  covered  all  over 
with  the  deep  scars  of  wounds  re- 
ceived in  glorious  conflicts  nearly 
lmlf  a  century  ago,  no  longer  pos- 
sessed the  mental  vigor  requisite  to 
the  planning  of  campaigns  or  the 
direction  of  military  movements  ? 
The  bare  suggestion,  on  Mr.  Lincoln's 
part,  would  have  been  generally  scout- 
ed as  the  acme  of  ignorant  conceit 
and  fool-hardy  presumption. 

But  not  merely  was  it  true  that, 
while  Jefferson  Davis  was  not  only 
able  to  place  every  man  in  his  service 
exactly  in  the  position  he  deemed 
him  fitted  for,  wThile  Abraham  Lin- 
coln had  neither  the  requisite  knowl- 
edge 18  nor  the  legal  authority  to  do 
likewise  with  our  officers,  the  fact 
that  every  one  who  went  over  to  the 
Confederates  thereby  proved  that  his 
heart  was  in  their  cause,  gave  that 
side  a  just  confidence  in  their  mili- 

him  to  his  duties.  Two  days  afterward,  lie 
learned  that  this  modern  Peter  had  absconded 
to  take  service  with  the  Rebels.  His  name  was 
J.  Bankhead  Magruder,  then  a  Lieut.  Col.  of 
Artillery ;  since,  a  Confederate  Major-General 


OUR    ARMY  OFFIC 


ERS    IN    THE  "WAR. 


507 


tary  leaders  which  was  wanting  in 
ours.    The  bitter  distich — 

"  Heaven  takes  the  good,  too  good  on  earth  to  stay, 
And  leaves  the  bad,  too  bad  to  take  away," 

has  a  qualified  application  to  this 
case.  Of  the  army  officers — some 
two  hundred  in  number — who  went 
over  to  the  Rebellion,  not  one  fancied 
that  he  was  consulting  his  own  ease 
or  physical  comfort  in  so  doing. 
Say  they  were  ambitious,  '  sectional,' 
traitorous,  forsworn,  or  whatever  you 
will :  it  is  barely  possible  that  some 
of  them  shared  the  prevalent  South- 
ern delusion  that  the  North  would 
not  fight ;  but  it  is  not  probable  that 
their  error  on  this  point  at  all  ap- 
proached that  of  their  stay-at-home 
compatriots,who  supposed  the  North13 
a  small  patch  of  country  mainly  de- 
voted to  the  production  of  school- 
masters, counter-jumpers,  peddlers, 
and  keepers  of  watering-place  hotels, 
all  keen  at  a  bargain,  but  never  to 
be  driven  into  a  fight.  Perhaps  no 
other  class  of  the  Southern  people 
were  so  free  from  the  prevalent  de- 
lusion on  this  head  as  were  their 
relatively  educated,  widely-traveled, 
observant  army  officers,  who,  aban- 
doning the  service  of  their  whole 
country,  proffered  their  swords  and 
their  lives  to  the  cause  of  Human 
Slavery.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
indolent,  the  stolid,  the  conscious- 
ly inefficient,  who  aspired  to  light 
work  and  easy  living,  naturally 
clung  to  a  service  wherein  they  had 
found  what  they  most  desired.  The 
Confederacy  might  fail;  the  Union, 
even  though  defeated  and  curtailed, 
could  not  well  absolutely  go  down. 
Many  thus  remained  whose  hearts 

13 "Do  you  know  John  Williams?"  asked  a 
Southern  young  lady  of  average  education,  ad- 
dressing her  Yankee  school-mistress. — "  No,  I  do 


inclined  to  the  other  side,  but  who 
did  not  believe  the  overthrow  or  dis- 
ruption of  the  Union  would  prove  a 
light  undertaking. 

X.  The  more  flagrant  instances 
of  official  cowardice  or  imbecility 
which  these  pages  must  often  record, 
will  sometimes  prompt  the  question — 
"  Were  these  men  downright  trai- 
tors ?"  And  the  general  answer  must 
be :  Consciously,  purposely,  according 
to  their  own  conceptions,  they  were 
not.  -  They  did  not  desire,  nor  seek 
to  compass,  the  division  of  the  re- 
public. Many  of  them  were  not  even 
bewildered  by  the  fatal  delusion  of 
State  omnipotence.  They  hoped  for 
and  sought  such  an  issue  from  our 
perilous  complications  as  would  leave 
our  country  undivided,  and  stronger, 
more  powerful,  greater  than  before. 
But  they  had  undoubtingly  imbibed 
tli at  one-sided,  narrow,  false  concep- 
tion of  the  genius  and  history  of  our 
political  fabric  which  identifies  Sla- 
very with  the  Constitution,  making 
the  protection  and  conservation  of  the 
former  the  chief  end  of  our  National 
existence — not  a  local  and  sectional 
excrescence,  alien  and  hostile  to  the 
true  nature  and  paramount  ends  of 
our  system,  to  be  borne  with  patience 
and  restrained  from  diffusing  its  virus 
until  opportunity  should  be  present- 
ed for  its  safe  eradication.  To  this 
large  and  influential  class  of  our 
officers,  the  Eebellion  seemed  a  sad 
mistake,  impelled  and  excused  by  the 
factious,  malignant,  unjustifiable  re- 
fusal of  the  Republicans  to  give  '  the 
South'  her  '  rights'  in  the  territories  ; 
and  they  controllingly  desired  that 
there  should  be  the  least  possible 

not  happen  to  recollect  any  person  of  that  name."  < 
"Why,  I  supposed  you  must  know  him — he 
came  from  the  North." 

I 


508  THE  AMERICA 

fightinc:  until  cool  reflection  and  the 
enormous  cost  of  the  struggle  should 
calm  or  overbear  the  rage  of  extrem- 
ists on  both  sides,  and  induce  reunion 
on  the  basis,  substantially,  of  the 
Crittenden  Compromise.  Whoever 
keeps  this  explanation  in  mind  will 
be  enabled  by  it  to  comprehend  move- 
ments, delays,  vacillations,  obstinate 
torpors,  and  even  whole  abortive  cam- 
paigns, which  must  otherwise  seem 
utterly  unaccountable. 

XI.  The  Rebellion  had,  moreover, 
a  decided  advantage  in  the  respect 
that  all  its  partisans,  civil  as  well  as 
military,  were  thoroughly  in  earnest, 
and  ready  to  prove  their  faith  by  their 
works.  "  You  are  a  Unionist,"  said 
a  Baltimorean  to  a  Xew  York  friend 
— "  I  don't  doubt  it.  But  are  you 
ready  to  fight  for  the  Union?  /  am 
a  Secessionist,  and  am  going  to  fight 
for  Secession."  There  were  few  real 
SL'ce.^ionivts  who  shrank  from  this 
test  of  their  sincerity.  On  the  side 
of  the  Union  were  the  calm  calcula- 
tions of  interest,  the  clear  suggestions 
of  duty,  the  inspi rations  of  a  broad, 
benignant  patriotism ;  but  these 
were  tame  and  feeble  impulses  when 
contrasted  with  the  vengeful  hate, 
the   cpiivering,  absorbing   rage,  the 

"The  Louisville  (Ky.)  Courier  of  June,  1S61, 
published  the  following  infamous  fabrication  as 
from  Tne  New  York  Tribune,  and  it  immediately 
ran  the  rounds  of  the  journals  of  the  Confederacy: 

" From  the  New  York  Tribune.  'Do  YOU 
hear  ?  The  Beauty  and  the  Booty  shall  be 
yours,  only  conquer  these  rebels  of  the 
South  before  the  next  crop  comes  in.  The 
next  crop  will  be  death  to  usl  Let  it  be  hewn 
down  in  the  field,  burned,  trampled,  lost ;  or,  if 
3rou  have  the  opportunity,  ship  it  to  New  York, 
and  we  will  build  up  Gotham  by  the  prices  it 
must  bring  next  season.  We  shall  have  the 
monopoly  of  the  markets,  having  duly  subjected 
our  vassals  in  the  South.  Go  ahead,  brave  fel- 
lows, Zouaves  of  New  York,  whom  we  were  apt 
to  spit  upon,  though  you  do  the  work  at  fires. 
Go  ahead  1  Don't  mind  yellow  fever;  don't 
mind  black  vomit;  don't  mind  bilious  fever,  or 


N  CONFLICT. 

stormy  wrath,  which  possessed  the 
great  body  of  the  Secessionists,  trans- 
forming even  women  into  fiends. 
These  impulses  were  sedulously  cul- 
tivated and  stimulated  by  the  engi- 
neers of  Disunion,  through  the  un- 
contradicted diffusion  by  their  jour- 
nals of  the  most  atrocious  forgeries 14 
and  the  most  shameless  inventions.1* 
The  North  was  habitually  represent- 
ed to  the  ignorant  masses  of  the 
South  as  thirsting  for  their  blood  and 
bent  on  their  extermination — as  send- 
ing forth  her  armies  instructed  to 
ravish,  kill,  lay  waste,  and  destroy ; 
and  the  pulpit  was  not  far  behind  the 
press  in  disseminating  these  atrocious 
falsehoods.  Hence,  the  Southern 
militia,  and  even  conscripts,  were  im- 
pelled by  a  hate  or  horror  of  their 
adversaries  which  rendered  them 
valiant  in  their  own  despite,  making 
them  sometimes  victors  where  the 
memories  of  their  grandfathers  at 
Charleston  and  at  Guilford,  and  of 
their  fathers  at  Bladensburg,  had  led 
their  foes  to  greatly  undervalue  their 
prowess  and  their  efficiency. 

XII.  "Whether  Slavery  should  prove 
an  element  of  strength  or  of  weakness 
to  the  Itebellion  necessarily  depended 
on  the  manner  in  which  it  should  be 

cholera,  or  measles,  or  small  pox,  or  hot  weather, 
or  hard  living,  or  cold  steel,  or  hot  shot !  Go  I' 

15  The  Norfolk  (  Ya.)  Herald  of  April  2 2d,  said: 
"  It  is  rumored  that  Lincoln  has  been  drunk 
for  th  ree  days,  and  that  Capt.  Lee  has  command 
at  the  Capitol;  and  also  that  Col.  Lee,  of  Vir- 
ginia, who  lately  resigned,  is  bombarding  Wash- 
ington from  Arlington  Hights.  If  so,  it  will 
account  for  his  not  having  arrived  here  to  take 
command,  as  was  expected." 

TJie  New  Orleans  Picayune  of  about  May  15th, 
1SG1,  said: 

"  All  the  Massachusetts  troops  now  in  Wash- 
ington are  negroes,  with  the  exception  of  two  or 
three  drummer  boys.  Gen.  Butler,  in  command, 
is  a  native  of  Liberia.  Our  readers  may  recol- 
lect old  Ben,  the  barber,  who  kept  a  shop  in 
Toydras-street,  and  emigrated  to  Liberia  with  a 
small  competence.    Gen.  Butler  is  his  son." 


SLAVERY,    LOYALTY,    AND    STATE  SOVEREIGNTY. 


509 


treated  by  the  defenders  of  the  Union. 
It  was  a  nettle,  which,  handled  timid- 
ly, tenderly,'  was  certain  to  sting  the 
hand  that  thus  toyed  with  it;  the 
only  safety  lay  in  clutching  it  reso- 
lutely and  firmly.  Slavery  had  made 
the  Rebellion ;  Slavery  coerced  the 
South  into  a  silence  that  counter- 
feited unanimity  by  howling  '  Aboli- 
tionist!' on  the  track  of  every  one 
who  refused  to  seem  a  traitor  to  his 
country,  and  sending  its  bloodhounds 
and  Thugs  to  throttle  or  knife  him. 
An  aristocracy  of  three  hundred 
thousand  families,  haughty,  high- 
spirited,  trained  to  arms,  and  accus- 
tomed to  rule  all  who  approached 
them,  wielding  all  the  resources  and 
governing  the  conduct  not  only  of 
Four  Millions  of  Slaves,  but  of  nearly 
twice  that  number  of  free  persons, 
who  served  the  woolly  man-owners 
as  merchants,  factors,  lawyers,  doc- 
tors, priests,  overseers,  navigators, 
mechanics,  slave-hunters,  etc.,  etc., 
never  dreaming  that  they  could  cher- 
ish any  opinions  but  such  as  the 
planting  aristocracy  prescribed,  was 
no  contemptible  foe.  So  long  as  their 
slaves  should  remain  obedient  to 
their  orders  and  docile  to  their  will, 
knowing  nothing  but  what  they  were 
told,  and  hoping  for  nothing  beyond 
their  daily  rations  of  corn  and  pork, 
a  community  of  Twelve  Millions, 
holding  an  area  of  nearly  One  Million 
square  miles — the  governing  caste 
conscripting  the  Poor  "Whites  to  fill 
its  armies,  and  using  the  labor  of  the 
slaves  to  feed  and  clothe  them — pre- 
sented to  its  foes  on  every  side  a  front 
of  steel  and  flame.  Only  by  pene- 
trating and  disintegrating  their  pha- 
lanx, so  that  its  parts  should  no  longer 
support  each  other,  but  their  enforced 
cohesion  give  place  to  their  natural 


antagonism,  could  it*  power  be  broken 
and  its  persistence  overborne. 

And  here  it  may  be  instructive  to 
note  that  the  paramount  loyalty  to 
his  State,  vaunted  by  the  Southron 
as  the  keystone  of  his  political  arch, 
always  resolved  itself,  on  a  searching 
analysis,  into  devotion  to  Slavery. 
Thus,  when  Virginia  seceded,  we 
have  seen  Alex.  H.  H.  Stuart,  with 
other  eminent  '  conservatives,'  who 
had,  up  to  this  point,  resisted  Dis- 
union, now  take  ground  in  its  favor ; 
white  Magoffin,  C.  F.  Jackson,  etc., 
always  insisted  that  it  was  to  his 
State  that  each  citizen  owed  his  first 
and  highest  duty.  A  favored  officer 
in  our  regular  army  transmitted  his 
resignation,  to  be  tendered  in  case 
his  State  seceded,  and  was  not  cash- 
iered therefor,  as  he  should  have  been 
promptly  and  finally.  All  over  the 
South,  men  said,  '  This  Secession  is 
madness — it  will  ruin  all  concerned — 
I  have  resisted  it  to  the  best  of  my 
ability — but  my  State  has  seceded 
nevertheless,  and  I  must  go  with  my 
State.'  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Ster- 
ling Price,  Humphrey  Marshall, 
James  B.  Clay,  Richard  Hawes, 
Simon  B.  Buckner,  William  Preston, 
Charles  S.  Morehead,  and  scores  like 
them — in  good  part  old  Whigs,  who 
could  not  help  knowing  better — 
never  seemed  to  imagine  that  the 
refusal  of  their  respective  States  to 
secede  laid  them  under  the  smallest 
obligation  to  restrain  their  traitorous 
propensities.  '  State  Sovereignty'  was 
potent  only  to  authorize  and  excuse 
treason  to  the  Union — never  to  re- 
strain or  prevent  it. 

XIII.  The  Southern  leaders  entered 
upon  their  great  struggle  with  the 
Union  under  the  impression — which, 
with  the  more  sanguine,  amounted 


510 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


to  undoubting  confidence — that  they 
were  to  be  largely  aided  by  coopera- 
tion and  diversion  on  the  part  of  their 
Northern  friends  and  allies.  They 
did  not,  for  a  moment,  suppose  4;hat 
the  Free  States  were  to  be,  even  in 
appearance,  a  unit  against  their  ef- 
forts.16 Doubtless,  there  was  disap- 
pointment on  both  sides — the  North 
believing  that  there  could  never  fail 
to  be  an  open  and  active  Union  party 
at  the  South ;  while  the  South  counted 
on  like  aid  from  the  North ;  but  there 
was  this  material  difference  between 
the  two  cases  :  The  Southern  lead- 
ers had  received  innumerable  assur- 
ances, through  a  series  of  years,  of 
Northern  sympathy  and  aid  in  the 
anticipated  struggle  for  their 1  rights  ;' 
while  probably  no  single  Republican 
had  received  a  letter  or  message  from 
any  Southron  of  note,  urging  that  no 
concession  be  made,  but  that  the 
Disunionists  be  crowded  to  the  wall, 
and  compelled  to  back  square  out  or 
fight.  On  the  contrary,  almost  every 
Southern  plea  for  the  Union  had  as- 
sumed as  its  basis  that  the  North 
could,  would,  and  should,  be  induced 
to  recede  from  its  position  of  resistance 

to  Slavery  Extension,  or  else  . 

The  alternative  was  not  always  plain- 
ly expressed ;  but  the  inference  was 
irresistible,  that  Southern  Unionism 
differed  from  Secessionism  in  that  it 

"  The  Xew  Orleans  Picayune  of  February  21st, 
1801,  had  a  letter  from  its  New  York  corre- 
spondent 'Antelope.'  dated  the  13th,  which,  with 
reference  to  Mr.  Lincoln's  speech,  two  days  ear- 
lier, at  Indianapolis,  said : 

"  Lincoln  even  goes  so  far  as  to  intimate  that 
hostile  armies  will  march  across  the  seceded 
States  to  carry  out  the  darling  project  of  recap- 
ture, and  the  1  enforcement  of  the  laws  .'  but  he 
surely  could  not  have  counted  the  dreadful  and 
sickening  result  when  such  a  course  wandered 
through  his  hot  and  frenzied  brain.  March  hos- 
tile armies  through  the  Southern  States  !  Why. 
where  are  the  armies  to  come  from  that  are  to 


proposed  allowing  the  North  a  month 
or  two  longer  wherein  to  back  out  of 
its  chosen  position  before  visiting  its 
perverseness  with  the  retribution  of 
fire  and  sword.  4  Wait  a  little  lonjr- 
er,'  was  the  burden  of  Southern  ap- 
peals for  persistence  in  Unionism : 
'  the  North  is  preparing  to  recede : 
she  will  presently  agree,  rather  than 
tight,  to  give  us,  at  least,  the  Critten- 
den Compromise.'  But  suppose  she 
should  not — what  then  ?  This  ques- 
tion was  sometimes  answered,  some- 
times not ;  but  the  logical  inference 
was  inevitable :  6  Then  we  will  unite 
with  you  in  a  struggle  for  Disunion.' 
Here  were  the  toils  in  which  Virginia 
Unionism  had  immeshed  itself  before 
the  bombardment  of  Sumter,  and 
which  foredoomed  it  to  suicide  direct- 
ly thereafter. 

The  more  earnest  and  resolute 
Southerners  had  been  talking  of 
their  c  rights  '  and  their  '  wrongs '  for 
a  number  of  years,  in  such  a  definite, 
decisive  way  that  they  felt  that  no 
one  could  justifiably  fail  to  compre- 
hend them.  Some  of  them  were 
Disunionists  outright — regarded  sepa- 
ration as  at  all  events  desirable  for 
the  South,  and  certain  to  enhance 
her  prosperity,  wealth,  and  power. 
Others  preferred  to  remain  in  the 
Union,  if  they  could  6hape  its  policy 
and  mold  it  to  their  will ;  but  the 

take  up  the  march?  Where  are  the  loans  of 
money  to  come  from  to  carry  on  this  diabolical 
and  fiendish  crime  ?  An  American  army  suffi- 
ciently powerful  cannot  be  raised  to  do  it;  while, 
as  regards  the  raising  of  moneys  to  prosecute 
the  fratricidal  strife,  Xew  York,  the  banking 
emporium  of  the  Union,  will  refuse,  point  blank, 
to  advance  a  dollar  for  so  u»holy  a  purpose.  *  *  * 
"  No  1  no !  The  South  is  too  terribly  in  earn- 
est for  our  bankers  to  furnish  the  sinews  where- 
with to  whip  it  back  to  its  'allegiance:'  and,  if 
the  atrocious  game  should  still  be  persisted  in, 
instead  of  having  the  funds  to  work  with,  the 
new  Government  of  Mr.  Lincoln  will  find  itself 
flat  upon  its  back." 


MR.    BUCHANAN  TO 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


511 


former  class,  though  few  at  first,  had 
been  steadily  gaining  from  the  latter. 
Each  of  these  were  constantly,  openly 
saying,  "  Give  us  our  rights  in  the 
Union,  or  we  will  secure  them  by 
going  out  of  the  Union."  When, 
therefore,  they  received  messages  of 
sympathy  and  cheer  from  their 
Northern  compatriots  in  many  ardu- 
ous struggles,  they  could  not  but 
understand  their  assurances  of  con- 
tinued and  thorough  accord  as  mean- 
ing what  was  implied  by  like  assu- 
rances from  Southern  sources. 

Among  the  captures  by  Gen. 
Grant's  army,  during  his  glorious 
Mississippi  campaign  of  1863,  were 
several  boxes  of  the  letters  and  pri- 
vate papers  of  Jefferson  Davis,  found 
in  an  out-house  on  a  plantation  be- 
tween Jackson  and  Vicksburg.  Seve- 
ral of  these  letters  were  given  to  the 
public  by  their  captors,  many  of 
them  bearing  the  signatures  of  North- 
ern men  of  note,  who  have  never 
denied  their  authenticity.  These 
letters  throw  a  clear  light  on  the 
state  of  Southern  opinion  which  in- 
duced the  Secession  movement  of 
1860-61,  and  are  therefore  essential 
contributions  to  the  history  of  that 
period.  As  such,  a  portion  of  them 
will  here  be  given. 

So  early  as  1850,  James  Buchanan 
(not  yet  President)  wrote  to  Mr. 
Davis,  complaining  that  '  the  South  ' 
was  disposed  to  be  too  easily  satisfied, 
with  regard  to  her  '  rights '  in  the 
territories.  In  this  'private  and 
confidential'  letter,  dated  Wheat- 
land, March  16th,  he  says  : 

"So  far  from  having  in  any  degree  re- 
coiled from  the  Missouri  Compromise,  I  have 
prepared  a  letter  to  sustain  it,  written  with 
all  the  little  ability  of  which  I  am  master. 


You  may  ask,  why  has  it  not  been  published  ? 
The  answer  is  very  easy.  From  a  careful 
examination  of  the  proceedings  in  Congress, 
it  is  clear  that  Non-Intervention  is  all  that 
icill  he  required  by  the  South.  Webster's 
speech  is  to  be  the  base  of  the  compromise 
— it  is  lauded  to  the  echo  by  distinguished 
Southern  men — and  what  is  it?  Non-inter- 
vention; and  Non-intervention  simply  because 
the  Wilmot  Proviso  is  not  required  to  pre- 
vent the  curse  of  Slavery  from  being  inflicted 
on  the  Territories.  Under  these  circumstan- 
ces, it  would  be  madness  in  me  to  publish 
my  letter,  and  take  higher  ground  for  the 
South  than  they  have  taken  for  themselves. 
This  would  be  to  out*Herod  Herod,  and  to 
be  more  Southern  than  the  South.  It  could 
do  no  good,  but  might  do  much  mischief. 

"  The  truth  is,  the  South  have  got  them- 
selves into  a  condition  on  this  question 
from  which  it  appears  to  me  now  they  can- 
not extricate  themselves.  My  proposition 
of  the  Missouri  Compromise  was  at  once 
abandoned  by  them,  and  the  cry  was  Non- 
Intervention.  They  fought  the  battle  at  the 
last  Presidential  election  with  this  device 
upon  their  banners.  The  Democracy  of 
Pennsylvania  are  now  everywhere  rallying 
to  Xon-Intervention.  They  suppose  in  doing 
this  they  are  standing  by  the  South  in  the 
manner  most  acceptable  to  their  Southern 
brethren.  Our  Democratic  journals  are 
praising  the  speech  of  Webster,17  because  all 
the  appearances  are  that  it  is  satisfactory  to 
the  South.  It  is  now  too  late  to  change 
front  with  any  hope  of  success.  You  may 
retreat  with  honor  upon  the  principle  that 
you  can  carry  your  slaves  to  California,  and 
hold  them  there  under  the  Constitution,  and 
refer  the  question  to  the  Supreme  Court  of 
the  United  States.  I  am  sorry,  both  for 
your  sakes  and  my  own,  that  such  is  the 
condition  in  which  you  are  placed. 

"  /  say  for  my  oxen  sake,  because  I  can 
never  yield  the  position  which  I  have  de- 
liberately taken  in  favor  of  the  Missouri 
Compromise ;  and  I  shall  be  assailed  by 
fanatics  and  free-soilers  as  long  as  I  live,  for 
having  gone  further  in  support  of  the  rights 
of  the  South  than  Southern  Senators  and 
Representatives.  I  am  committed  for  the 
Missouri  Compromise,  and  that  committal 
shall  stand. 

"  Should  there  be  any  unexpected  change 
in  the  aspect  of  affairs  at  Washington 
which  would  hold  out  the  hope  that  the 
publication  of  my  Missouri  Compromise 
letter  would  do  any  good,  it  shall  yet  be 
published." 

In  this  spirit,  Northern  aspirants 

and  office-seekers  had  for  years  been 


7  Mr.  Webster's  deplorably  famous  speech  of  March  7th,  1850. 


512 


THE  AMERICAN"  CONFLICT. 


egging  on  the  leaders  of  Southern 
opinion  to  take  higher  ground  in 
opposition  to  Northern  'fanaticism' 
and  in  assertion  of  '  Southern  rights.' 
Gen.  John  A.  Quitman,  of  Missis- 
sippi— an  able  and  worthy  disciple  of 
Mr.  Calhoun  —  in  a  letter  written 
shortly  before  his  death,  stated  that 
Senator  Douglas,  just  prior  to  the 
Cincinnati  Convention  of  1856,  made 
complaints  to  him  of  the  disposition 
of  Southern  men  to  be  too  easily 
satisfied,  substantially  like  those  of 
Mr.  Buchanan,  just  quoted.  He 
suggested  that  they  should  boldly 
demand  all  their  rights,  and  accept 
nothing  less.  In  this  spirit,  the  fol- 
lowing letter  from  a  leading  Demo- 
crat of  Illinois,  formerly  Governor 
of  that  State,  was  written  after  the 
secession  of  South  Carolina : 

"  Bellville,  111.,  Dec.  23,  1860. 

"  Dear  Friends  :  I  write  to  you  because 
I  cannot  well  avoid  it.  I  am,  in  heart  and 
soul,  for  the  South,  as  they  are  right  in  the 
principles  and  possess  the  Constitution. 

"  If  the  public  mind  will  bear  it,  the  seat 
of  Government,  the  Government  itself,  and 
the  Army  and  Navy,  ought  to  remain  with 
the  South  and  the  Constitution.  I  have 
been  promulgating  the  above  sentiment,  al- 
though it  is  rather  revolutionary.  A  Pro- 
visional Government  should  be  established 
at  Washington  to  receive  the  power  of  the 
out-going  President,  and  for  the  President 
elect  to  take  the  oath  of  office  out  of  slave 
territory. 

"  Now  I  come  to  the  point.  All  the  Slave 
States  must  separate  from  the  North  and 
come  together.  The  Free  States  will  not 
concede  an  atom,  but  are  bent  on  the  de- 
struction of  Slavery.  Why,  in  God's  name, 
cannot  the  Northern  Slave  States  see  this 
fact,  as  clear  as  noonday  before  their  eyes  ? 

"  The  general  secession  ought  to  be  ac- 
complished before  the  4th  of  March.  Mr. 
Buchanan  deserves  immortal  honor  for  keep- 
ing down  bloodshed.  In  one  hour,  by  tele- 
graph, he  could  order  Fort  Moultrie  to  fire 
on  Charleston,  and  the  war  would  rage 
over  the  Union.  I  am,  in  heart  and  soul, 
against  war;  but  the  best  way  to  keep 
peace  is  to  be  able  to  defend  yourselves. 

"  If  the  Slave  States  would  unite  and 
form  a  Convention,  they  might  have  the 
power  to  coerce  the  North  into  terms  to 


amend  the  Constitution  so  as  to  protect 
Slavery  more  efficiently. 

uYou  will  pardon  this  letter,  as  it  pro- 
ceeds  from  friendly  motives,  from 

"  Your  friend,         John  Reynolds. 

"To  the  Hon.  Jeff.  Davis  and  Ex-Governor 
Wm.  Smith." 

Prof.  Charles  "W.  Hackley,  of  Co- 
lumbia College,  New  York,  writing 
two  days  earlier  to  Mr.  Davis,  to 
suggest  a  moderate  and  reasonable 
mean  between  the  Northern  and  the 
Southern  positions  respecting  the 
territories,  commences  :  "  My  sympa- 
thies are  entirely  with '  the  South'  " — 
an  averment  which  doubtless  meant 
much  more  to  the  receiver  than  was 
intended  by  the  writer.  Yet  it  is 
probable  that  nine  out  of  every  ten 
letters  written  from  the  North  to  the 
South  during  that  boding  Winter,  if 
they  touched  on  public  affairs  at  all, 
were  more  exceptionable  and  mis- 
leading than  was  this  one. 

Ex-President  Pierce  wrote,  almost 

a  year  previously,  and  in  prospect  of 

the  Presidential  nomination  for  1860, 

as  follows : 

Clarendon  Hotel,  Jan.  6,  1860. 
My  Dear  Friend  :  I  wrote  you  an  un- 
satisfactory note  a  day  or  two  since.  1  have 
just  had  a  pleasant  interview  with  Mr.  Shep- 
ley,  whose  courage  and  fidelity  are  equal  to 
his  learning  and  talents.  He  says  he  would 
rather  fight  the  battle  with  you  as  the  stand- 
ard-bearer, in  1860,  than  under  the  auspices 
of  any  other  leader.  The  feeling  and  judg- 
ment of  Mr.  S.  in  this  relation  is,  I  am  confi- 
dent, rapidly  gaining  ground  in  New  Eng- 
land. Our  people  are  looking  for  "the 
Coming  Man."  One  who  is  raised  by  all 
the  elements  of  his  character  above  the  at- 
mosphere ordinarily  breathed  by  politicians. 
A  man  really  fitted  for  this  emergency  by 
his  ability,  courage,  broad  statesmanship  and 
patriotism.  Col.  Seymour  (Tho's.  H.)  ar- 
rived here  this  morning,  and  expressed  his 
views  in  this  relation  in  almost  the  identical 
language  used  by  Mr.  Shepley.  It  is  true 
that,  in  the  present  state  of  things  at  Wash- 
ington, and  throughout  the  country,  no  man 
can  predict  what  changes  two  or  three 
months  may  bring  forth.  Let  me  suggest 
that,  in  the  morning  debates  of  Congress, 
full  justice  seems  to  me  not  to  have  been  done 


NORTHERN"   ST  M  PATH 


T   WITH    'THE    SOUTH.'  513 


to  the  Democracy  of  the  North.  I  do  not 
believe  that  our  friends  at  the  South  have 
any  just  idea  of  the  state  of  feeling,  hurrying 
at  this  moment  to  the  pitch  of  intense  ex- 
asperation, between  those  who  respect  their 
political  obligations,  and  those  who  have 
apparently  no  impelling  power  but  that 
which  a  fanatical  position  on  the  subject  of 
domestic  Slavery  imparts.  Without  discuss- 
ing the  question  of  right — of  abstract  power 
to  secede — I  have  never  believed  that  actual 
disruption  of  the  Union  can  occur  without 
blood  ;  and  if  through  the  madness  of  North- 
ern Abolitionists  that  dire  calamity  must 
come,  the  fighting  will  not  be  along  Mason 
and  Dixon's  line  merely.  It  icill  be  within 
our  oicn  borders,  in  our  own  streets,  beticeen 
the  two  classes  of  citizens  to  whom  I  have 
referred.  Those  who  defy  law  and  scout 
constitutional  obligations,  will,  if  we  ever 
reach  the  arbitrament  of  arms,  find  occujja- 
tion  enough  at  home.  Nothing  but  the  state 
of  Mrs.  Pierce's  health  would  induce  me  to 
leave  the  country  now,  although  it  is  quite 
likely  that  my  presence  at  home  would  be 
of  little  service.  I  have  tried  to  impress 
upon  our  people,  especially  in  N.  H.  and 
Connecticut,  where  the  only  elections  are  to 
take  place  during  the  coming  Spring,  that, 
while  our  Union  meetings  are  all  in  the  right 
direction  and  well  enough  for  the  present, 
they  will  not  be  worth  the  paper  upon 
which  their  resolutions  are  written  unless 
we  can  overthrow  political  Abolitionism  at 
the  polls,  and  repeal  the  unconstitutional 
and  obnoxious  laws  which  in  the  cause  of 
"Personal  Liberty"  have  been  placed  upon 
our  statute-books.  I  shall  look  with  deep 
interest,  and  not  without  hope,  for  a  decided 
change  in  this  relation.  Ever  and  truly 
your  friend,  Franklin  Pierce. 

Hon.  Jeff.  Davis,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Such  are  specimens  of  the  North- 
ern letters  wherewith  Southern  states- 
men were  misled  into  the  belief  that 
the  North  would  be  divided  into  hos- 
tile camps  whenever  the  South  should 
strike  boldly  for  her  lights.'  It 
proved  a  grievous  mistake ;  but  it  was 
countenanced  by  the  habitual  tone 
of  1  conservative '  speakers  and  jour- 
nals throughout  the  canvass  of  1860, 
and  thence  down  to  the  collision  at 
Sumter.  Even  then,  the  spirit  which 
impelled  these  assurances  of  Northern 
sympathy  with,  and  readiness  to  do 
and  dare  for,  'the  South,'  was  not 
33 


extinguished,  though  its  more  obvious 
manifestations  were  in  good  part  sup- 
pressed for  a  season.  A  very  few 
persons — hardly  a  score  in  all — of 
the  most  uncontrollable  Southern 
sympathies,  left  the  North  to  enter  the 
Confederate  armies ;  but  many  thou- 
sands remained  behind,  awaiting  the 
opportunity,  which  disappointment 
and  disaster  were  soon  to  present, 
wherein  they  might  take  ground 
against  the  prosecution  of  the  '  Abo- 
lition War,'  and  in  favor  of  a  1  com- 
promise' that  was  not  to  be  had — at 
all  events  and  on  any  terms,  of 
'  Peace.'  There  is,  or  has  been,  a 
quite  general  impression,  backed  by 
constant  and  confident  assertions,  that 
the  people  of  the  Free  States  were 
united  in  support  of  the  War  until 
an  anti-Slavery  aspect  was  given  to 
it  by  the  Administration.  Yet  that 
is  very  far  from  the  truth.  There 
was  no  moment  wherein  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  Northern  Democracy 
were  not  at  least  passively  hostile  to 
any  form  or  shade  of  ■  coercion 
wThile  many  openly  condemned  and 
stigmatized  it  as  atrocious,  unjustifi- 
able aggression.  And  this  opposition, 
even  wThen  least  vociferous,  sensibly 
subtracted  from  the  power  and  dimin- 
ished the  efficiency  of  the  North. 

XIY.  Whether  there  was  greater 
unanimity  at  the  South  or  at  the 
North  in  sustaining  the  Union  or  the 
Confederacy  in  the  prosecution  of 
their  struggle,  will,  perhaps,  never 
be  conclusively  determined.  There 
were  moments  during  its  progress 
when  the  South  appeared  almost  a 
unit  for  Secession,  while  the  dis- 
heartened North  seemed  ready  to 
give  up  the  -contest  for  the  Union ; 
as  there  were  crises  wherein  the  Re- 
bellion seemed  to  reel  on  the  brink 


514  THE  AMERICA 

of  speedy  dissolution  :  but  neither  of 
these  can  justly  be  taken  as  an  accu- 
rate test  of  the  average  popular  senti- 
ment of  the  respective  sections.  Yet 
we  have  seen  that  a  majority  of' the 
Southern  people  could  never,  until 
frenzied  by  the  capture  of  Fort  Sum- 
ter, and  by  official  assurances  (un- 
denied  in  their  hearing)  that  Lincoln 
had  declared  unprovoked  and  utter- 
ly unjustifiable  war  upon  them,  be 
induced  to  lift  hostile  hands  against 
their  country  ;  and  that  Secession  was 
only  forced  down  the  throats  of  those 
who  accepted  it  by  violence,  outrage, 
and  terror.  A  few  additional  facts 
on  this  head,  out  of  thousands  that 
might  be  cited,  will  here  be  given : 

Rev.  John  II.  Aughey,  a  Presby- 
terian clergyman  of  Northern  birth, 
but  settled  in  Northern  Mississippi 
for  some  years  prior  to  the  outbreak 
of  the  Rebellion,  in  his  "  Iron  Fur- 
nace,"18 gives  a  synopsis  of  a  Seces- 
sion speech  to  which  he  listened  in 
Atala  county,  Miss.,  just  after  Presi- 
dent Lincoln's  election,  running  thus : 

"The  halter  is  the  only  argument  that 
should  be  used  against  the  submissionists ; 
and  I  predict  that  it  will  soon,  very  soon,  be 
in  force. 

"  We  have  glorious  news  from  Tallahatchie. 
Seven  tory  submissionists  were  hanged  there 
in  one  day :  and  the  so-called  Union  candi- 
dates, having  the  wholesome  dread  of  hemp 
before  their  eyes,  are  not  canvassing  the 
county,"  etc.,  etc. 

When  the  election  was  held  for 
delegates  to  the  Convention  which 
assumed  the  power  to  take  Missis- 
sippi out  of  the  Union,  Mr.  Aughey 
attended  it,  and  says  : 

'J  Approaching  the  polls,  I  asked  for  a 
Union  ticket,  and  was  informed  that  none 
had  been  printed,  and  that  it  would  be 
advisable  to  vote  the  Secession  ticket.  I 
thought  otherwise;  and,  going  to  a  desk, 

18  Philadelphia,  W.  S.  and  Alfred  Martin,  1SG3. 


N  CONFLICT. 

made  out  a  Union  ticket,  and  voted  it, 
amidst  the  frowns  and  suppressed  murmurs 
of  the  judges  and  bystanders;  and,  as  the 
result  proved,  I  had  the  honor  of  depositing 
the  only  vote  in  favor  of  the  Union  which 
was  polled  in  that  precinct.  I  knew  of 
many  who  were  in  favor  of  the  Union,  but 
who  were  intimidated  by  threats,  and  by  the 
odium  attending  it,  from  voting  at  all." 

Such  was  the  case  at  thousands 
of  polls  throughout  the  South,  or 
wherever  the  Confederates  were  strong 
enough  to  act  as  their  hearts  prompt- 
ed. Mr.  Clingman's  boast,  in  the 
Senate,  that  i  free  debaters'  were 
'hanging  on  trees'  down  his  way, 
was  uttered,  it  should  be  noted,  in 
December,  1800.  And  thus  it  was 
that  several  Counties  in  Tennessee19 
gave  not  a  single  vote  against  Seces- 
sion, while  Shelby  (including  Mem- 
phis) gave  7,132  for  Secession  to  five 
against  it,  and  a  dozen  others  gave 
respectively  3,  7,  9,  11,  12,  13,  14, 
16,  17,  20,  23,  and  28  votes  for  the 
Union  to  many  thousands  for  Seces- 
sion. There  was  only  the  semblance 
of  an / election.  "If  you  vote  the 
Union  ticket,  you  must  prepare  to 
leave  the  State,"  said  Senator  Ma- 
son ;  and  the  more  reckless  and  less 
responsible  Secessionists  readily  trans- 
lated such  words  into  deeds.  Where 
Slavery  had  undivided  sway,  a  voter 
had  just  the  same  liberty  to  be  a 
Unionist  as  he  had  to  be  an  Aboli- 
tionist— that  is,  none  at  all. 

But  there  were  many  communities, 
and  even  entire  counties,  throughout 
the  South,  wherein  Slavery  had  but  a 
nominal  or  limited  existence;  as  in 
Texas,  thirty-four  counties — some  of 
them  having  each  a  considerable  free 
population — were  returned,  in  1S60, 
as  containing  each  less  than  a  hun- 
dred slaves.    Some  of  these  could  be, 

19  Franklin,  Humplireys,  Lincoln. 


THE   PEOPLE  FO 


R   T-HE.  UNION. 


•515 


and  were,  controlled  by  tlieir  mana- 
ging politicians,  holding  offices  and 
earning  perquisites  by  the  grace  of  the 
Slave  Power  enthroned  at  the  State 
capital ;  others  were  incorrigible,  and 
were  managed  in  this  way :  In  Gray- 
son county  (having  8,187  inhabitants, 
of  whom  1,291  were  slaves),  when  Se- 
cession was  proposed,  a  county  meet- 
ing was  held,  to  consider  the  project ; 
by  which,  after  discussion,  it  was  de- 
cided to  negative  the  movement,  and 
hold  no  election  for  delegates  to  the 
proposed  State  Convention.  This 
gave  the  Secessionists  the  opportu- 
nity they  wanted.  They  proceeded 
to  hold  an  election,  and  to  choose 
delegates,  who  helped  vote  the  State 
out  of  the  Union.  And  this  was  one 
case  like  many  others. 

Gen.  Edward  W.  Gantt,  who  had, 
in  August,  1860,  been  chosen  to  Con- 
gress as  an  independent  Democrat, 
from  the  Southern  district  of  Arkan- 
sas, and  who  was  an  early  and  ardent 
Secessionist,  testifies,  since  his  recla- 
mation to  Unionism,  that  the  poor 
farmers  and  other  industrious  non- 
slaveholders  of  his  region  were  never 
Secessionists — that,  where  he  had  al- 
ways been  able  to  induce  three-fourths 
of  them  to  vote  with  him  as  a  Demo- 
crat, he  could  not  persuade  half  of 
them  to  sustain  him  as  a  Secessionist 
— that  their  hearts  were  never  in  the 
cause ;  and  that  those  who  could  be 
persuaded  to  vote  for  it  did  so  reluc- 
tantly, and  as  though  it  went  against 
the  grain.  No  rational  doubt  can 
exist  that,  had  time  been  afforded  for 
consideration,  and  both  sides  been 
generally  heard,  a  free  and  fair  vote 
would  have  shown  an  immense  ma- 
jority, even  in  the .  Slave  States, 
against  Secession. 

For  the  Union  was  strong — im- 


mensely strong — in  the  traditions, 
the  affections,  the  instincts,  and  the 
aspirations,  of  the  great  majority  of 
the  American  People.    Its  preserva- 
tion was  inseparably  entwined  with 
their  glories,  their  interests,  and  their 
hopes.    In  the  North,  no  one  had, 
for  forty  years,  desired  its  dissolution, 
unless  on  account  of  Slavery  ;  at  the 
South,  the  case  was  essentially  the 
same.    No  calculations,  however  im- 
posing and  elaborate,  had  ever  con- 
vinced  any  hundred    persons,  on 
whichever  side  of  the  slave  line,  that 
Disunion  could  be  really  advantage- 
ous to  either  section.    No  line  could 
be  drawn  betwixt  'the  South'  and 
*  the  North'  which  would  not  leave 
one  or  the  other  exposed  to  attack — 
none  which  six  plain  citizens,  fairly 
chosen  from  either  section,  could  be 
induced  to  adopt   as  final.  Multi- 
tudes who  supported  Secession  did  so 
only  as  the  most  efficacious  means  of 
inducing  the  North  to  repudiate  the 
'  Black  Republicans'  and  agree  to  the 
Crittenden  or  some  kindred  Compro- 
mise— in  short,  to  bully  the  North 
into  giving  the  South  her  4  rights' — 
never  imagining,  at  the  outset,  that 
this  could  be  refused,  or  that  Disunion 
would  or  could  be  really,  conclusively 
effected.     Thousands  died  fighting 
under  the  flag  of  treason  whose  hearts 
yearned  toward  the  old  banner,  and 
whose  aspiration  for  an  6  ocean-bound 
republic' — one  which  should  be  felt 
and  respected  as  first  among  nations — 
could  not  be  quenched  even  in  their 
own  life-blood.    And,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  flag  rendered  illustrious  by 
the  triumphs  of  Gates  and  Greene  and 
Washington — of  Harrison,  Brown, 
Scott,   Macomb,   and    Jackson — of 
Truxtun,  Decatur,  Hull,  Perry,  Por- 
ter, and  McDonough — was  through- 


516 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


out  1  a  tower  of  strength'  to  the 
Unionists.  In  the  hours  darkened 
by  shameful  defeat  and  needless  dis- 
aster, when  the  Republic  seemed 
rocking  and  reeling  on  the  very  brink 
of  destruction — when  Europe  almost 
unanimously  pronounced  the  Union 
irretrievably  lost,  and  condemned  the 
infatuation  that  demanded  persist- 
ence in  an  utterly  hopeless  contest — 


the  heart  of  the  loyal  Millions  never 
faltered,  nor  was  their  faith  shaken 
that,  in  spite  of  present  reverses,  the 
flag  of  their  fathers  would  float  once 
more  over  Richmond  and  Charleston 
and  Montgomery,  over  Raleigh,  At- 
lanta, and  Houston,  the  symbol  of  Na- 
tional authority  and  power,  accepted, 
beloved,  and  rejoiced  in,  by  a  great, 
free,  happy  people. 


XXXII. 
WEST  YIRGINIA. 


The  Yirginia  Convention  of  1861, 
of  which  a  majority  assumed  to  vote 
their  State  out  of  the  Union,  as  we 
have  seen,  had  been  elected  not  only 
as  Unionists,  but  under  an  express 
stipulation  that  their  action  should 
be  valid  only  in  case  of  its  submission 
to  and  indorsement  by  a  vote  of  the 
People.  How  shamefully  that  con- 
dition was  evaded  and  circumvented, 
we  have  seen.  The  vote  to  secede, 
taken  on  the  17th  of  April,  and  al- 
ready anticipated  by  acts  of  hostility 
to  the  Union  under  the  authority  of 
the  State,  was,  so  far  as  possible,  kept 
secret  until  the  25th,  when  it  was 
proclaimed  by  Gov.  Letcher  that  the 
Convention  had,  on  the  preceding 
day,  adopted  the  provisional  Consti- 
tution of  the  Confederate  States,  and 
placed  the  entire  military  power  of 
the  State  under  the  control  of  Jeffer- 
son Davis,  by  a  '  convention,'  whereof 
the  material  provision  is  as  follows : 

"  1st.  Until  the  union  of  said  Common- 
wealth with  said  Confederacy  shall  be  per- 
fected, and  said  Commonwealth  shall  be- 
come a  member  of  said  Confederacy,  accord- 
ing to  the  Constitutions  of  both  Powers,  the 


whole  military  force  and  military  operations, 
offensive  and  defensive,  of  said  Common- 
wealth, in  the  impending  conflict  with  the 
United  States,  shall  be  under  the  chief  con- 
trol and  direction  of  the  President  of  said 
Confederate  States,  upon  the  same  principle, 
basis,  and  footing,  as  if  said  Commonwealth 
were  now,  and  during  the  interval,  a  mem- 
ber of  said  Confederacy." 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Union- 
ists of  Yirginia  were  liable,  that  day 
and  every  day  thereafter,  to  be  called 
out  as  militia,  and  ordered  to  assault 
Washington,  seize  Pittsburg,  or  in- 
vade any  portion  of  the  loyal  States, 
as  Davis  and  his  subordinates  might 
direct ;  and,  having  thus  involved 
themselves  in  the  guilt  and  peril  of 
flagrant  treason  against  the  Union, 
they  were  to  be  allowed,  a  month 
later,  to  vote  themselves  out  of  the 
Confederacy  and  back  into  the  Union 
again  !  The  stupendous  impudence 
of  this  mockery  of  submission  was  so 
palpable  as  almost  to  shield  it  from 
the  reproach  of  imposture  ;  and,  as  if 
to  brush  aside  the  last  fig-leaf  of  dis- 
guise, Letcher,  nine  days  thereafter,1 
issued  a  fresh  proclamation,  calling 
out  the  militia  of  the  State  to  repel 


2May  3d,  1861. 


WEST  VIRGINIA. 


518  THE  AMERICA 

apprehended  invasion  from  "  the  Gov- 
ernment at  Washington,"  and  desig- 
nating twenty  points  throughout  the 
State — five  or  six  of  them  westward 
of  the  mountains — at  which  the  mili- 
tia from  the  adjacent  counties  res- 
pectively were  required  to  assemble 
forthwith,  for  organization  and  ser- 
vice;  and,  only  three  days  later2 — 
still  seventeen  days  prior  to  that  on 
which  the  people  were  to  vote  for  or 
against  Secession — the  State  was  for- 
mally admitted  into  and  incorporated 
with  the  Confederacy,  and  Gen. 
Robert  E.  Lee 3  put  in  chief  command 
of  the  Confederate  forces  in  Virgi- 
nia— by  this  time,  largely  swelled  by 
arrivals  from  South  Carolina,  Geor- 
gia, Alabama,  and  other  Rebel  States. 

The  people  of  West  Virginia,  thus 
summoned,  in  the  name  of  their 
State,  to  fight  against  the  country  they 
loved  for  a  Rebellion  they  abhorred, 
saw  the  toils  closing  fast  around 
them,  and  realized  that  they  must 
awake  and  resist,  or  they  would  soon 
be  helpless  under  the  feet  of  their  be- 
trayers. Rebel  officers,  appointed 
from  Richmond,  were  busily  at  work, 
enlisting  and  mustering  their  young 
men  for  the  uses  of  treason,  under 
the  guise  of  obedience  to  lawful  and 
constitutional  authority.  On  the  4th, 
a  strong  and  spirited  Union  mass 
meeting  was  held  at  Kingwood,  Pres- 
ton county,  near  the  north  line  of 
the  State,  at  which  the  most  deter- 
mined hostility  to  Secession  was 
avowed,  and  the  separation  of  West- 
ern from  Old  Virginia  demanded. 
The  meeting  further  resolved  to  vote, 
on  the  appointed  day,  for  a  member 
of  Congress — not  that  of  the  Confede- 
racy, but  that  of  the  Union.  A  like 
meeting,  impelled  by  a  similar  spirit, 


N  CONFLICT. 

was  held  at  Wheeling  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  whereby  adherence  to  the 
Union  was  affirmed,  separation  from 
Eastern  Virginia  demanded,  and  a 
determination  evinced  to  render  no 
further  tribute,  whether  military  or 
pecuniary,  to  the  Rebel  rule  at  Rich- 
mond. Hon.  John  S.  Carlile  was 
especially  decided  and  zealous  in  ad- 
vocacy of  separation.  Another  great 
Union  meeting  was  held  at  Wheeling 
on  the  11th,  which  was  addressed  in 
the  same  spirit  by  Mr.  Carlile,  as 
also  by  Francis  H.  Pierpont.  The 
response  of  the  masses  was  unani- 
mous and  enthusiastic.  On  the  13th, 
a  Convention  of  delegates,  represent- 
ing thirty-five  counties  of  West  Vir- 
ginia, assembled  at  Wheeling,  to  re- 
iterate more  formally  the  general  de- 
mand that  Secession  be  repudiated, 
and  West  Virginia  severed  from  the 
Old  Dominion.  This  Convention 
adjourned  on  the  15th,  after  calling  a 
provisional  Convention,  to  assemble 
on  the  11th  of  June.  The  delegates 
were  to  be  chosen  on  the  26th  of 
May;  on  which  day,  about  forty 
Counties  held  regular  elections,  and 
chose  delegates  in  accordance  with 
the  call — usually,  by  a  heavy  vote. 

The  provisional  Convention  met 
on  the  designated  day.  Arthur  J. 
Boreman  was  chosen  permanent 
Chairman  ;  and  John  S.  Carlile,  on 
the  13th,  reported,  from  the  Commit- 
tee on  Business,  a  Declaration,  de- 
nouncing the  usurpation  by  which 
the  Convention  at  Richmond  had 
pretended  to  sever  Virginia  from  the 
Union,  repudiating  the  idea  of  al- 
legiance to  the  Southern  Confede- 
racy, and  vacating  the  offioes  of  all 
who  adhered  to  the  Rebellion.  In 
the  debate  which  followed,  Mr.  Car- 


2  May  Gth. 


3  Late  a  Colonel  of  Cavalr  j  in  the  U.  S.  regular  Army. 


ORGANIZATION    OP    WEST  VIRGINIA. 


519 


lile  opposed  an  immediate  division  of 
the  State ;  but  Mr.  Dorsey,  of  Mo- 
nongahela,  who  urged  it,  being  sup- 
ported by  Pierpont  and  others,  ob- 
tained, on  the  20th,  a  unanimous 
vote  in  favor  of  ultimate  separation — 
Yeas  56.  The  Convention  had  voted, 
two  days  earlier,  by  57  to  17,  that 
the  separation  of  Western  from 
Eastern  Virginia  was  one  of  its  para- 
mount objects.  In  the  afternoon  of 
that  day,  Francis  H.  Pierpont,  of 
Marion  county,  was  chosen  Governor, 
Daniel  Paisley,  of  Mason  county, 
Lieutenant-Governor,  with  five  mem- 
bers to  form  an  Executive  Council. 
These  elections  were  all  unanimous. 
The  Convention,  it  will  be  noted,  was 
a  Convention  of  Virginia,  wherein 
the  loyal  counties  and  loyal  people 
were  represented,  so  far  as  the  Re- 
bellion did  not  prevent ;  and  all  this 
action  was  taken,  not  in  behalf  of 
West  Virginia  as  such,  but  of  loyal 
Virginia.  The  Legislature,  which 
met  soon  after  at  Wheelino;,  was  a 
Legislature  of  Virginia,  elected  on 
the  regularly  appointed  day  of  elec- 
tion—  eastern  as  well  as  western 
counties  being  represented  therein ; 
and  this  Legislature,  as  well  -as  the 
Convention,  heartily  assented  to  the 
formation  of  the  new  State  of  West 
Virginia.  This  action  was  taken, 
throughout,  on  the  assumption  that 
the  loyal  people  of  a  State  constitute 
the  State ;  that  traitors  and  rebels, 
who  repudiate  all  respect  for  or  loy- 
alty to  the  Constitution  and  Govern- 
ment of  the  country,  have  no  right  to 
control  that  Government;  and  that 
those  people  of  any  State  who  heartily 
recognize  and  faithfully  discharge 
their  obligations  as  loyal  citizens,  have 
a  right  to  full  and  perfect  protection 


from  the  Republic  they  thus  cling  to 
and  uphold.  Congress,  after  due 
deliberation,  assented  to  and  ratified 
this  claim,  admitting  the  new  State 
of  West  Virginia 4  into  the  Union  as 
the  equal  of  her  elder  sisters ;  her 
people  being  henceforth  under  no 
other  obligation  to  the  authorities  of 
Old  Virginia  than  are  the  people  of 
that  State  to  the  authorities  of  her 
young  sister  across  the  Alleghanies. 

Of  course,  neither  the  Rebels  in 
arms,  nor  their  sympathizers  any- 
where, were  delighted  with  this  ap- 
plication of  the  principle  of  seces- 
sion. Gov.  Letcher,  in  a  Special  Mes- 
sage,5 treated  it  as  one  of  the  chief 
sources  of  his  general  unhappiness. 
He  says : 

"  President  Lincoln  and  his  Cabinet  have 
willfully  and  deliberately  proposed  to  violate 
every  provision  of  the  third  section  of  the 
fourth  article  of  the  Constitution,  which  each 
one  of  them  solemnly  swore  or  affirmed,  in 
the  presence  of  Almighty  God,  to  '  preserve, 
protect,  and  defend.'  That  section  is  in  these 
words : 

"  1  New  States  may  be  admitted  by  the  Con- 
gress into  this  Union  ;  but  no  new  State  shall  be 
formed  or  erected  within  the  jurisdiction  of  any 
other  State,  nor  any  State  formed  by  the  junction 
of  two  or  more  States  or  parts  of  States,  with- 
out the  consent  of  the  Legislatures  of  the  States 
concerned,  as  well  as  of  the  Congress.' " 

The  answer  to  this  is  ready  and 
simple :  President  Lincoln  and  his 
Cabinet  do  not  regard  John  Letcher 
as  Governor  of  that  State  of  Virginia 
which  is  a  member  of  our  Federal 
Union.  The  Governor  of  that  Vir- 
ginia is  Francis  H.  Pierpont ;  and  its 
Legislature  is  that  which,  elected  by 
loyal  Virginians,  assembled  at  Wheel- 
ing, and  gave  its  free,  hearty,  and  al- 
most unanimous  assent  to  the  division 
of  the  old  and  the  formation  of  the 
new  State.  All  this  must  be  as  plain 
to  Letcher  as  to  Lincoln.    Those  who 


4  First  named  Kanawha,  after  its  principal  river. 


5  January  Gth,  1862. 


520  THE  AMERICA 

hold  that  Letcher  and  his  fellow-con- 
spirators had  a  legal  right  to  precipi- 
tate their  State  into  treason,  so  as  to 
bind  her  loyal,  Union-loving  citizens 
to  follow  and  sustain  them  therein, 
will  echo  his  lamentations ;  but  those 
who  stand  by  their  country  and  her 
Government  take  a  different  view  of 
the  matter.6 

All  direct  communication  between 
Western  Virginia  and  Washington 
was,  and  remained,  interrupted  for 
some  weeks  after  the  primary 7  Rebel 
foray  on  Harper's  Ferry.  The  Reb- 
els remained  in  force  at  that  point, 
completely  controlling  travel  and 
transportation  on  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  road.  They  finally  obstructed 
that  road  altogether  by  destroying" 
several  bridges  farther  west ;  con- 
tinuing to  hold  and  to  strengthen 
their  position  at  Harper's  Ferry. 
Two  companies  of  Confederate  or 
State  militia  entered  the  village  of 
Clarksburg,  the  capital  of  Harrison 
county,  on  the  20th,  but  found  them- 
selves speedily  outnumbered  by  the 
Union  militia  of  that  place,  on  whose 
demand  they  surrendered  their  arms 
and  dispersed  without  a  contest. 

Although  some  thousands  of  West 
Virginians  had  volunteered  to  fight 
for  the  Union,  none  of  them  were  en- 
camped on  the  soil  of  their  State 
until  after  the  election  held 9  to  ratify 
or  reject  the  Ordinance  of  Secession. 
The  Government,  assured  that  West- 
ern Virginia  was  overwhelmingly  for 
the  Union,  doubtless  chose  not  to 
have  that  unanimity  attributed,  even 

6  A  Union  soldier  who,  having  been  taken 
prisoner  by  the  Rebels  and  paroled,  was,  in  the 
Summer  of  1862,  in. camp  on  Governor's  Island, 
New- York,  was  asked  by  a  regular  army  officer 
— "What  is  your  regiment?"  He  answered: 
"  The  6th  Virginia."    "  Virginia  ?"  rejoined  the 


N  CONFLICT. 

falsely,  to  the  presence  of  a  Union 
force.  The  Virginians  who  volun- 
teered were  mustered  in  and  organ- 
ized at  Camp  Carlile,  in  Ohio,  oppo- 
site Wheeling,  under  the  command 
of  Col.  Kelly,  himself  a  Virginian. 
George  B.  McClellan,  who  had  been 
appointed  a  Major-General  and  as- 
signed to  the  command  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  Ohio,  remained  at 
Cincinnati,  his  home.  Three  days 
after  the  election  aforesaid,  he  issued 
from  that  city  a  spirited  address  "  To 
the  Union  men  of  Western  Virginia," 
wherein  he  says : 

"The  General  Government  has  long 
enough  endured  the  machinations  of  a  few 
factious  Rebels  in  your  midst.  Armed  trai- 
tors have  in  vain  endeavored  to  deter  you 
from  expressing  your  loyalty  at  the  polls. 
Having  failed  in  this  infamous  attempt  to 
deprive  you  of  the  exercise  of  your  dearest 
rights,  they  now  seek  to  inaugurate  a  reign 
of  terror,  and  thus  force  you  to  yield  to  their 
schemes,  and  submit  to  the  yoke  of  the  trai- 
torous conspiracy,  dignified  by  the  name  of 
the  Southern  Confederacy.  They  are  des- 
troying the  property  of  citizens  of  your  State, 
and  ruining  your  magnificent  railways.  The 
General  Government  has  heretofore  care- 
fully abstained  from  sending  troops  across 
the  Ohio,  or  even  from  posting  them  along 
its  banks,  although  frequently  urged  by 
many  of  your  prominent  citizens  to  do  so. 

"  It  determined  to  await  the  result  of  the 
State  election,  desirous  that  no  one  might  be 
able  to  say  that  the  slightest  effort  had  been 
made  from  this  side  to  influence  the  free  ex- 
pression of  your  opinions,  although  the  many 
agencies  brought  to  bear  upon  you  by  the 
Rebels  were  well  known.  You  have  now 
shown,  under  the  most  adverse  circum- 
stances, that  the  great  mass  of  the  people  of 
Western  Virginia  are  true  and  loyal  to  that 
beneficent  Government  under  which  we  and 
our  fathers  have  lived  so  long." 

A  brief  and  stirring  address  to  his 
soldiers  was  issued  simultaneously 
with  the  above;  and,  both  being  read 

Westpointer ;  "  then  you  ought  to  be  fighting  on  the 
other  side.""  Of  course,  this  patriot  will  naturally 
be  found  among  those  who  consider  the  division 
of  Virginia  a  usurpation  and  an  outrage 

7  Night  of  April  1  Sth. 

6  May  16th.  9  May  23d. 


PORTE  RFIELD'S   APPEAL    TO    WEST  VIRGINIA. 


521 


to  those  in  Camp  Carlile  that  even- 
ing, the  1st  Virginia,  1,100  strong, 
Col.  Kelly,  crossed  to  Wheeling  early 
next  morning,  closely  followed  by  the 
16th  Ohio,  Col.  Irvine.  The  14th 
Ohio,  Col.  Steedman,  crossed  simul- 
taneously, and  quietly  occupied  Par- 
kersburg,  the  terminus  of  the  North- 
western branch  of  the  Baltimore  and 
Ohio  road.  A  rebel  force,  then  hold- 
ing Grafton,  which  connected  the 
branch  aforesaid  with  the  main  or 
Wheeling  division  of  the  railroad, 
had  meditated  a  descent  on  Wheel- 
ing ;  but,  finding  themselves  antici- 
pated and  outnumbered,  they  ob- 
structed and  destroyed  the  railroad 
west  of  them,  so  that  the  Unionists 
did  not  reach  Grafton  till  the  morn- 
ing of  the  30th.  On  the  31st,  both 
tracks  having  been  repaired,  a  force 
of  seven  or  eight  thousand  men  was 
collected  at  this  point,  under  the  im- 
mediate command  of  Gen.  Morris; 
the  Rebels  having  been  pushed  back, 
without  resistance,  to  Philippi,  the 
capital  of  Barbour  county,  some  fif- 
teen miles  southward,  and  entirely  off 
the  line  of  the  railroad.  From  this 
place,  Col.  G.  A.  Porterfield,  as  com- 
mander of  the  Virginia  Rebel  forces, 
issued  the  following  proclamation  : 

"  Fellow-Citizens  :  I  am  in  your  section 
of  Virginia,  in  obedience  to  the  legally  con- 
stituted authorities  thereof,  with  the  view 
of  protecting  this  section  of  the  State  from 
invasion  by  foreign  forces,  and  to  protect  the 
people  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  rights — 
civil,  religious,  and  political.  In  the  per- 
formance of  my  duties,  I  shall  endeavor  to 
exercise  every  charitable  forbearance,  as  I 
have  hitherto  done.  I  shall  not  inquire 
whether  any  citizens  of  Virginia  voted  for" 
or  against  the  Ordinance  of  Secession.  My 
only  inquiry  shall  and  will  be  as  to  who  are 
the  enemies  of  our  mother — the  Common- 
wealth of  Virginia.  My  duty  now  compels 
me  to  say  to  all,  that  the  citizens  of  the  Com- 


monwealth will  at  all  times  be  protected  by 
me  and  those  under  my  command.  Those 
who  array  themselves  against  the  State  will 
be  treated  as  her  enemies,  according  to  the 
laws  thereof. 

»  Virginians !  allow  me  to  appeal  to  you, 
in  the  name  of  our  common  mother,  to  stand 
by  the  voice  of  your  State,  and  especially  to 
repel  invasion  from  any  and  every  quarter. 
Those  who  reside  within  the  State,  who  in- 
vite invasion,  or  who  in  any  manner  assist, 
aid,  or  abet  invaders,  will  be  treated  as  ene- 
mies to  Virginia.  I  trust  that  no  Virginian, 
whether  native-born  or  adopted,  will  refuse 
to  defend  his  State  and  his  brothers  against 
invasion  and  injury.  Virginians!  be  true; 
and,  in  due  time,  your  common  mother  will 
come' to  your  relief. 

"  Already,  many  of  you  have  rallied  to  the 
support  of  the  honor  of  your  State,  and  the 
maintenance  of  your  liberties.  Will  you 
continue  to  be  freemen,  or  will  you  submit 
to  be  slaves?  Will  you  allow  the  people  of 
other  States  to  govern  you?  Have  you  for- 
gotten the  precepts  of  Madison  and  Jeffer- 
son ?10  Remember  that  i  the  price  of  liberty 
is  eternal  vigilance.'  Virginia  has  not  made 
war.  War  has  been  made  upon  her  and  her 
time-honored  principles.  Shall  she  be  vin- 
dicated in  her  efforts  to  maintain  the  liber- 
ties of  her  people?  or  shall  she  bow  her  head 
in  submission  to  tyranny  and  oppression  ? 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  true  friend  of  ra- 
tional liberty  cannot  hesitate.  Strike  for 
your  State!  Strike  for  your  liberties! 
Rally!  rally  at  once  in  defense  of  your 
mother!" 

Gen.  McClellan  having  ordered 
that  Philippi  be  captured  by  surprise, 
the  attempt  was  made  on  the  night 
of  June  2d.  Two  brigades  of  two 
regiments  each  approached  the  Rebel 
camp  by  different  roads.  They  were 
to  have  enveloped  the  town  by  4  A.  m. 
of  the  3d ;  but  the  roads  were  bad, 
the  night  intensely  dark  and  stormy, 
and  the  division  under  Col.  Kelly, 
which  had  to  make  the  longer  march 
— twenty-two  miles — did  not,  because 
it  could  not,  arrive  in  season.  The 
Rebels,  only  six  or  eight  hundred  in 
number,  could  make  no  successful 
stand  against  the  forces  already  in 
their  front,  and  were  evidently  pre-. 


10  The  omission  of  Washington's  name  here  is  most  appropriate  and  significant. 


522  THE  AMERICA 

paring  for  a  hurried  retreat.  The 
Unionists,  under  Cols.  Dumont  and 
Lander,  opened  with  artillery  and 
promptly  charged  with  infantry,  when 
the  dismayed  Rebels,  after  a  moment- 
ary resistance,  fled.  Col.  Kelly's 
division  came  in  at  this  instant,  and 
fell  upon  the  Rebels,  who  were  ut- 
terly demoralized  and  dispersed.  Col. 
Kelly  received  a  severe  wound  from 
a  pistol-shot  through  the  lungs,  and 
two  Unionists  were  killed.  The  Reb- 
els lost  sixteen  killed  and  ten 
prisoners,  with  all  their  provisions, 
munitions,  and  tents,  and  nearly  all 
their  arms.  Porterfield,  gathering 
up  such  portion  of  his  forces  as  he 
could  find,  retreated  hastily  to  Bev- 
erly, and  thence  to  Huttonsville ; 
where  the  Rebel  array  was  rapidly 
increased  by  conscription,  and  Gov. 
Wise  placed  in  command. 

Gen.  McClellan  arrived  at  Grafton 
on  the  23d,  and  at  once  issued  a 
proclamation  severely  condemning 
the  guerrilla  warfare  to  wdiich  the 
Rebels  were  addicted.  On  the  25th, 
he  issued  a  second  address  to  his  sol- 
diers, exhorting  them  to  forbear  pil- 
lage and  outrage  of  every  kind,  re- 
membering always  that  the  people 
were  their  friends.  His  forces  were 
rapidly  augmented,  till  they  amount- 
ed, by  the  4th  of  July,  to  over  30,000 
men  ;  while  the  Rebels  in  his  front 
could  hardly  muster  10,000  in  all. 
He  therefore  resolved  to  advance. 
The  Rebel  main  force,  several  thou- 
sand strong,  under  Gen.  Robert  S.  Gar- 
nett,  w^as  strongly  intrenched  on  Lau- 
rel Hill,  a  few  miles  north  of  Beverly, 
the  capital  of  Randolph  county,  hold- 

11  "  Rich  Mountain  is  a  gap  in  the  Laurel  Hill 
Range,  where  the  Staunton  and  Western  turn- 
pike crosses  it  between  Buckhannon  and  Beverly, 
and  about  four  or  five  miles  out  of  the  latter 
place.    It  is  about  as  far  from  Laurel  Hill  proper 


N  CONFLICT. 

ing  the  road  to  Philippi;  while  a 
smaller  detachment,  under  Col.  John 
Pegram,  was  intrenched  upon  the 
summit  and  at  either  base  of  Rich 
Mountain,11  %here  passes  the  turn- 
pike from  Beverly  westward  to  Buck- 
hannon— his  position  being  a  strong 
one,  three  or  four  miles  distant  from  the 
Rebel  main  body.  McClellan,  after 
reconnoitering,  and  determining  by 
scouts  the  position  of  the  enemy,  de- 
cided, first,  to  attack  and  crush  Pe- 
gram ;  and,  to  this  end,  sent  Col. 
Rosecrans  to  make  a  detour  of  eight 
miles  through  the  mountains,  and 
gain  the  turnpike  two  or  three  miles 
in  the  rear  of  Pegram.  This  w^as  suc- 
cessfully accomplished;  but  a  drag- 
oon, dispatched  by  McClellan  with 
orders  to  Rosecrans,  was  captured 
during  the  day,  and  the  plan  of 
attack  discovered.  The  Rebels  were 
found  intrenched  on  the  top  of  the 
mountain,  with  three  cannon.  Rose- 
crans, wTho  had  marched  since  day- 
light through  forests  and  thickets  of 
laurel,  under  a  cold,  pelting  rain,  by 
mountain  bridle-paths,  and,  in  part, 
through  trackless  woods,  had,  of 
course,  no  artillery.  He  approached 
the  Rebel  position  about  noon,  and 
was  immediately  opened  upon  by 
their  guns,  which  made  much  noise 
to  little  purpose.  The  vigorous  mus- 
ketry fire,  soon  opened  on  either  side, 
was  little  more  effective,  because 
of  the  rain,  the  inequalities  of  the 
ground,  and  the  density  of  the  low, 
bushy  forest.  But  the  Unionists  were 
largely  superior  in  numbers,  and, 
after  half  an  hour  of  this  random 
firing,  were  ordered  to  fix  and  charge 

(that  is,  where  the  Beverly  and  Fairmount  turn- 
pike crosses  it,  and  where  the  enemy  is  in- 
trenched) as  Beverly  is.  It  is  also  about  twenty- 
five  miles  from  Buckhannon." — Wheeling  Intelli- 
gencer. 


CAPTURE    OF    PEGR  AM. 


.—  DEATH    OF  GARNETT. 


523 


bayonets,  which  orders  were  promptly 
and  vigorously  obeyed.  The  Rebels 
at  once  took  to  flight,  leaving  their 
cannon,  wagons,  tents,  provisions,  and 
stores,  with  135  dead. 

Gen.  McClellan  remained  through- 
out the  day  inactive  in  front  of  Col.  Pe- 
gram's  position,  awaiting  advices  from 
Rosecrans,  that  failed  to  reach  him. 
Pegram,  better  advised  of  Rosecrans' 
operations,  and  justly  alarmed  for  his 
own  safety,  attempted  to  escape  dur- 
ing the  following  night,  but  found  it 
impossible,  and  was  compelled,  after 
a  day's  hiding  in  the  forest,  to  surren- 
der12 his  remaining  force — about  600 
men — at  discretion. 

Gen.  McClellan  pushed  on  to  Bev- 
erly, which  he  entered  early  next 
morning,  flanking  Gen.  Garnett's  po- 
sition at  Laurel  Hill,  and  compelling 
him  to  a  precipitate  flight  northward. 
Six  cannon,  two  hundred  tents,  sixty 
wagons,  and  over  one  hundred  pris- 
oners, were  the  trophies  of  this  suc- 
cess. The  Rebel  loss  in  killed  and 
wounded  was  about  150 ;  the  Union 
about  50.  Gen.  Garnett,  completely 
flanked,  thoroughly  worsted,  and  fear- 
fully outnumbered,  abandoned  his 
camp  at  Laurel  Hill  without  a  strug- 
gle, crossing  the  Laurel  Mountains 
eastward,  by  a  by-road,  into  the  nar- 
row valley  of  Cheat  river,  traversed 
by  one  wretched  road,  which  he  took 
care  to  make  worse  for  his  pursuers 
by  felling  trees  across  it  at  every  op- 
portunity. It  rained  incessantly. 
This  valley  is  seldom  more  than  a 
wooded  glen ;  whence  he  hoped  to 
escape  across  the  main  ridge  of  the 
Alleghanies  eastward  into  Hardy 
county.  Provisions  and  supplies  of 
every  kind  were  scarce  enough  with 
the  fugitives,  and,  for  the  most  part, 


with  their  pursuers  also.  Rain  fell 
incessantly,  swelling  the  unbridged 
rivulets  to  torrents.  Skirmishes  were 
frequent;  and  four  companies  of  a 
Georgia  regiment,  being  cut  off  from 
the  main  body,  were  taken  prisoners. 
At  length,  having  crossed  the  Cheat 
at  a  point  known  as  Carrick's  Ford, 
which  proffered  an  admirable  position 
for  defense,  Garnett  turned  to  fight ; 
and,  though  the  Union  forces  rapidly 
came  up  in  overpowering  numbers, 
and  opened  a  heavy  fire  both  of  mus- 
ketry and  artillery,  yet  the  strong 
and  sheltered  position  of  the  Confed^ 
erates  enabled  them  for  some  time  to 
hold  the  ford,  twice  repulsing  efforts 
to  cross  it.  Col.  Taliaferro,  com- 
manding the  Rebel  rearguard,  finally 
withdrew  by  order,  having  exhausted 
his  cartridges  and  lost  about  thirty 
men.  The  position  had  by  this  time 
been  flanked  by  Col.  Dumont,  with 
his  7th  Indiana,  who  had  fairly  gained 
the  crest  on  the  right,  when  he  was 
ordered  to  turn  it  on  the  left ;  and, 
marching  down  the  bluff  and  through 
the  middle  of  the  stream,  between 
the  two  armies  firing  over  their 
heads,  the  regiment,  forcing  its  way 
through  the  tangled  thicket  of  lau- 
rel, appeared  on  the  right  flank  of 
the  Rebels,  who  thereupon  fled.  The 
road  crosses  the  stream  again  a  quar- 
ter of  a  mile  below ;  and  here  a  des- 
perate attempt  was  made  by  Garnett 
to  rally  his  forces  for  another  strug- 
gle ;  but  in  vain.  They  received  and 
returned  one  volley,  when  they  start- 
ed to  run — they  being,  at  least,  3,000, 
and  the  Indianians,  directly  upon 
them,  barely  600;  but  there  were 
enough  more  not  far  behind.  Gen. 
Garnett  exerted  himself  desperately 
to  hold  his  men,  without  success ;  and, 


12  July  12th. 


524  THE  AMERICA 

while  so  doing,  was  shot  through  the 
body  by  Sergt.  Burlingame,  and  fell 
dead  without  a  groan.  A  slight,  boy- 
ish Georgian — probably  an  Aid — 
alone  stood  by  him  to  the  last,  and 
shared  his  fate.13  Gen.  McClellan, 
with  a  large  portion  of  his  force,  had 
not  united  in  this  chase,  but  had 
moved  southerly  from  Beverly,  sev- 
eral miles,  to  Huttonsville ;  whence, 
on  the  next  day,14  he  telegraphed  to 
Washington  that 

"  Gen.  Garnett  and  his  forces  have  been 
routed,  and  his  baggage  and  one  gun  taken. 
His  array  are  completely  demoralized.  Gen. 
Garnett  was  killed  while  attempting  to  rally 
his  forces  at  Carricksford,  near  St.  George. 

"  We  have  completely  annihilated  the  en- 
emy in  Western  Virginia. 

"  Our  loss  is  about  thirteen  killed,  and  not 
more  than  forty  wounded  ;  while  the  ene- 
my's loss  is  not  far  from  two  hundred  killed  ; 
and  the  number  of  prisoners  we  have  taken 
will  amount  to  at  least  one  thousand.  We 
have  captured  seven  of  the  enemy's  guns  in 
all. 

"A  portion  of  Garnett's  forces  retreated; 
but  I  look  for  their  capture  by  Gen.  Hill, 
who  is  in  hot  pursuit." 

This  expectation  was  not  realized. 
The  pursuit  was  only  continued  two 
miles  beyond  the  ford ;  when  our 
weary  soldiers  halted,  and  the  resi- 
due of  the  Rebels,  under  Col.  Ram- 
sey, turning  sharply  to  the  right, 
made  their  way  across  the  mountains, 
and  joined  Gen.  Jackson  at  Monterey. 

A  strong  Union  force,  under  Gen. 
Cox,  made  an  advance  from  Guyan- 
dotte  simultaneously  with  Gen.  Mc- 
Clellan's  on  Beverly,  capturing  Bar- 
boursville  after  a  slight  skirmish,  and 

13  TJie  Cincinnati  Gazette's  correspondent,  '  Ag- 
ate,' in  describing  the  battle,  says: 

"Among  the  enemy's  wounded  was  a  young 
Massachusetts  boy,  who  had  received  a  shot  in 
the  leg.  He  had  been  visiting  the  South,  and 
had  been  impressed  into  the  Rebel  service.  As 
soon  as  the  battle  began,  he  broke  from  the 
E.ebei  ranks,  and  attempted  to  run  down  the 
hill  and  cross  over  to  our  side.    His  own  lieu- 


N  CONFLICT. 

moving  eastward  to  the  Kanawha, 
and  up  that  river.  At  Scarytown, 
some  miles  below  Charleston,  a  de- 
tachment of  1,500  Ohio  troops,  un- 
der Col.  Lowe,  was  resisted1'  by  a 
smaller  Rebel  force,  well  posted,  un- 
der Capt.  Patton,  and  repulsed,  with 
a  loss  of  57  men.  Five  officers,  in- 
cluding two  Colonels,  who  went  heed- 
lessly forward,  without  their  com- 
mands, to  observe  the  fight,  rode 
into  the  Rebel  lines,  and  were  cap- 
tured. The  Rebels  abandoned  the 
place  that  night,  leaving  their  leader 
dangerously  wounded  to  become  a 
prisoner. 

Gen.  Cox  pushed  steadily  forward, 
reaching  Charleston,  the  capital  of 
Kanawha  county,  on  the  25th.  Gov. 
Wise,  who  commanded  the  Rebels  in 
this  quarter,  had  expected  here  to 
make  a  stand ;  but,  discouraged  by 
the  tidings  which  had  reached  him, 
some  days  before,  of  Garnett's  disas- 
ters, continued  his  flight  up  the  rivei\ 
Gen.  Cox  pursued,  reaching,  on  the 
29th,  Gauley  bridge,  which  Wise  had 
burned  to  impede  pursuit.  The  peo- 
ple of  that  valley,  and,  indeed,  of 
nearly  all  Western  Virginia — being 
Unionists — complained  that  the  Reb- 
els mercilessly  plundered  them  of 
every  thing  eatable ;  which  was 
doubtless  true  to  a  great  extent,  and, 
for  the  most  part,  unavoidable.  In 
the  race  up  the  Kanawha  valley, 
Wise  succeeded,  to  the  last,  in  keep- 
ing ahead,  which  was  the  only  mili- 
tary success  he  ever  achieved.  He 

tenant  saw  him  in  the  act,  and  shot  him  with  a 
revolver.  Listen  to  such  a  tale  as  that  I  did,  by 
the  side  of  the  sad  young  sufferer,  and  tell  me 
if  your  blood  does  not  boil  hotter  than  ever  be- 
fore, as  you  think,  not  of  the  poor  deluded  fol- 
lowers, but  of  the  leaders,  who,  for  personal  am- 
bition and  personal  spite,  began  this  infernal 
rebellion." 

14  July  14th.  15  July  17  th 


THE   AFFAIR  OF 


CARNIFEX  FERRY. 


525 


retreated  to  Lewisburg,  the  capital 
of  Greenbrier,  one  of  the  few  coun- 
ties west  of  the  main  ridge  of  the 
Alleghanies  which,  having  a  conside- 
rable number  of  slaves,  and  having 
been  settled  entirely  from  Old  Vir- 
ginia, has  evinced  a  preponderating 
devotion  to  the  Rebel  Cause. 

Here  he  was  reenforced,  and  out- 
ranked, about  August  1st,  by  Gen. 
John  B.  Floyd,  who,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  inspiring  news  from  Bull 
Run,  and  the  depletion  of  the  Fede- 
ral forces  by  the  mustering  out  of 
service  of  the  three  months'  men,  was 
soon  able  to  assume  the  offensive. 
Keeping  well  to  the  right  of  New 
River — the  main  affluent  which  unites 
near  Gauley  bridge  with  the  Gauley 
to  form  the  Kanawha — he  surprised 
the  7th  Ohio,  Col.  Tyler,  while  at 
breakfast  at  Cross  Lanes,  near  Sum- 
mersville,16  and  routed  it  with  a  loss 
of  some  200  men.  Moving  thence 
southerly  to  Carnifex  Ferry,  he  was 
endeavoring  to  gain  the  rear  of  Gen. 
Cox,  who  was  still  south  of  him, 
when  he  was  himself  attacked  by 
Gen.  Rosecrans,  who,  at  the  head  of 
nearly  10,000  men,  came  rapidly 
down  upon  him  from  Clarksburg, 
nearly  a  hundred  miles  northward. 
Most  of  the  Union  troops  had  marched 
seventeen  miles  that  day,  when,  at 
3  o'clock  p.  m.  of  the  10th,  they  drew 
up  in  front  of  Floyd's  strong  and 
well-fortified  position  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  Gauley,  just  below  the 
mouth  of  Meadow  river.  Rosecrans 
ordered  a  reconnoissance  in  force  by 
Benham,  which  was  somewhat  too  gal- 

18  The  capital  of  Nicholas  county. 

17  Pollard  says  of  this  conflict : 

u  The  successful  resistance  of  this  attack  of 
the  enemy,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Carnifex 
Ferry,  was  one  of  the  mo?t  remarkable  incidents 
of  the  campaign  in  Western  Virginia.    The  force 


lantly  executed,  resulting  in  a  short, 
but  severe  action,  wherein  the  advan- 
tage of  position  was  so  much  on  the 
side  of  the  Confederates  that  their 
loss  must  have  been  considerably  less 
than  ours,  which  was  about  two  hun- 
dred, including  Col.  Lowe,  of  the 
12th  Ohio,  killed,  and  Col.  Lytle,  of 
the  10th,  severely  wounded,  as  was 
Lieut'.-Col.  White,  of  the  12th.  Col. 
McCook's  Ohio  brigade  (Germans)  at 
one  time  received  an  order  to  storm 
the  Rebel  intrenchments,  and  wel- 
comed it  with  a  wild  delight,  which 
showTed  how  gladly  and  thoroughly  it 
.  would  have  been  obeyed  ;  but  it  was 
an  order  which  Rosecrans  had  not 
given,  and  which,  after  a  careful  ob- 
servation of  the  works,  he  counter- 
manded. Instead  of  assaulting,  he 
directed  a  more  thorough  reconnois- 
sance to  be  made,  and  the  troops  to 
be  so  posted  as  to  be  ready  for  de- 
cisive work  early  in  the  morning. 
But,  when  daylight  dawned,  the 
enemy  were  missing.  Floyd,  disap- 
pointed in  the  expected  support  of 
Wise,  and  largely  outnumbered,  had 
wisely  withdrawn  his  forces  under 
cover  of  the  night,  abandoning  a  por- 
tion of  his  equipage,  much  baggage, 
and  a  few  small  arms,  but  no  cannon.17 
He  rapidly  retreated  some  thirfy 
miles  to  Big  Sewell  Mountain,  and 
thence  to  Meadow  Bluff',  whither  he 
wras  not  closely  followed. 

Wise  strengthened  the  position  on 
Big  Sewell,  named  it  Camp  Defiance, 
and  there  remained. 

Gen.  Lee,  arriving  from  the  North 
with  a  considerable  Rebel  force,  took 

of  Gen.  Floyd's  command  was  1,740  men; 
and  from  3  o'clock  p.  m.  until  night-fall  it  sus- 
tained, with  unwavering  determination  and  the 
most  brilliant  success,  an  assault  from  an  enemy 
between  eight  and  nine  thousand  strong,  mado 
with  small-arras,  grape,  and  round-shot,  from 
howitzers  and  rilled  cannon." 


526 


THE  AMERIC 


AN"  CONFLICT. 


command  of  both  Floyd's  and  "Wise's 
troops,  swelling  his  army  to  20,000 
men.  Roseerans,  after  remaining  sev- 
eral days  in  his  front  at  Big  Sewell,  re- 
treated thirty  miles  to  the  Gauley, 
and  was  not  pursued  ;  Gen.  Lee  being 
soon  after  recalled  to  take  a  command 
on  the  coast,  and  Gov.  "Wise  ordered 
to  report  at  Richmond. 

Gen.  Lee,  before  leaving  the  North, 
had  made  a  strong  reconnoissance 
in  force  rather  than  a  serious  attack, 
on  the  position  held  by  Gen.  Reynolds 
on  Cheat  Mountain,  in  Randolph 
county,  not  far  from  the  arena  of 
Garnett's  and  of  Pegram's  disasters. 
There  was  skirmishing  on  the  12th, 
13th,  and  14th  of  September,  during 
which  Col.  John  A.  Washington,  one 
of  Gen.  Lee's  aids,  was  killed,  with 
nearly  one  hundred  other  Rebels. 
The  L  nion  loss  was  nearly  equal  to 
this,  mainly  in  prisoners.  Reynolds's 
force  was  about  half  that  of  his  assail- 
ants, but  so  strongly  posted  that  Lee 
found  it  impossible  to  dislodge  him, 
and  retired  to  his  camp  at  Green- 
brier. Here  Reynolds,  whose  forces 
were  equal,  if  not  superior,  to  those 
in  his  front,  after  Lee's  departure  for 
the  South,  paid  a  return  visit  to  the 
Rebels,  now  commanded  by  Gen.  H. 
R.  Jackson,  of  Georgia,  on  the  3d 
of  October.  Reynolds,  in  turn,  found 
his  adversary's  position  too  strong  to 
be  carried  by  assault,  and  retreated 
unpursued,  after  a  desultory  contest 
of  several  hours.  1 

On  the  10th  of  November,  at  8 
p.  m.,  Col.  Jenkins,  with  his  regiment 
of  Rebel  cavalry,  which  had  been  en- 
gaged for  some  time  in  guerrilla  war- 
fare, dashed  into  the  village  of  Guy- 
andotte,  on  the  Ohio  river,  near  the 
Kentucky  line,  surprising  the  LTnion 


forces  stationed  there  and  taking  over 
a  hundred  prisoners.  All  who  re- 
sisted were  killed  by  the  guerrillas, 
who  left  hastily  next  morning,  with 
all  the  plunder  they  could  carry. 
Col  Zeigler,  of  the  5th  [loyal]  Vir- 
ginia, who  arrived  early  next  morn- 
ing, ordered  the  houses  of  the  Seces- 
sionists to  be  burned,  on  the  assump-. 
tion  that  they  had  instigated  the 
Rebel  raid,  and  furnished  the  infor- 
mation which  rendered  it  safe  and 
successful ;  and,  the  leading  citizens 
being  mostly  rebels,  the  village  was 
mainly  consumed.  This  destruction 
was  generally  condemned  as  barbar- 
ous, though  the  charge  was  probably 
true,  and  would  have  justified  any 
penalty  that  might  have  been  inflicted 
on  those  only  who  supplied  the  in- 
formation. 

Roseerans  having  posted  himself 
at  Gauley  Mount,  on  New  River, 
three  miles  above  its  junction  with 
the  Gauley,  Floyd  and  Wise,  after 
Lee's  departure,  took  position  on  the 
opposite  (south)  side  of  New  River, 
and  amused  themselves  by  shelling 
the  Union  teamsters  engaged  in  sup- 
plying our  army.  Here  Roseerans 
attempted  to  flank  and  surprise  them, 
but  was  first  defeated  by  a  great  flood 
in  the  river,  rendering  it  impassable  ; 
and  next  by  the  failure  of  Gen.  Ben- 
ham  to  gain  Floyd's  rear  and  ob- 
struct his  retreat,  as  he  had  been  or- 
dered to  do.  The  attack  in  front  was 
duly  made,18  but  Floyd  retreated  un- 
molested by  Benham,  and  but  faintly 
pursued.  On  the  14th,  his  rear-guard 
of  cavalry  was  attacked  and  driven 
by  Benham;  its  Colonel,  St.  George 
Croghan,  being  killed.  No  further 
pursuit  was  attempted.  Floyd  re- 
treated to   Peterstown,  more  than 


18  November  1 2th. 


ALLEGHANY  SUMMIT-HUXTERSVILLE. 


527 


fifty  miles  southward.  And  thus 
died  out  the  campaign  in  the  south- 
ern part  of  West  Virginia. 

In  the  north-east,  Gen.  Kelly,  who 
held  and  guarded  the  Alleghany  sec- 
tion of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road, starting  from  New  Creek  on 
the  night  of  October  25th,  advanced 
rapidly  to  Romney,  the  capital  of 
Hampshire  county,  driving  out  a 
Rebel  battalion  and  capturing  two 
cannon,  sixty  prisoners,  several  hun- 
dred stand  of  arms,  with  all  the  camp 
equipage,  provisions,  and  munitions. 
By  this  spirited  dash,  West  Virginia 
was  nearly  cleared  of  armed  Rebels. 

Gen.  R.  II.  Milroy,  who  had  suc- 
ceeded Gen.  Reynolds  in  command 
at  Cheat  Mountain,  attempted,  soon 
afterward,19  a  similar  dash  on  the 
Rebels  in  his  front,  strongly  posted 
at  Alleghany  Summit,  twenty-two 
miles  distant,  on  the  turnpike  to 
Staunton.  To  this  end,  he  moved 
forward  with  3,200  men,  nearly  half 
of  which  were  directed  to  make  a 
detour  by  the  old  Greenbrier  road,  to 
assault  the  enemy's  left.  The  com- 
bination failed.  The  flank  move- 
ment, under  Col.  Moody,  of  the  9th 
Indiana,  was  not  effected  in  time. 
The  Rebel  forces,  consisting  of  four 
regiments,  under  Col.  Edward  John- 


son, were  neither  surprised  nor  dis- 
mayed ;  and  the  attack  in  front,  led 
by  Col.  James  A.  Jones,  of  the  25th 
Ohio,  though  gallantly  made,  did  not 
succeed.  The  Rebels,  finding  them- 
selves superior  in  numbers  as  well  as 
position,  attacked  in  turn,  and  were 
likewise  repulsed,  as  also  in  an  at- 
tempted flank  movement.  Still,  Mil- 
roy,'having  lost  150  men,  with  his 
ranks  still  further  depleted  by  the 
skulking  of  his  raw  troops,  had  begun 
to  retreat  before  Col.  Moody,  at  8 
a.  m.,  commenced  his  flank  attack, 
which  was  of  course  a  failure.  Mil- 
roy retreated  unpursued  to  his  old 
camp.  But,  not  discouraged,  he  dis- 
patched Major  Webster,  of  the  25th 
Ohio,  with  800  men,  on  the  last  day 
of  the  year,  to  break  up  a  Rebel  post 
'at  Huntersville,  fifty  miles  south,  on 
the  Greenbrier.  The  weather  was 
cold ;  the  ground  covered  with  snow ; 
yet  the  march  was  made  in  three 
days,  the  Rebel  force  driven  out.  and 
six  buildings,  filled  with  provisions 
and  forage,  destroyed  by  fire ;  the 
expedition  returning  without  loss  or 
accident.  Here  closed  the  campaign 
of  1861  in  Western  Virginia,  with 
scarcely  a  Rebel  uniform  or  picket 
to  be  seen,  on  that  side  of  the  Alle- 
ghany Mountains.20 


"December  12th. 

20  Though  the  crest  of  the  main  ridge  of  the 
Alleghanies  is  the  natural  and  proper  line  of  de- 
marcation between  '  the  Old  Dominion'  and  new, 
or  West  Virginia,  and  pretty  accurately  discrim- 
inates the  Counties  w  herein  Slavery  and  Seces- 
sion did,  from  those  -wherein  they  did  not,  at  any 
time,  predominate,  yet  three  or  four  Counties — 
Monroe,  Greenbrier,  <fcc. — which  geographically 
pertain  to  West  Virginia,  have,  either  voluntarily 
or  under  duress,  adhered  to  Old  Virginia  and 
the  Rebellion. 

Note — The  originally  proposed  State  of  Ka- 
nawha included  within  her  boundaries  only  the 
Counties  of  Virginia  lying  north  and  west  of,  but 


not  including.  McDowell,  Mercer,  Monroe,  Green- 
brier, and  Pocahontas — thirty -nine  in  all,  with  a 
total  population  in  1S60  of  280,691,  whereof 
6,894  were  slaves.  The  Constitution  of  West 
Virginia  expressly  included  the  rive  counties 
above  named,  making  the  total  population 
315,969,  of  whom  10,147  were  slaves.  It  fur- 
ther provided  that  the  counties  of  Pendleton, 
Hardy,  Hampshire,  Frederick,  Berkeley.  Jeffer- 
son, and  Morgan,  might  also  be  embraced  within 
the  new  State,  provided  their  people  should,  by 
vote,  express  their  desire  to  be — which  they, 
excepting  those  of  Frederick,  in  due  time,  did — 
raisiDg  the  population,  in  1860,  of  the  new  State 
to  376,742,  and  entitling  it  to  three  representa- 
tives in  Congress. 


528  '  THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


XXXIII. 

EAST  VIRGINIA— BULL  RUN. 


If  the  North  had  been,  or  at  least 
had  seemed,  obstinately  apathetic,  be- 
cause skeptical  as  to  the  probability 
or  the  imminence  of  Civil  War,  it 
was  fully  and  suddenly  undeceived 
by  the  developments  that  swiftly  fol- 
lowed the  bombardment  of  Fort 
Sumter,  but  especially  by  the  occur- 
rences in  Baltimore  and  the  attitude 
of  Maryland.  For  a  few  weeks,  all 
petty  differences  seemed  effaced,  all 
partisan  jealousies  and  hatreds  for- 
gotten. A  few  6  conservative'  presses 
sought  to  stem  the  rushing  tide;  a 
few  old  Democratic  leaders  struggled 
to  keep  the  party  lines  distinct  and 
rigid ;  but  to  little  purpose.  Twelve 
States,  whose  Legislatures  happened 
to  be  sitting  in  some  part  of  April 
or  May,  1861,  tendered  pecuniary 
aid  to  the  Government,  amounting, 
in  the  aggregate,  to  nearly  Nineteen 
Millions  of  Dollars ;  while  some  Five 
Millions  were  as  promptly  contribu- 
ted, in  the  cities  and  chief  towns  of 
the  North,  to  clothe  and  equip  volun- 
teers. Railroads  and  steamboats 
were  mainly  employed  in  transporting 
men  and  munitions  to  the  line  of  the 
Potomac  or  that  of  the  Ohio.  Never 
before  had  any  Twenty  Millions  of 
people  evinced  such  absorbing  and 
general  enthusiasm.  But  for  the  de- 
plorable lack  of  arms,  Half  a  Million 
volunteers  might  have  been  sent  into 
camp  before  the  ensuing  Fourth  of 
July. 

President  Lincoln  issued,  on  the 


27th  of  April,  a  proclamation  an- 
nouncing the  blockade  of  the  coast 
of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina; 
due  evidence  having  been  afforded 
that  Virginia  had  formally  and  North 
Carolina  practically  adhered  to  the 
Rebellion.  Some  weeks  were  re- 
quired to  collect  and  fit  out  the  ves- 
sels necessary  for  the  blockade  of 
even  the  chief  ports  of  the  Rebel 
States  ;  but  the  month  of  May 1  saw 
this  undertaking  so  far  completed  as 
to  make  an  entrance  into  either  of 
those  ports  dangerous  to  the  block- 
ade-runner. On  the  3d,  the  Presi- 
dent made  a  further  call  for  troops — 
this  time  requiring  42,000  additional 
volunteers  for  three  years;  beside 
adding  ten  regiments  to  the  regular 
army  —  about  doubling  its  nominal 
strength.  A  large  force  of  volun- 
teers, mainly  Pennsylvanians,  was 
organized  at  Chambersburg,  Pa., 
under  the  command  of  Major-Gen. 
Robert  Patterson,  of  the  Pennsyl- 
vania militia ;  while  Gen.  Butler, 
having  completed  the  taming  of 
Baltimore,  by  planting  batteries  on 
the  highest  points  and  sending  a  few 
of  her  more  audacious  traitors  to 
Fort  McHenry,  was  made 2  a  Major- 
General,  and  placed  in  command  of  a 
Department  composed  of  tide- wa- 
ter Virginia  with  North  Carolina. 
George  B.  McClellan,  John  C.  Fre- 
mont (then  in  Europe),  and  John  A. 
Dix  had  already 3  been  appointed 
Major-Generals  in  the  regular  army 


1  Richmond  and  Norfolk,  the  8th ;  Charleston, 
the  11th;  New  Orleans  and  Mobile,  the  27th; 


Savannah,  the  28th.  ■  May  16th. 

3  May  1st  and  speedily  thereafter. 


GEN.    BUTLER  AT 


FORTRESS  MONROE. 


529 


— Gen.  Dix  commanding  in  New- 
York.  Lieut.  Gen.  "Winfield  Scott,  at 
"Washington,  was  commander-in-chief, 
as  well  as  in  immediate  charge  of  the 
large  force  rapidly  pouring  into  the 
capital  and  its  environs — in  part,  by 
steamboat  up  the  Potomac ;  in  part, 
by  way  of  the  Railroad  through  Balti- 
more. There  were  cities  that  hailed 
the  Union  soldiers  with  greater  en- 
thusiasm, but  none  that  treated  them 
with  more  civility  and  deference, 
than  Baltimore,  from  and  after  But- 
ler's arrival  in  that  city ;  though  he 
somewhat  embarrassed  the  trade  of 
that  hitherto  thriving  mart  by  search- 
ing for  and  seizing  large  quantities 
of  arms,  secreted  in  her  cellars  or 
snugly  stowed  away  in  the  holds  of 
her  vessels,  awaiting  transportation 
to  lower  Virginia.  One  of  his  last 
and  most  important  seizures  was  that 
of  the  person  of  George  P.  Kane, 
Marshal  of  Police ;  who,  making  all 
possible  opposition  to  captures  of 
arms  designed  for  the  Rebels,  was 
taken  also  to  the  Fort,  that  he  might 
see  that  they  were  in  safe  hands. 
Unluckily,  he,  like  other  traitors,  was 
not  retained  there  so  long  as  he 
should  have  been ;  but  this  was  by 
no  fault  of  Gen.  Butler,  who  was 
ordered  to  take  command  at  Fortress 
Monroe,  whither  he  repaired  on  the 
22d,  and  where  he  soon  found  him- 
self at  the  head  of  some  15,000  raw 
but  gallant  soldiers. 

It  had  been  decided  that  no  offen- 
sive movement  should  be  made  prior 
to  the  24th  (the  day  after  the  farce 
of  voting  to  ratify  the  Ordinance  of 
Secession) — the  Government  having 
apparently  resolved  that  no  Union 
soldier  should,  on  that  day,  tread  the 

4  This  village  was  burnt,  August  9th,  by  Ma- 
gruder's  order,  that  it  might  no  longer  afford  shel- 

34 


soil  of  Virginia,  save  within  the  nar- 
row limits,  or  immediately  under  the 
frowning  walls,  of  Fortress  Monroe. 
So  Gen.  Butler  soon  found  some  ten 
or  twelve  thousand  Confederates  in 
his  front,  under  command  of  Gens. 
Huger  and  Magruder,  (both  recently 
of  the  regular  army,)  with  earth- 
works and  batteries  facing  him  at 
every  commanding  point,  well  mounts 
ed  with  powerful  guns  from  the 
spoils  of  the  Norfolk  Navy  Yard. 
The  white  population  in  that  slave- 
holding  neighborhood  was  so  gene- 
rally disloyal  that,  of  a  thousand  in- 
habitants of  the  little  village  of 
Hampton,  lying  just  under  the  guns 
of  the  fort,  but  a  hundred  remained 
on  the  1st  of  June.4 

Gen.  Butler  found  his  position  so 
cramped  by  the  proximity  and  au- 
dacity of  the  Rebels,  whose  cavalry 
and  scouts  almost  looked  into  the 
mouths  of  his  guns,  that  he  resolved 
on  enlarging  the  circle  of  his  Vir- 
ginia acquaintance  ;  to  which  end  he 
seized  and  fortified  the  point  known 
as  Newport  News,  at  the  mouth  of 
James  river;  and,  on  the  9th  of 
June,  ordered  a  reconnoissance  in 
force  for  some  eight  or  ten  miles 
northward,  with  intent  to  surround, 
surprise,  and  capture,  the  Rebel  po- 
sition nearest  him,  known  as  Little 
Bethel.  To  this  end,  Col.  Henry  B. 
Duryea's  Zouaves  were  dispatched 
from  Hampton  at  1  o'clock  next 
morning,  followed  by  Col.  F.  Towns- 
end's  3d  New- York,  an  hour  later, 
with  directions  to  gain  the  rear  of 
Little  Bethel,  so  as  to  cut  off  the  re- 
treat of  the  Rebels ;  while  Col. 
Phelps,  with  a  Yermont  battalion, 
supported  by  Bendix's  New- York 

ter  to  our  troops.  An  attempt  vras  at  first  mado 
to  attribute  this  devastation  to  the  Unionists. 


530 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


regiment,  was  to  approach  that  post 
in  front,  ready  to  attack  at  daybreak. 
The  whole  expedition  was  under  the 
command  of  Gen.  E.  W.  Pierce,  a 
militia  Brigadier  from  Massachusetts. 

Gen.  Butler  had  given  precise  or- 
ders and  directed  the  use  of  ample 


precautions  to  avoid  collision  in  the 
darkness  between  the  several  portions 
of  our  own  forces.  Yet,  just  before 
daybreak,  at  a  junction  of  roads, 
some  two  miles  from  Little  Bethel, 
the  regiments  of  Col.  Bendix  and 
Col.  Townsend  neared  each  other: 


TEN  MILES  AROCND  FORTRESS  MONROE. 


and  the  former,  mistaking  the  latter 
for  enemies,  opened  fire  with  both 
artillery  and  musketry,  whereby  two 
of  Col.  Townsend's  men  were  killed, 
and  eight  or  ten  seriously,  besides  a 
large  number  slightly  wounded.  The 
mistake  was  soon  discovered;  but  not 
until  the  whole  expedition  had  been 


thrown  into  confusion — those  in  ad- 
vance, with  reason,  presuming  that 
the  Rebels  were  assaulting  their  rear, 
and  preparing  for  defense  on  this  pre- 
sumption. The  Rebels  at  Little  Bethel 
were,  of  course,  alarmed,  and  made 
good  their  retreat.  Gen.  Pierce  sent 
back  to  Gen.  Butler  for  reenforce- 


BIG-  BETHEL— HARPER'S  PERRY. 


531 


ments ;  and  another  regiment  was 
ordered  up  to  Ms  support.  Col.  Dur- 
yea  had  already  surprised  and  cap- 
tured a  picket-guard  of  the  enemy, 
consisting  of  thirty  persons,  who  were 
sent  prisoners  to  the  fort. 

Gen.  Pierce,  finding  only  a  hastily 
deserted  camp  at  Little  Bethel,  pushed 
on  to  Big  Bethel,  several  miles  fur- 
ther. Here  he  found  a  substantial, 
though  hastily  constructed,  breast- 
work, protected  from  assault  by  a 
deep  creek,  with  1,800  Confederates, 
under  Col.  J.  B.  Magruder,  behind 
it.  Gen.  Pierce,  who,  probably,  had 
never  before  seen  a  shot  fired  in  ac- 
tual war,  ordered  an  attack ;  planting 
his  few  small  guns  in  the  open  field, 
half  a  mile  from  the  well-sheltered 
Rebel  batteries  in  his  front.  Our 
balls,  of  course,  buried  themselves 
harmlessly  in  the  Rebel  earthworks  ;5 
while  our  men,  though  partially 
screened  by  woods  and  houses,  were 
exposed  to  a  deadly  fire  from  the 
Rebels.  For  four  hours,  the  action 
thus  continned — necessarily  with  con- 
siderable loss  on  our  side  and  very 
little  on  the  other.  Finally,  a  more 
determined  assault  was  made  by  a 
part  of  our  infantry,  led  by  Major 
Theodore  Winthrop,  Aid  to  Gen. 
Butler,  who  was  shot  dead  while 
standing  on  a  log,  cheering  his  men 
to  the  charge.  His  courage  and  con- 
duct throughout  the  fight  rendered 
him  conspicuous  to,  and  excited  the 
admiration  of,  his  enemies.  Lieut. 
John  T.  Greble,  of  the  2d  regular  ar- 
tillery, was  likewise  killed  instantly 
by  a  ball  through  the  head,  while 
serving  his  gun  in  the  face  of  the  foe. 

•  Pollard  says :  "  The  only  injury  received 
from  their  artillery  was  the  losa  of  a  mule." 

6  Col.  (since,  Major-Gen.)  D.  H.  Hill,  who  com- 
manded the  1st  North  Carolina  in  this  affair,  in 


Our  total  loss,  in  the  advance  and  the 
attack,  was  hardly  less  than  100  men  ; 
while  the  Rebels  reported  theirs  at 
1  killed  and  7  wounded.  Gen.  Pierce, 
whose  inexperience  and  incapacity 
had  largely  contributed  to  our  mis- 
fortune, finally  ordered  a  retreat, 
which  was  made,  and  in  good  order  ; 
the  Rebels  following  for  some  miles 
with  cavalry,  but  at  a  respectful  dis- 
tance. And,  so  conscious  were  their 
leaders  that  they  owed  their  advan- 
tage to  accident,  that  they  abandoned 
the  position  that  night,  and  retreated 
so  far  as  Yorktown,  ten  miles  np  the 
Peninsula.6  No  further  collisions  of 
moment  occurred  in  this  department 
that  season.  Gen.  Butler  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Gen.  Wool  on  the  16th  of 
August. 

Reports  of  a  contemplated  Rebel 
invasion  of  the  North,  through  Mary- 
land, were  current  throughout  the 
month  of  May,  countenanced  by  the 
fact  that  Maryland  Hights,  opposite 
Harper's  Ferry,  were  held  by  John- 
ston through  most  of  that  month, 
while  a  considerable  force  appeared 
opposite  Williamsport  on  the  19th, 
and  seemed  to  meditate  a  crossing. 
A  rising  in  Baltimore,  and  even  a 
dash  on  Philadelphia,  were  among 
their  rumored  purposes.  Surveys  and 
reconnoissances  had  been  made  by 
them  of  Arlington  Hights  and  other 
eminences  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the 
Potomac,  as  if  with  intent  to  plant 
batteries  for  the  shelling  of  Washing- 
ton. But  the  Union  forces,  in  that 
State  and  Maryland,  increased  so  ra- 
pidly, that  any  offensive  movement 

his  official  report,  after  claiming  a  victory,  says : 

"  Fearing  that  heavy  reinforcements  would  be 
sent  up  from  Fortress  Monroe,  wo  fell  back  at 
nightfall  upon  our  works  at  Yorktown." 


WASHINGTON  AND  VICINITT. 


CROSSING   INTO   VIRGINIA.— TIEN  N  A. 


533 


in  that  quarter  on  the  part  of  the 
Eebels  would  have  been  foolhardy  in 
the  extreme.  Finally,  on  the  night 
of  the  23d — the  day  of  her  election 
aforesaid — Gen.  Scott  gave  the  order 
for  an  advance ;  and,  before  morning, 
10,000  Unionists  were  planted  on  the 
6  sacred  soil.'  Gen.  Mansfield  super- 
intended the  crossing  of  the  Long 
Bridge ;  while  Gen.  McDowell  con- 
ducted that  over  the  Chain  Bridge  at 
Georgetown  ;  whence  the  69th  New 
York,  Col.  Corcoran,  was  pushed  for- 
ward to  seize  the  crossing  of  the 
Orange  and  Manassas  Gap  Railway, 
some  miles  westward.  The  New- 
York  Fire  Zouaves,  Col.  Ellsworth, 
moved  by  steamers  directly  on  Alex- 
andria ;  but  the  Rebels  in  that  city 
had  either  been  warned  by  treachery, 
or  were  alarmed  by  the  menacing 
appearance  of  the  gunboat  Pawnee, 
and  had  very  generally  escaped  when 
the  Zouaves  landed.  Some  300  of 
them,  mainly  civilians,  were  captured 
by  the  New  York  69th,  in  their  flight 
on  the  railroad  aforesaid.  No  resist- 
ance was  met  at  any  point.  But  Col. 
Ellsworth,  seeing  a  Secession  flag 
flying  from  the  '  Marshall  House'  at 
Alexandria,  stepped  in,  with  four 
followers,  and  took  it  down.  Pass- 
ing down  the  stairs,  he  was  met  by 
one  Jackson,  the  hotel-keeper,  who, 
raising  a  double-barreled  gun,  shot 
Ellsworth  dead  on  the  spot.  He  was 
himself  instantly  shot  in  turn  by 
Francis  E.  Brownell,  one  of  Col.  Ells- 
worth's followers  ;  and  the  two  who, 
at  one  moment,  confronted  each  other 
as  strangers  but  as  mortal  foes,  the 
next  lay  side  by  side  in  death.  Jack- 
son's deed,  which,  at  the  North,  was 
shudderingly  regarded  as  assassina- 
tion, at  the  South,  was  exulted  over 


as  an  exhibition  o'f  patriotic  heroism  ; 
and  a  subscription  was  at  once  set  on 
foot  for  the  benefit  of  his  family. 
This  incident  was  rightly  regarded 
by  many  as  indicative  of  the  terrible 
earnestness  of  the  contest  upon  which 
the  American  people  were  now  en- 
tering. 

Gen.  McDowell,  having  firmly  es- 
tablished himself  on  the  right  bank 
of  the  Potomac  for  several  miles  op- 
posite to  and  below  Washington,  pro- 
ceeded to  fortify  his  position,  but 
made  no  further  offensive  demonstra- 
tions for  several  weeks ;  whose  quiet 
was  broken  only  by  a  brisk  dash  into 
and  through  the  village  of  Fairfax 
Court-House  by  Lieut.  C.  H.  Tomp- 
kins, of  the  2d  regular  cavalry — re- 
sulting in  a  loss  of  six  on  either  side — 
and  by  an  ambuscade  at  Yienna. 

Late  on  Monday,  June  17th,  Gen. 
Robert  C.  Schenck,  under  orders  from 
Gen.  McDowell,  left  camp  near  Alex- 
andria, with  700  of  Col.  McCook's  1st 
Ohio,  on  a  railroad  train,  and  pro- 
ceeded slowly  up  the  track  toward 
Leesburg,  detaching  and  stationing 
two  companies  each  at  Fall's  Church 
and  at  two  road-crossings  as  he  pro- 
ceeded. He  was  nearing  Yienna, 
thirteen  miles  from  Alexandria,  with 
four  remaining  companies,  numbering 
275  men,  utterly  unsuspicious  of  dan- 
ger, when,  on  emerging  from  a  cut 
and  turning  a  curve,  eighty  rods  from 
the  village,  his  train  was  raked  by  a 
masked  battery  of  two  guns,  hastily 
planted  by  Col.  Gregg,7  who  had  been 
for  two  or  three  days  scouting  along 
our  front,  with  about  800  Rebels, 
mainly  South  Carolinians,  and  who, 
starting  that  morning  from  Dranes- 
ville,  had  been  tearing  up  the  track 
at  Yienna,  and  had  started  to  return 


Afterward,  Gen.  Maxcy  Gregg;  Governor  eloct  of  South  Carolina;  killed  at  Fredericksburg. 


534:  THE  AMERICA 

to  Dranesville  when  they  heard  the 
whistle  of  Gen.  Schenck's  locomotive. 
Several  rounds  of  grape  were  fired 
point-blank  into  the  midst  of  the 
Ohio  boys,  who  speedily  sprang  from 
the  cars,  and  formed  under  the  ^pro- 
tection of  a  clump  of  trees  on  the  side 
of  the  track.  The  engineer,  who  was 
backing  the  train,  and,  of  course,  in 
the  rear  of  it,  instantly  detached  his 
locomotive,  and  started  at  his  best 
speed  for  Alexandria,  leaving  the 
cars  to  be  burnt  by  the  Rebels,  and 
the  dead  and  wounded  to  be  brought 
off  in  blankets  by  their  surviving 
comrades.  The  Rebels,  deceived  by 
the  cool,  undaunted  bearing  of  our 
force,  did  not  venture  to  advance,  for 
fear  of  falling  into  a  trap  in  their 
turn ;  so  that  our  loss  in  men  was  but 
20,  including  one  captain.  The  Reb- 
els, of  course,  lost  none.  Each  party 
retreated  immediately — the  Rebels 
to  Fairfax  Court  House. 

As  very  much  has  since  been  said, 
on  both  sides,  with  partial  justice,  of 
outrages  and  barbarities,  devastation 
and  rapine,  whereof  '  the  enemy'  is 
always  assumed  to  be  guilty,  the  fol- 
lowing manifesto,  issued  by  a  Con- 
federate chief  at  the  very  outset  of 
the  contest,  and  before  it  could  have 
had  any  foundation  in  fact,  casts 
light  on_  many  similar  and  later  in- 
culpations : 

"  IIead-q.uartees,  Dep't  of  Alexandria,  ) 
Camp  Pickexs,  June  5th,  1861.  ) 
"a  proclamation. 
"  To  the  people  of  the  Counties  of  Loudoun, 
Fairfax,  and  Prince  William : 
u  A  reckless  and  unprincipled  tyrant  has 
invaded  your  soil.    Abraham  Lincoln,  re- 
gardless of  all  moral,  legal,  and  constitutional 
restraints,  has  thrown  his  Abolition  hosts 
among  you,  who  are  murdering  and  impris- 
oning your  citizens,  confiscating  and  de- 
stroying your  property,  and  committing  other 
acts  of  violence  and  outrage,  too  shocking 
and  revolting  to  humanity  to  be  enumerated. 


N  CONFLICT. 

"  All  rules  of  civilized  warfare  are  aban- 
doned, and  they  proclaim  by  their  acts,  if 
not  on  their  banners,  that  their  war-cry  is 
'Beauty  and  Booty.'  All  that  is  dear  to 
man — your  honor,  and  that  of  your  wives 
and  daughters — your  fortunes  and  your  lives, 
are  involved  in  this  momentous  contest. 

u  In  the  name,  therefore,  of  the  constituted 
authorities  of  the  Confederate  States— in  the 
sacred  cause  of  constitutional  liberty  and 
self-government,  for  which  we  are  contend- 
ing— in  behalf  of  civilization  itself— I,  G.  T. 
Beauregard,  Brigadier-General  of  the  Con- 
federate States,  commanding  at  Camp  Pick- 
ens, Manassas  Junction,  do  make  this  my 
Proclamation,  and  invite  and  enjoin  you,  by 
every  consideration  dear  to  the  hearts  of 
freemen  and  patriots,  by  the  name  and 
memory  of  your  Pwevolutionary  fathers,  and 
by  the  purity  and  sanctity  of  your  domestic 
firesides,  to  rally  to  the  standard  of  your  State 
and  country;  and,  by  every  means  m  your 
power,  compatible  with  honorable  warfare, 
to  drive  back  and  expel  the  invaders  from 
your  land. 

I  conjure  you  to  be  true  and  loyal  to  your 
country  and  her  legal  and  constitutional  au- 
thorities, and  especially  to  be  vigilant  observ- 
ers of  the  movements  and  acts  of  the  enemy, 
so  as  to  enable  you  to  give  the  earliest  au- 
thentic information  at  these  headquarters, 
or  to  the  officers  under  my  command. 

'*I  desire  to  assure  you  that  the  utmost 
protection  in  my  power  will  be  given  to 
you  all.  G.  T.  Beauregard, 

"  Brigadier-General  Commanding." 

Three  days  before,  and  in  utter 
unconsciousness  of  the  fulmination 
which  Beauregard  was  preparing, 
Gen.  McDowell,  in  command  of  our 
forces  in  his  front,  had  issued  the 
following : 

"  Head-quarters  Dep't  of  IN".  E.  Virginia, 
Arlington,  June  2d,  1861. 

"  General  Order  No.  4. — Statements  of 
the  amount,  kind,  and  value,  of  all  private 
property  taken  and  used  for  Government 
purposes,  and  of  the  damage  done  in  any 
way  to  private  property,  by  reason  of  the 
occupation  of  this  section  of  the  country  by 
the  United  States  troops,  will,  as  soon  as 
practicable,  be  made  out  and  transmitted- to 
department  head-quarters  of  brigades  by  the 
commanders  of  brigades,  and  officers  in 
charge  of  the  several  fortifications.  These 
statements  will  exhibit : 

"  First.  The  quantity  of  land  taken  pos- 
session of  for  the  several  field-works,  and  the 
kind  and  value  of  the  crops  growing  there- 
on, if  any. 


GE  1ST.    PATTERSON  CR 


OSSES   THE  POTOMAC. 


535 


t€  Second.  The  quantity  of  land  used  for 
the  several  encampments,  and  the  kind  and 
value  of  the  growing  crops,  if  any. 

"  Third.  The  number,  size,  and  character 
of  the  buildings  appropriated  to  public  pur- 
poses. 

"  Fourth.  The  quantity  and  value  of  trees 
cut  down. 

"  Fifth.  The  kind  and  extent  of  fencing, 
etc.,  destroyed. 

"  These  statements  will,  as  far  as  possible, 
give  the  value  of  the  property  taken,  or  of 
the  damage  sustained,  and  the  name  or 
names  of  the  owners  thereof.  Citizens  who 
have  sustained  any  damage  or  loss  as  above 
will  make  their  claims  upon  the  command- 
ing officers  of  the  troops  by  whom  it  was 
done,  or,  in  cases  where  these  troops  have 
moved  away,  upon  the  commander  nearest 
them. 

"  These  claims  will  accompany  the  state- 
ment above  called  for.  The  commanders  of 
brigades  will  require  the  assistance  of  the 
commanders  of  regiments  or  detached  com- 
panies, and  will  make  this  order  known  to 
the  inhabitants  in  their  vicinity,  to  the  end 
that  all  loss  or  damage  may,  as  nearly  as 
possible,  be  ascertained  while  the  troops  are 
now  here,  and  by  whom,  or  on  whose  ac- 
count, it  has  been  occasioned,  that  justice 
may  be  done  alike  to  the  citizen  and  to  the 
Government.  The  name  of  the  officer  or 
officers,  in  case  the  brigade  commanders 
shall  institute  a  board  to  fix  the  amount  of 
loss  or  damage,  shall  be  given  in  each  case. 

"By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  McDowell. 
"  James  B.  Fey,  Ass't  Adj't- General." 

Qf  course,  this  order  does  not 
prove  that  no  outrage  was  commit- 
ted, no  wanton  injury  inflicted,  by 
our  soldiers,  in  this  or  other  portions 
of  the  Confederacy.  War  cannot 
afford  to  be  nice  in  the  selection  of 
its  instruments ;  and  probably  no  cam- 
paign was  ever  prosecuted  through  a 
friendly,  much  more  a  hostile,  region, 
wherein  acts  of  violence  and  spo- 
liation were  not  perpetrated  by  sol- 
diers on  the  defenseless  inhabitants 
of  the  country.  But  that  the  com- 
manders on  our  side,  and,  in  fact,  on 
both  sides,  were  generally  earnest 
and  vigilant  in  repressing  and  pun- 
ishing these  excesses,  is  the  simple 
truth,  which  should  be  asserted  and 


insisted  on  for  the  honor  of  our  coun- 
try and  her  people. 

Gen.  Robert  Patterson,  with  about 
20,000  men,  broke  camp  at  Cham- 
bersburg,  June  7th,  and  advanced 
to  Hagerstown,  while  Col.  Lew.  Wal- 
lace, on  his  right,  took  quiet  posses- 
sion of  Cumberland,  and  made  a  dash 
upon  Romney,  which  he  easily  cap- 
tured. Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 
commanding  the  Rebels,  burned  the 
bridge  at  Point  of  Rocks  on  the  7th, 
and  evacuated  Harper's  Ferry  on  the 
14th,  destroying  the  superb  railway 
bridge  over  the  Potomac.  He  re- 
treated upon  Winchester  and  Lees- 
burg,  after  having  destroyed  the 
armory  and  shops  at  the  Ferry — the 
machinery  having  been  already  sent 
off  to  Richmond.  The  Chesapeake 
Canal  and  the  several  railroads  in 
this  region  were  thoroughly  disman- 
tled. The  Potomac  was  crossed  at 
Williamsport,  by  Gen.  Thomas,  on 
the  16th.  But,  for  some  reason,  this 
advance  was  countermanded,  and  our 
troops  all  recrossed  on  the  18th — 
Gen.  Patterson  remaining  at  Hagers- 
town. The  Rebels  at  once  returned 
to  the  river,  completing  the  work  of 
destruction  at  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
conscripting  Unionists  as  well  as  Con- 
federates to  fill  their  ranks.  Patter- 
son recrossed  the  Potomac  at  Wil- 
liamsport on  the  morning  of  July  2d, 
at  a  place  known  as  *  Falling  Waters,' 
encountering  a  small  Rebel  force  un- 
der Gen.  Jackson  (afterward  known 
as  6  Stonewall'),  who,  being  outnum- 
bered, made  little  resistance,  but  fell 
back  to  Martinsburg,  and  ultimately 
to  Bunker  Hill.  On  the  7th,  an  or- 
der to  advance  on  Winchester  was 
given,  but  not  executed.  Finally,  on 
the  15th,  Patterson  moved  forward  to 


536 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Bunker  Hill,  on  the  direct  road 
to  and  nine  miles  from  Winchester, 
which  he  occupied  without  resistance. 

On  the  17th,  he  turned  abruptly 
to  the  left,  moving  away  from  the 
enemy  in  his  front,  and  inarching  to 
Charlestown,  twelve  miles  eastward, 
near  the  Potomac,  leaving  Johnston 
at  full  liberty  to  lead  his  entire  force 
to  Manassas.  The  consequences  of 
this  extraordinary  movement  by  Pat- 
terson were  so  important  and  so  dis- 
astrous as  to  demand  for  it  the  fullest 
elucidation. 

Maj.-Gen.  Charles  W.  Sanford,  of 
New  York,  who  was  second  in  com- 
mand to  Gen.  Patterson  during  this 
campaign,  testifies 8  positively  that  he 
was  dispatched  from  Washington  by 
Gen.  Scott  and  the  Cabinet,  on  the  6th 
of  July,  to  report  to  Patterson  and 
serve  under  him,  because  of  the  latter's 
tardiness  and  manifest  indisposition  to 
fight — that  he  reported  to  Patterson 
at  Williamsport,  with  two  fresh  regi- 
ments, on  the  10th ;  was  there  placed 
in  command  of  a  division  composed 
of  8,000  New  York  troops,  and  deliv- 
ered orders  from  Gen.  Scott,  urging 
"  a  forward  movement  as  rapidly  as 
possible" — that  Patterson  then  had 
22,000  men  and  two  batteries ;  that 
delay  ensued  at  Martinsburg;  but 
that  the  army  advanced  from  that 
place — on  the  15th — to  Bunker  Hill, 
nine  miles  from  Johnston's  fortified 
camp  at  Winchester — Sanford's  di- 
vision moving  on  the  left  or  east  of 
the  other  two ;  that  Patterson  visited 
him  (Sanford) — whose  pickets  were 
three  miles  further  ahead — that  after- 
noon, after  the  army  had  halted,  and 
complimented  him  on  his  comforta- 
ble location ;  to  which  he  (S.)  respond- 
ed— "  Yery  comfortable,  General ;  but 


when  shall  we  move  on  ?"  to  which 
Patterson  replied — but  this  is  so  im- 
portant that  we  must  give  the  precise 
language  of  Gen.  Sanford's  sworn 
testimony : 

u  He  hesitated  a  moment  or  two,  and  then 
said:  'I  don't  know  yet  when  we  shall 
move.  And,  if  I  did,  I  wonld  not  tell  my 
own  father.'  I  thought  that  was  rather  a 
queer  sort  of  speech  to  make  to  me,  under 
the  circumstances.  But  I  smiled  and  said : 
'  General,  I  am  only  anxious  that  we  shall 
get  forward,  that  the  enemy  shall  not  escape 
us.'  He  replied:  'There  is  no  danger  of 
that.  I  will  have  a  reconnoissance  to-mor- 
row, and  we  will  arrange  about  moving  at  a 
very  early  period.'    He  then  took  his  leavo. 

"  The  next  day,  there  was  a  reconnoissance 
on  the  Winchester  turnpike,  about  four  or 
five  miles  below  the  General's  camp.  He 
sent  forward  a  section  of  artillery  and  some 
cavalry,  and  they  found  a  post  and  log  fence 
across  the  Winchester  turnpike,  and  some 
of  the  enemy's  cavalry  on  the  other  side  of 
it.  They  gave  them  a  round  of  grape.  The 
cavalry  scattered  off,  and  the  reconnoissance 
returned.  That  was  the  only  reconnoissance 
I  heard  of  while  we  were  there.  My  own 
pickets  went  further  than  that.  But  it  was 
understood,  the  next  afternoon,  that  we  were 
to  march  forward  at  daylight.  I  sent  down 
Col.  Morell,  with  40  men,  to  open  a  road 
down  to  Opequan  creek,  within  five  miles 
of  the  camp  at  AVinchester,  on  the  side- roads 
I  was  upon,  which  would  enable  me,  in  the 
course  of  three  hours,  to  get  between  John- 
ston and  the  Shenandoah  river,  and  effectu- 
ally bar  his  way  to  Manassas.  I  had  my 
ammunition  all  distributed,  and  ordered  my 
men  to  have  24  hours'  rations  in  their  hav- 
ersacks, independent  of  their  breakfast.  We 
were  to  march  at  4  o'clock  the  next  morn- 
ing. I  had  this  road  to  the  Opequan  com- 
pleted that  night.  I  had  then  with  me.  in 
addition  to  my  eight  regiments,  amounting 
to  about  8,000  men  and  a  few  cavalry, 
Doubleday's  heavy  United  States  battery  of 
20  and  30-pounders,  and  a  very  good  Rhode 
Island  battery.  And  I  was  willing  to  take 
the  risk,  whether  Gen.  Patterson  followed 
me  up  or  not,  of  placing  myself  between 
Johnston  and  the  Shenandoah  river,  rather 
than  let  Johnston  escape.  And,  at  4  o'clock, 
I  should  have  moved  over  that  road  for  that 
purpose,  if  I  had  had  no  further  orders.  But, 
a  little  after  12  o'clock  at  night  [July  16th- 
17th],  I  received  a  long  order  of  three  pages 
from  Gen.  Patterson,  instructing  me  to  move 
on  to  Cliarlestown,  which  is  nearly  at  right  an- 
gles to  the  road  I  was  going  to  move  on,  and 


8  Before  the  Joint  Committee  of  Congress  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War. 


GEN".    SANFORD    ON  PA 


TTBRSON'S  CONDUCT. 


537 


twenty-two  miles  from  "Winchester.  This 
was  after  I  had  given  my  orders  for  the 
other  movement. 

"  Question  by  the  Chairman:  [Senator 
"Wade]  And  that  left  Johnston  free  ? 

"  Answer:.  Yes,  sir ;  left  him  free  to  make 
his  escape,  which  he  did.  *  *  * 

"  Question :  In  what  direction  would 
Johnston  have  had  to  move  to  get  by  you  ? 

"  Answer :  Right  out  to  the  Shenandoah 
river,  which  he  forded.  He  found  out  from 
his  cavalry,  who  were  watching  us,  that  we 
were  actually  leaving,  and  he  started  at  1 
o'clock  that  same  day,  with  8,000  men, 
forded  the  Shenandoah  where  it  was  so  deep 
that  he  ordered  his  men  to  put  their  cart- 
ridge-boxes on  their  bayonets,  got  out  on 
the  Leesburg  road,  and  went  down  to  Ma- 
nassas. *  *  * 

"  Question  by  the  Chairman :  Did  Patter- 
son assign  any  reason  for  that  movement  ? 

"Answer:  I  was,  of  course,  very  indig- 
nant about  it,  and  so  were  all  my  officers 
and  men ;  so  much  so  that  when,  subse- 
quently, at  Harper's  Ferry,  Patterson  came 
by  my  camp,  there  was  a  universal  groan — 
against  all  discipline,  of  course,  and  we  sup- 
pressed it  as  soon  as  possible.  The  excuse 
given  by  Gen.  Patterson  was  this :  that  he 
had  received  intelligence  that  he  could  rely 
upon  that  Gen.  Johnston  had  been  reenforced 
by  20,000  men  from  Manassas,  and  was  going 
to  make  an  attack  upon  him;  and,  in  the 
order  which  I  received  that  night — a  long 
order  of  three  pages — I  was  ordered  to  oc- 
cupy all  the  communicating  roads,  turning 
off  a  regiment  here,  and  two  or  three  regi- 
ments there,  and  a  battery  at  another  place, 
to  occupy  all  the  roads  from  Winchester  to 
the  neighborhood  of  Charlestown,  and  all 
the  cross-roads,  and  hold  them  all  that  day, 
until  Gen.  Patterson's  whole  army  went  by 
me  to  Charlestown;  and  I  sat  seven  hours 
in  the  saddle  near  a  place  called  Smithfield, 
while  Patterson,  with  his  whole  army,  went 
by  me  on  their  way  to  Charlestown,  he  being 
apprehensive,  as  he  said,  of  an  attack  from 
Johnston's  forces. 

**  Question  by  Mr.  Odell:  You  covered 
this  movement  ? 

"Answer:  Yes,  sir.  Now  the  statement 
that  he  made,  which  came  to  me  through 
Col.  Abercrombie,  who  was  Patterson's 
brother-in-law,  and  commanded  one  division 
in  that  army,  was  that  Johnston  had  been 
reenforced;  and  Gen.  Fitz- John  Porter  re- 
ported the  same  thing  to  my  officers.  Gen. 
Porter  was  then  the  chief  of  Patterson's  staff, 
and  was  a  very  excellent  officer,  and  an  ac- 
complished soldier.  They  all  had  got  this 
story,  which  was  without  the  slightest 
shadow  of  foundation ;  for  there  had  not  a 
single  man  arrived  at  the  camp  since  we  had 
got  full  information  that  their  force  consisted 


of  20.000  men,  of  whom  1,800  were  sick 
with  the  measles.  The  story  was,  however, 
that  they  had  ascertained,  by  reliable  in- 
formation, of  this  reenforcement.  "Where 
they  got  their  information,  I  do  not  know. 
None  such  reached '  me  ;  and  I  picked  up 
deserters  and  other  persons  to  get  all  the 
information  I  could;  and  we  since  have 
learned,  as  a  matter  of  certainty,  that 
Johnston's  force  never  did  exceed  20,000 
men  there.  But  the  excuse  Patterson  gave 
was,  that  Johnston  had  been  reenforced 
by  20,000  men  from  Manassas,  and  was 
going  to  attack  him.  That  was  the  rea- 
son he  gave  then  for  this  movement.  But, 
in  this  paper  he  has  lately  published,  he 
hints  at  another  reason — another  excuse 
— which  was  that  it  was  by  order  of  Gen. 
Scott.  Noav,  I  know  that  the  peremptory 
order  of  Gen.  Scott  to  Gen.  Patterson,  re- 
peated over  and  over  again,  was  this — I  was 
present  on  several  occasions  when  tele- 
graphic communications  went  from  Gen. 
Scott  to  Gen.  Patterson :  Gen.  Scott's  orders 
to  Gen.  Patterson  were  that,  if  he  were 
strong  enough,  he  was  to  attack  and  beat 
Johnston.  But,  if  not,  then  he  was  to 
place  himself  in  such  a  position  as  to  keep 
Johnston  employed,  and  prevent  him  from 
making  a  junction  with  Beauregard  at  Ma- 
nassas. That  was  the  repeated  direction  of 
Gen.  Scott  to  Gen.  Patterson  ;  and  it  wa3 
because  of  Patterson's  hesitancy,  and  his 
hanging  back,  and  keeping  so  far  beyond 
the  reach  of  Johnston's  camp,  that  I  was 
ordered  to  go  up  there  and  reenforce  him, 
and  assist  him  in  any  operations  necessary 
to  effect  that  object.  The  excuse  of  Gen. 
Patterson  now  is,  that  he  had  orders  from 
Gen.  Scott  to  move  to  Charlestown.  Now, 
that  is  not  so.  But  this  state  of  things  ex- 
isted :  Before  the  movement  was  made  from 
Martinsburg,  Gen.  Patterson  suggested  to 
Gen.  Scott  that  Charlestown  would  be  a 
better  base  of  operations  than  Martinsburg, 
and  suggested  that  he  had  better  move  on 
Charlestown,  and  thence  make  his  ap- 
proaches to  Winchester;  that  it  would  be 
better  to  do  that  than  to  move  directly  to 
Winchester  from  Martinsburg;  and  Gen. 
Scott  wrote  back  to  say  that,  if  he  found 
that  movement  a  better  one,  he  was  at  lib- 
erty to  make  it.  But  Gen.  Patterson  had 
already  commenced  his  movement  on  Win- 
chester direct  from  Martinsburg,  and  had  got 
as  far  as  Bunker  Hill ;  so  that  the  movement 
which  he  had  formerly  suggested,  to  Charles- 
town, was  suppressed  by  his  own  act.  But 
that  is  the  pretense  now  given  in  his  pub- 
lished speech  for  making  the  movement 
from  Bunker  Hill  to  Charlestown,  which 
was  a  retreat,  instead  of  the  advance  which 
the  movement  to  Charlestown  he  first  pro- 
posed to  Gen.  Scott  was  intended  to  be.  *  * 


538 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


"  Question  by  the  Chairman  :  I  have 
heard  it  suggested  that  he  undertook  to 
excuse  this  movement  on  the  ground  that 
the  time  of  many  of  his  troops  had  expired, 
and  they  refused  to  accompany  him. 

"  Answer :  That,  to  my  knowledge,  is  un- 
true. The  time  of  none  of  them  had  ex- 
pired when  this  movement  was  made.  ,  All 
the  troops  that  were  there  were  in  the  high- 
est condition  for  the  service.  These  three- 
months'  men,  it  may  be  well  to  state  to  you 
who  are  not  military  men,  were  superior  to 
any  other  volunteer  troops  that  we  had,  in 
point  of  discipline.  They  were  the  dis- 
ciplined troops  of  the  country.  The  three- 
months'  men  were  generally  the  organized 
troops  of  the  different  States — New- York, 
Pennsylvania,  etc.  We  had,  for  instance, 
from  Patterson's  own  city,  Philadelphia,  one 
of  the  finest  regiments  in  the  service,  which 
was  turned  over  to  me,  at  their  own  request; 
and  the  most  of  my  regiments  were  disci- 
plined and  organized  troops.  They  were  all  in 
fine  condition,  anxious,  zealous,  and  earnest 
for  a  fight.  They  thought  they  were  going 
to  attack  Johnston's  camp  at  Winchester. 
Although  I  had  suggested  to  Gen.  Patterson 
that  there  was  no  necessity  for  that,  the 
camp  being  admirably  fortified  with  many 
of  their  heavy  guns  from  Norfolk,  I  pro- 
posed to  him  to  place  ourselves  between 
Johnston  and  the  Shenandoah,  which  would 
have  compelled  him  to  fight  us  there,  or  to 
remain  in  his  camp,  either  of  which  would 
have  effected  Gen.  Scott's  object.  If  I  had 
got  into  a  fight,  it  was  very  easy,  over  this 
road  I  had  just  been  opening,  for  Patterson 
to  have  reenforced  me  and  to  have  come  up 
to  the  fight  in  time.  The  proposition  was 
to  place  ourselves  between  Johnston's  forti- 
fied camp  and  the  Shenandoah,  where  his  for- 
tified camp  would  have  been  of  no  use  to  him. 

"  Question :  Even  if  you  had  received  a 
check  there,  it  would  have  prevented  his 
junction  with  the  forces  at  Manassas? 

u  Answer :  Yes,  sir;  I  would  have  risked  a 
battle  with  my  own  division  rather  than 
Johnston  should  have  escaped.  If  he  had 
attacked  me,  I  could  have  taken  a  position 
where  I  could  have  held  it,  while  Patterson 
could  have  fallen  upon  him  and  repulsed  him. 

"  Question  by  Mr.  Odell :  Had  you  any 
such  understanding  with  Patterson  ? 

"  Answer :  I  told  him  I  would  move  down 

9  If  any  Unionist  is  curious  to  see,  and  has 
the  patience  to  read,  all  the  excuses  which  can 
be  trumped  up  for  Patterson's  conduct  through- 
out this  wretched  business,  he  will  find  them 
embodied  and  skillfully  marshaled  in  Mr.  Fitz 
John  Porter's  testimony  before  the  Joint  Com- 
mittee [of  the  XXXYIIth  Congress]  on  the 
Conduct  of  the  War,  vol.  ii.  pp.  152-59.    I  see 


on  this  side-road  in  advance,  leaving  Gen. 
Patterson  to  sustain  me  if  I  got  into  a  fight. 
So,  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  should  attack 
Patterson,  I  wTas  near  enough  to  fall  upon 
Johnston's  flank  and  to  support  Patterson. 
By  using  this  communication  of  mine  to 
pass  Opequan  creek — where,  I  had  informed 
Patterson,  I  had  already  pushed  forward  my 
pickets,  [200  men  in  the  day  and  400  more  at 
night,]  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  burning 
the  bridge — it  would  have  enabled  me  to 
get  between  Johnston  and  the  Shenandoah 
river.  On  the  morning  of  our  march  to 
Charlestown,  Stuart's  Cavalry,  which  fig- 
ured so  vigorously  at  Bull  Run,  was  upon 
my  flank  all  day.  They  were  apparently 
about  800  strong.  I  saw  them  constantly 
on  my  flank  for  a  number  of  miles.  I  could 
distinguish  them,  with  my  glass,  with  great 
ease.  Finally,  they  came  within  about  a 
mile  of  the  line  of  march  I  was  pursuing, 
and  I  sent  a  battery  around  to  head  them 
off,  and  the  12th  regiment  across  the  fields 
in  double-quick  time  to  take  them  in  the 
rear.  I  thought  I  had  got  them  hemmed 
in.  But  they  broke  down  the  fences,  and 
went  across  the  country  to  Winchester,  and 
I  saw  nothing  more  of  them.  They  were 
then  about  eight  miles  from  Winchester,  and 
must  have  got  there  in  the  course  of  a 
couple  of  hours.  That  day,  at  1  o'clock — 
as  was  ascertained  from  those  who  saw  him 
crossing  the  Shenandoah — Johnston  started 
from  Winchester  with  8,000  men,  forded  the 
§henandoah,  and  got  to  Manassas  on  Friday 
night ;  and  his  second  in  command  started 
the  next  day  with  all  the  rest  of  the  avail- 
able troops — something  like  9,000  men; 
leaving  only  the  sick,  and  a  few  to  guard 
them,  in  the  camp  at  Winchester — and  they 
arrived  at  the  battle-field  in  the  midst  of  the 
fight,  got  out  of  the  cars,  rushed  on  the 
battle-field,  and  turned  the  scale.  I  have  no 
doubt  that,  if  wro  had  intercepted  Johnston, 
as  we  ought  to  have  done,  the  battle  of  Bull 
Run  would  have  been  a  victory  for  us  in- 
stead of  a  defeat.  Johnston  was,  undoubt- 
edly, the  ablest  general  they  had  in  their 
army."9 

Patterson  remained  at  Charlestown, 
idle  and  useless,  until  the  22d ;  when, 
learning  of  the  disaster  at  Bull  Run, 

nothing  therein  that  essentially  contradicts  Gen. 
Sanford's  testimony,  or  is  calculated  to  relieve 
Gen.  Patterson  from  the  grave  imputations  which 
that  testimony  n*ust  fix  in  the  breast  of  every  loyal 
American.  All  that  it  seems  to  establish  is  a  per- 
fect identity  of  principles,  sympathies,  and  pur- 
poses, between  Porter  and  Patterson,  with  a  rare 
skill  in  framing  excuses  on  the  part  of  the  former. 


MCDOWELL'S  ADVAN 


CE    TO  CENTERVILLE. 


539 


he  fell  back  hastily  to  Harper's 
Ferry  ;10  where,  on  the  25th,  he  was 
superseded  by  Gen.      P.  Banks. 

The  movement  of  the  Union  Grand 
Army,  commanded  in  the  field  by 
Gen.  Irwin  McDowell,  but  directed 
from  Washington  by  Lieut.  Gen. 
Scott,  commenced  on  Tuesday,  July 
16th.  Gen.  Tyler's  column,  in  the 
advance,  bivouacked  that  night  at 
Vienna,  four  and  a  half  miles  from 
Fairfax  Court  House.  It  rested  next 
night  at  Germantown,  two  miles  be- 
yond Fairfax ;  and,  on  Thursday,  at 
9  o'clock  a.  m.,  pushed  on  to  and 
through  Centerville,  the  Eebels  re- 
tiring quietly  before  it.  Three  miles 
beyond  that  village,  however,  the 
Eebels  were  found  strongly  posted  at 
Blackburn's  ford,  on  Bull  Rttn,  and, 
on  being  pressed,  showed  fight.  This 
was  at  1£  o'clock  p.  m.  A  spirited 
conflict,  mainly  with  artillery,  re- 
sulted— the  Eebels  being  in  heavy 
force,  under  the  immediate  command 
of  Gen.  James  Longstreet.  The 
Unionists,  more  exposed,  as  well  as 
outnumbered,  finally  drew  back,  leav- 
ing the  Eebel  position  intact.  The 
losses  were  nearly  equal :  83  on  our 
side;  68  on  the  other.  Sherman's 
battery,  Capt.  Ayres,  did  most  of  the 
actual  fighting,  supported  by  Col. 

10  On  the  day  of  McDowell's  advance  to  Cen- 
terville, and  of  the  collision  at  Blackburn's  Ford, 
Gen.  Scott  telegraphed  complainingly  to  Patter- 
son as  follows : 

"  Washington,  July  18th,  1861. 

"  Major-Gen.  Patterson,  etc. :  I  have  cer- 
tainly been  expecting  you  to  beat  the  enemy. 
If  not,  to  hear  that  you  have  felt  him  strongly, 
or,  at  least,  had  occupied  him  by  threats  and 
demonstrations.  You  have  been  at  least  his 
equal,  and,  I  suppose,  superior,  in  numbers. 
Has  he  not  stolen  a  march  and  sent  reinforce- 
ments toward  Manassas  Junction  ?  A  week  is 
enough  to  win  a  victory.  *  * 

"Winfield  Scott." 

To  this,  Patterson  responded  as  follows : 


Richardson's  brigade,  consisting  of 
the  1st  Massachusetts,  12th  New- 
York,  and  2d  and  3d  Michigan.  Re- 
garded as  a  reconnoissance  in  force, 
the  attack  might  be  termed  a  success ; 
since  the  result  demonstrated  that 
the  main  Rebel  army  was  in  position 
along  the  wooded  valley  of  Bull  Run, 
half-way  between  Centerville  and 
Manassas  Junction,  and  purposed  to 
remain. 

Gen.  McDowell's  army  was  moved 
up  to  and  concentrated  around  the 
ridge  on  which  Centerville  is  situated 
during  the  18th  and  19th,  with  in- 
tent to  advance  and  attack  the  Reb- 
els, posted  along  Bull  Run  and  be- 
tween that  stream  and  Manassas 
Junction,  on  Saturday,  the  20th. 
But  delay  was  encountered  in  the 
reception  of  adequate  subsistence, 
which  did  not  arrive  till  Friday  night. 
During  Saturday,  three  days'  rations 
were  distributed  and  issued,  and 
every  preparation  made  for  moving 
punctually  at  2  o'clock  next  morning. 
Meantime,  Beauregard,  maintaining 
an  absolute  quiet  and  inoffensiveness 
on  his  front,  and  fully  informed  by 
spies  and  traitors  of  every  movement 
between  him  and  Washington,  had 
hastily  gathered  from  every  side  all 
the  available  forces  of  the  Confede- 
racy, including  15,000,  or  nearly  the 

"  Charlestown,  July  18th,  1861. 
"Col.  E.  D.  Townsend,  A.  A.  G.,  etc.:  Tele- 
gram of  to-day  received.  The  enemy  has  stolen 
no  march  upon  me.  I  have  kept  him  actively 
employed,  and,  by  threats  and  reconnoissances 
in  force,  caused  him  to  be  reenforced.  I  have 
accomplished  more  in  this  respect  than  the 
General-in-Chief  asked,  or  could  well  be  expect- 
ed, in  the  face  of  an  enemy  far  superior  in  num- 
bers, with  no  line  of  communication  to  pro- 
tect. *  *  *  *  E.  Patterson." 

At  this  very  moment,  Patterson  knew  that  he 
had,  by  his  flank  march  to  Charlestown,  com- 
pletely relieved  Johnston  from  all  apprehension 
of  attack  or  disturbance,  and  left  him  perfectly 
free  to  reenforce  Beauregard  with  his  entire  army. 


540 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


full  strength,  of  Gen.  Johnston's 
Army  of  the  Shenandoah,  and  had 
decided  to  assume  the  offensive  and 
attack  our  forces  before  Gen.  Patter- 
son could  come  up  to  join  them. 
Had  our  advance  been  made  on  Sat- 
urday, as  we  originally  intended,  it 
would  have  encountered  but  two- 
thirds  of  the  force  it  actually  com- 


bated ;  had  it  been  delayed  a  few 
hours  longer,  we  should  have  stood 
on  the  defensive,  with  the  immense 
advantage  of  knowing  the  ground, 
and  of  choosing  the  positions  where- 
on to  fight.  Such  are  the  overruling 
casualties  and  fatalities  of  war. 

Bull  Run  is  a  decent  mill-stream, 
fordable,  in  summer,  at  intervals  of 


BATTLE  OF  BULL  RUK. 


half  a  mile  to  a  mile.  Its  immediate 
valley  is  generally  narrowband  wood- 
ed, inclosed  by  bluffs,  neither  high 
nor  very  steep,  but  affording  good 
positions  for  planting  batteries  to 
command  the  roads  on  the  opposite 
side,  so  screened  by  woods  and  brush 
as  to  be  neither  seen  nor  suspected 
until  the  advancing  or  attacking  party 


ex- 


is  close  upon  them.  This  fact 
plains  and  justifies  Gen.  McDowell's 
(or  Scott's)  order  of  battle.  This  was, 
briefly:  to  menace  the  Rebel  right 
by  the  advance  of  our  1st  division  on 
the  direct  road  from  Centre ville  to 
Manassas  Junction,  while  making  a 
more  serious  demonstration  on  the 
road  running  due  west  from  Center- 


SUCCESS    OF  OUR 


FLANK  ATTACK. 


541 


yille  to  Groveton  and  Warrenton,  and 
crossing  Bull  Run  by  the  Stone 
Bridge ;  while  the  real  or  main  attack 
was  to  be  made  by  a  column  15,000 
strong,  composed  of  the  2d  (Hunter's) 
and  3d  (Heintzelman's)  divisions, 
which,  starting  from  their  camps  a 
mile  or  two  east  and  southeast  of 
Centerville,  were  to  make  a  consider- 
able detour  to  the  right,  crossing  Cub 
Eun,  and  then  Bull  Eun  at  a  ford 
known  as  Sudley  Spring,  three  miles 
above  the  Stone  Bridge,  thus  turning 
the  Rebel  left,  and  rolling  it  up  on 
the  center,  where  it  was  to  be  taken 
in  flank  by  our  1st  division  (Tyler's) 
crossing  the  Stone  Bridge  at  the  right 
moment,  and  completing  the  rout  of 
the  enemy.  The  5th  division  (Miles's) 
was  held  in  reserve  at  Centerville, 
not  only  to  support  the  attacking 
columns,  but  to  guard  against  the  ob- 
vious peril  of  a  formidable  Rebel  ad- 
vance on  our  left  across  Blackburn's 
Ford  to  Centerville,  flanking  our 
flank  movement,  capturing  our  mu- 
nitions and  supplies,  and  cutting  off 
our  line  of  retreat.  The  4th  division 
(Runyon's)  guarded  our  communica- 
tions with  Alexandria  and  Arlington ; 
its  foremost  regiment  being  about 
seven  miles  back  from  Centerville. 

The  movement  of  our  army  was 
to  have  commenced  at  2f  o'clock  a. 
m.,  and  the  battle  should  have  been 
opened  at  all  points  at  6  a.  m.  ;  but 
our  raw  troops  had  never  been  brig- 
aded prior  to  this  advance,  and  most 
of  their  officers  were  utterly  without 
experience ;  so  that  there  was  a  delay 
of  two  or  three  hours  in  the  flanking 
divisions  reaching  the  point  at  which 
the  battle  was  to  begin.    Gen.  Tyler, 

11  Beauregard's  official  report  of  the  battle, 
which  was  dated  Manassas,  August  26th,  (after 
he  had  received  and  read  all  our  official  reports,) 


in  front  of  Stone  Bridge,  opened  with 
his  artillery  at  6-J-  a.  m.,  eliciting  no 
reply ;  and  it  was  three  hours  later 
when  Hunter's  advance,  under  Col. 
Burnside,  crossed  at  Sudley  Spring ; 
his  men,  thirsty  with  their  early 
march  that  hot  July  morning,  stop- 
ping as  they  crossed  to  drink  and  fill 
their  canteens.  Meantime,  every 
movement  of  our  forces  was  made 
manifest  to  Beauregard,  watching 
them  from  the  slope  two  or  three 
miles  west,  by  the  clouds  of  dust  that 
rose  over  their  line  of  march;  and 
regiment  after  regiment  was  hurried 
northward  by  him  to  meet  the  immi- 
nent shock.  ~No  strength  was  wasted 
by  him  upon,  and  scarcely  any  notice 
taken  of,  our  feint  on  his  right ;  but, 
when  Burnside's  brigade,  after  cross- 
ing at  Sudley,  had  marched  a  mile 
or  so  through  woods  down  the  road 
on  the  right  of  Bull  Run,  and  come 
out  into  a  clear  and  cultivated  coun- 
try, stretching  thence  over  a  mile  of 
rolling  fields  down  to  Warrenton 
turnpike,  he  was  vigorously  opened 
upon  by  artillery  from  the  woods  in 
his  front,  and,  as  he  pressed  on,  by 
infantry  also.  Continuing  to  ad- 
vance, fighting,  followed  and  sup- 
ported by  Hunter's  entire  division, 
which  was  soon  joined  on  its  left  by 
Heintzelman's,  which  had  crossed 
the  stream  a  little  later  and  further 
down,  our  attacking  column  reached 
and  crossed  the  "Warrenton  road  from 
Centerville  by  the  Stone  Bridge,  giv- 
ing a  hand  to  Sherman's  brigade  of 
Tyler's  division,  and  all  but  clearing 
this  road  of  the  Rebel  batteries  and 
regiments,  which  here  resisted  our 
efforts,11  under  the  immediate  com- 

says  of  the  state  of  the  battle  a±this  time: 

"  Heavy  losses  had  now  been  sustained  on  our 
side,  both  in  numbers  and  in  the  personal  worth 


542 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


mand  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  Johnston. 
Here  Griffin's  battery,  which,  with 
Rickett's,  had  done  the  most  effective 
fighting  throughout,  was  charged 
with  effect  by  a  Eebel  regiment, 
which  was  enabled  to  approach  it 
with  impunity  by  a  mistake  of  our 
officers,  who  supposed  it  one  of  our 
own.  Three  different  attacks  were 
repulsed  with  slaughter,  and  the  bat- 
tery remained  in  our  hands,  though 
all  its  horses  were  killed.  At  3 
p.  m.,  the  Rebels  had  been  driven 
a  mile  and  a  half,  and  were  nearly 
out  of  sight,  abandoning  the  Warren- 
ton  road  entirely  to  our  victorious 
troops.  Gen.  Tyler,  on  hearing  the 
guns  of  Hunter  on  our  right,  had 
pushed  Sherman's,  and  soon  after 
Keyes's,  brigade,  over  the  Run  to  as- 
sail the  enemy  in  his  front,  driving 
them  back  after  a  severe  struggle, 
and  steadily  advancing  until  checked 
by  a  heavy  fire  of  artillery  from  bat- 
teries on  the  hights  above  the  road, 
supported  by  a  brigade  of  Rebel 
infantry  strongly  posted  behind 
breastworks.  A  gallant  charge  by 
the  2d  Maine  and  3d  Connecticut 


temporarily  carried  the  buildings 
behind  which  the  Rebel  guns  were 
sheltered ;  but  the  breastworks  were 
too  strong,  and  our  men,  recoiling 
from  their  fire,  deflected  to  the  left, 
moving  down  the  Run  under  the 
shelter  of  the  bluff,  covering  the 
efforts  of  Captain's  Alexander's  pio- 
neers to  remove  the  heavy  abatis, 
whereby  the  Rebels  had  obstructed 
the  road  up  from  the  Stone  Bridge. 
This  had  at  length  been  effected;  and 
Schenck's  brigade  and  Ayres'  battery, 
of  Tyler's  division,  were  on  the  point 
of  crossing  the  Run  to  aid  in  comple- 
ting our  triumph. 

But  the  Rebels,  at  first  out-num- 
bered at  the  point  of  actual  collision, 
had  been  receiving  reinforcements 
nearly  all  day ;  and,  at  this  critical 
moment,  Gen.  Kirby  Smith,13  who 
had  that  morning  left  Piedmont, 
fifteen  miles  distant,  with  the  remain- 
ing brigade  of  Gen.  Johnston's  army, 
appeared  on  the  field.  Cheer  after 
cheer  burst  from  the  Rebel  hosts,  but 
now  so  downcast,  as  this  timely  re- 
enforcement  rushed  to  the  front  of 
the  battle.18    Smith  almost  instantly 


of  the  slain.  The  8th  Georgia  regiment  had 
suffered  heavily,  being  exposed,  as  it  took  and 
maintained  its  position,  to  a  fire  from  the  enemy, 
already  posted  within  a  hundred  yards  of  their 
front  and  right,  sheltered  by  fences  and  other 
cover.  It  was  at  this  time  that  Lieut.  Col.  Gard- 
ner was  severely  wounded,  as  also  several  other 
valuable  officers ;  the  Adjutant  of  the  regiment, 
Lieut.  Branch,  was  killed,  and  the  horse  of  the 
regretted  Bartow  was  shot  under  him.  The  4th 
Alabama  also  suffered  severely  from  the  deadly 
fire  of  the  thousands  of  muskets  which  they  so 
dauntlessly  fronted,  under  the  immediate  leader- 
ship of  Bee  himself.  Its  brave  Colonel,  E.  J. 
Jones,  was  dangerously  wounded,  and  many  gal- 
lant officers  fell,  slain  or  Ixors  de  combat. 

"Now,  however,  with  the  surging  mass  of 
over  14,000  Federal  infantry  pressing  on  their 
front,  and  under  the  incessant  fire  of  at  least 
twenty  pieces  of  artillery,  with  the  fresh  brig- 
ades of  Sherman  and  Keyes  approaching — the 
latter  already  in  musket— range — our  lines  gave 
back,  but  under  orders  from  Gen.  Bee. 

"  The  enemy,  maintaining  their  fire,  pressed 
their  swelling  masses  onward  as  our  shattered 


battalions  retired :  the  slaughter  for  the  moment 
was  deplorable,  and  has  filled  many  a  Southern 
home  with  life-long  sorrow. 

"  Under  this  inexorable  stress,  the  retreat 
continued  until  arrested  by  the  energy  and  reso- 
lution of  Gen.  Bee,  supported  by  Bartow  and 
Evans,  just  in  the  rear  of  the  Robinson  House, 
and  Hampton's  Legion,  which  had  been  already 
advanced,  and  was  in  position  near  it. 

"  Imboden's  battery,  which  had  been  handled 
with  marked  skill,  but  whose  men  were  almost 
exhausted,  and  the  two  pieces  of  Walton's  bat- 
tery, under  Lieut.  Richardson,  being  threatened 
by  the  enemy's  infantry  on  the  left  and  front, 
were  also  obliged  to  fall  back.  Imboden,  leaving 
a  disabled  piece  on  the  ground,  retired  until  he 
met  Jackson's  brigade,  while  Richardson  joined 
the  main  body  of  his  battery  near  the  Lewis 
House." 

"  A  Connecticut  traitor. 

13  The  Richmond  Dispatch  of  August  1st  has  a 
spirited  account  of  the  battle,  by  an  eye-witness, 
writing  at  Manassas  Junction,  July  22d;  from 
which  we  extract  the  following: 


ELZEY'S    CHARGE- ROUT   OP    OUR  FORCES. 


543 


fell  from  liis  horse,  wounded  ;  but 
the  command  of  his  brigade  was 
promptly  assumed  by  Col.  Arnold 
Elzey,1*  who  pressed  forward,  backed 
by  the  whole  reassured  and  exultant 
Rebel  host,  who  felt  that  the  day 
was  won.  Our  soldiers,  who  had 
been  thirteen  hours  marching  and 
fighting,  weary,  hungry,  thirsty,  con- 
tinually encountering  fresh  Rebel 
regiments,  and  never  seeing  even  a 
company  hurrying  to  their  own  sup- 
port, became  suddenly  dismayed  and 

"  Between  2  and  3  o'clock,  large  numbers  of 
men  were  leaving  the  field,  some  of  them 
wounded,  others  exhausted  by  the  long  struggle, 
who  gave  us  gloomy  reports ;  but,  as  the  firing  on 
both  sides  continued  steadily,  we  felt  sure  that 
our  brave  Southerners  had  not  been  conquered 
by  the  overwhelming  hordes  of  the  North.  It 
is,  however,  clue  to  truth  to  say  that  the  result 
at  this  hour  hung  trembling  in  the  balance.  We 
had  lost  numbers  of  our  most  distinguished  offi- 
cers. Grens.  Bartow  and  Bee  had  been  stricken 
down;  Lieut.  Col.  Johnson,  of  the  Hampton 
Legion,  had  been  killed ;  Col.  Hampton  had 
been  wounded.  But  there  was  at  hand  the  fear- 
less General  whose  reputation  as  a  commander 
was  staked  on  this  battle:  Gen.  Beauregard 
promptly  offered  to  lead  the  Hampton  Legion 
into  action,  which  he  executed  in  a  style  un- 
surpassed and  unsurpassable.  Gen.  Beauregard 
rode  up  and  down  our  lines,  between  the  enemy 
and  his  own  men,  regardless  of  the  heavy  fire, 
cheering  and  encouraging  our  troops.  About 
this  time,  a  shell  struck  his  horse,  taking  his 
head  off,  and  killing  the  horses  of  his  Aids, 
Messrs.  Ferguson  and  Hayward.  Gen.  Beau- 
regard's Aids  deserve  honorable  mention,  par- 
ticularly those  just  named,  and  Cols.  W.  Porcher 
Miles,  James  Chestnut,  John  L.  Manning,  and  A. 
R.  Chisholm.  Gen.  Johnston  also  threw  him- 
self into  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  seizing  the 
colors  of  a  Georgia  regiment,  and  rallying  them 
to  the  charge.  His  staff  signalized  themselves 
by  their  intrepidity,  Col.  Thomas  being  killed 
and  Major  Mason  wounded. 

"Your  correspondent  heard  Gen.  Johnston 
exclaim  to  Gen.  Cocke,  just  at  the  critical  mo- 
ment, 'Oh,  for  four  regimental'  His  wish  was 
answered;  for  in  the  distance  our  re  enforcements 
appeared.  The  tide  of  battle  was  turned  in  our 
favor  by  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Kirby  Smith,  from 
Winchester,  with  4,000  men  of  Gen.  Johnston's 
division.  Gen.  Smith  heard,  while  on  the  Ma- 
nassas railroad  cars,  the  roar  of  battle.  He 
stopped  the  train,  and  hurried  his  troops  across 
the  fields  to  the  point  just  where  he  was  most 
needed.  They  were  at  first  supposed  to  be  the 
enemy,  their  arrival  at  that  point  of  the  field 
being  entirely  unexpected.  The  enemy  fell 
back,  and  a  panic  seized  them.    Cheer  after 


panic-stricken.  Elzey's  and  Early's 16 
fresh  battalions  filled  the  woods  on 
their  right,  extending  rapidly  toward 
its  rear,  firing  on  them  from  under 
cover,  and  seeming,  by  their  shots  and 
cries,  to  be  innumerable.  Two  or 
three  of  our  regiments  recoiled,  and 
then  broke,  rushing  down  to  the  Run. 
Jefferson  Davis,  who  had  left  Rich- 
mond at  6  a.  m.,  reached  the  Junction 
at  4,  and  galloped  to  the  battle-field 
just  in  time,  it  was  said,  to  witness 
the  advance   of  his  cavalry,  1,500 

cheer  from  our  men  went  up,  and  we  knew  the 
battle  had  been  won." 

The  Louisville  Courier,  a  thoroughly  Secession 
sheet,  had  an  account  from  its  correspondent, 
"Se  De  Kay,"  who  was  an  officer  in  the  Ken- 
tucky battalion  attached  to  Gen.  Johnston's 
army,  which  reached  the  battle-field  among  the 
last,  and  who,  writing  from  Manassas,  Monday, 
July  2 2d,  after  stating  that  Beauregard  had 
been  driven  two  miles,  says  : 

"The  fortunes  of  the  day  were  evidently 
against  us.  Some  of  our  best  officers  had  been 
slain,  and  the  flower  of  our  army  lay  strewn 
upon  the  field,  ghastly  in  death  or  gaping  with 
wounds.  At  noon,  the  cannonading  is  described 
as  terrific.  It  was  an  incessant  roar  for  more 
than  two  hours,  the  havoc  and  devastation  at 
this  time  being  fearful.  McDowell,  with  the  aid 
of  Patterson's  division  of  20,000  men,  had  nearly 
outflanked  us,  and  they  were  just  in  the  act  of  pos- 
sessing themselves  of  the  railway  to  Richmond. 
Then  all  would  have  been  lost.  But,  most  oppor- 
tunely— I  may  say  providentially — at  this  juncture, 
Gen.  Johnston,  with  the  remnant  of  his  division — 
our  army,  as  we  fondly  call  it,  for  we  have  been 
friends  and  brothers  in  camp  and  field  for  three 
months — reappeared  and  made  one  other  desperate 
struggle  to  obtain  the  vantage-ground.  Elzey's 
brigade  of  Marylanders  and  Virginians  led  the 
charge ;  and  right  manfully  did  they  execute  the 
work." 

14  A  Marylander  who  did  not  '  go  with  his  State.' 

15  Beauregard's  report  of  the  battle  says : 

"  Col.  Early,  who,  by  some  mischance,  did  not 
receive  orders  until  2  o'clock,  which  had  been 
sent  him  at  noon,  came  on  the  ground  immedi- 
ately after  Elzey,  with  Kemper's  7th  Virginia, 
Hay's  7th  Louisiana,  and  Barksdale's  13th  Mis- 
sissippi regiments.  This  brigade,  by  the  personal 
direction  of  Gen.  Johnston,  was  marched  by  the 
Holkham  house,  across  the  fields  to  the  left, 
entirely  around  the  woods  through  which  Elzey 
had  passed,  and  under  a  severe  fire,  into  a  po- 
sition in  line  of  battle  near  Chinn's  house,  out- 
flanking the  enemy's  right." 


644 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT 


Btrong,  under  Lieut.  Col.  Stuart,  on 
the  heels  of  our  flying  troops.  He 
telegraphed  that  night  to  his  Con- 
gress as  follows : 

"  Manassas  Junction,  Sunday  night. 

"  Night  has  closed  upon  a  hard-fought 
field.  Our  forces  were  victorious.  The 
enemy  was  routed,  and  fled  precipitately, 
abandoning  a  large  amount  of  arms,  ammu- 
nition, knapsacks,  and  baggage.  The  ground 
was  strewed  for  miles  with  those  killed,  and 
the  farm-houses  and  the  ground  around  were 
filled  with  wounded. 

"  Pursuit  was  continued  along  several 
routes,  toward  Leesburg  and  Oenterville, 
until  darkness  covered  the  fugitives.  We 
have  captured  several  field-batteries,  stands 
of  arms,  and  Union  and  State  flags.  Many 
prisoners  have  been  taken.  Too  high  praise 
cannot  be  bestowed,  whether  for  the  skill 
of  the  principal  officers,  or  for  the  gallantry 
of  all  our  troops.  The  battle  was  mainly 
fought  on  our  left.  Our  force  was  15,000  ; 
that  of  the  enemy  estimated  at  35,000. 

"  Jeffeeson  Davis." 

Had  Davis  been  aware  of  the  utter 
demoralization  of  our  soldiers  by 
panic,  he  would  doubtless  have  had 
them  pursued,  not  only  toward  Cen- 
terville,  but,  if  possible,  into  and  be- 
yond it ;  and  he  would  not  have 
needed  so  grossly  to  understate  the 
strength  of  his  army  in  order  to 
magnify  his  victory. 

Before  3  p.  m.,  there  had  been  fitful 


cannonading  and  skirmishing,  but  no 
serious  engagement,  on  our  left. 16 
But,  when  our  defeat  on  the  right 
became  manifest,  Gen.  Johnston 17 
again  ordered  Ewell  to  advance  and 
attack;  which  he  did,  but  was  re- 
ceived by  the  2d  brigade,  Col.  T.  A. 
Davis,  with  so  rapid  and  spirited  a 
fire  of  grape  and  canister  that  he 
precipitately  retreated.  There  were 
still  more  than  three  hours  of  good 
daylight  when  the  Eebels  saw  our 
routed  right  rushing  madly  from  the 
field,13  like  frightened  sheep,  yet  their 
pursuit  amounted  to  nothing.  They 
came  across  Bull  Run,  preceded  by 
their  cavalry,  and  seem  to  have  taken 
a  deliberate,  though  rather  distant, 
survey  of  the  5th  division,  drawn  up 
in  good  order  along  the  slope  west  of 
Centerville,  and  eagerly  expecting 
their  advance.  But  they  appear  to 
have  been  aware  that  their  victory 
was  a  lucky  accident,  and  they  did 
not  choose  to  submit  its  prestige  to 
the  chances  of  another  fray.  Having 
gratified  their  thirst  for  knowledge, 
considerably  out  of  musket-shot,  they 
returned  to  their  previous  hiding- 
places  in  the  woods  skirting  Bull 


16  Beauregard  says,  in  his  official  report,  that 
he  sent  orders  to  Gen.  Ewell,  holding  his  ex- 
treme right  at  the  Union  Mills  ford,  next  south 
of  Blackburn's  (on  Bull  Run),  to  advance  and 
attack  ;  and  that  they  did  advance  a  mile  toward 
Centerville  on  the  Union  Mills  road,  but  retreated 
again  "  under  a  sharp  fire  of  artillery,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  miscarriage  of  orders." 

17  Gen.  Johnston,  who  had  joined  Beauregard, 
at  Winchester  on  the  20th,  was  the  ranking  offi- 
cer, and  entitled  to  command :  but,  after  listening 
to  Beauregard's  plans,  promptly  acceded  tq  them, 
and  directed  him  to  carry  them  into  execution. 
As  Davis  himself  finally  arrived  on  the  field,  the 
Rebel  army  may  be  said  to  have  had  three  com- 
manders-in-chief during  the  course  of  the  battle. 

1PA  correspondent  of  The  New  York  Tribune, 
who  witnessed  and  described  the  battle  and  the 
flight,  says : 


"  Notwithstanding  all  that  I  had  seen,  it 
seemed  incredible  that  our  whole  army  should 
melt  away  in  a  night;  and  so  I  remained  at 
Centerville,  trusting  that,  by  the  morning,  a  sort 
of  reorganization  would  have  taken  place,  and 
that  our  front  would  still  oppose  the  enemy. 
At  7  A.  H.,  I  started  toward  the  battle-field; 
and,  on  reaching  a  considerable  acclivity,  was 
amazed  to  find  that  no  vestige  of  our  troops  re- 
mained, excepting  a  score  or  two  of  straggling 
fugitives,  who  followed  the  tracks  of  those  who 
had  gone  before.  While  returning  to  Centerville, 
a  group  of  Rebel  cavalry  passed,  who  looked 
inquiringly,  but  did  not  question.  Their  conver- 
sation turned  upon  the  chances  of  cutting  off  the 
retreat  at  Fairfax  Court  House.  After  seeking 
Mr.  Waud,  an  artist  from  New  York,  who  also 
fingered,  I  went  straight  to  Fairfax.  As  we 
passed  the  church  used  as  a  hospital,  the  doctors 
came  out,  and,  finding  what  was  the  condition 
of  affairs,  walked  rapidly  away.  I  do  not  wish 
to  say  that  they  deserted  the  wounded.  They 
may  have  returned,  for  aught  I  know." 


FAILURE    OF   THE  VICTO 


RS   TO    PURSUE  — LOSSES.  545 


Ran. 19  During  the  fore  part  of  the 
night,  some  of  our  men,  who  had  not 
been  stampeded,  went  down  toward 
the  battle-field  and  brought  away 
one  or  two  guns,  which  had  been 
abandoned  in  the  flight,  but  not  cap- 
tured by  the  enemy.  Our  5th  di- 
vision, constituting  the  reserve,  now 
become  the  rear-guard,  of  our  army, 
remained  in  position  until  after  mid- 
night ;  when,  under  peremptory  orders 
from  Gen.  McDowell,  it  commenced 
its  deliberate  retreat  to  the  environs 
of  Washington.20 

19  Beauregard,  in  his  officials  report,  thus 
lamely  explains  this  modesty  : 

"  Early's  brigade,mean  while,  joined  by  the  19th 
Virginia  regiment,  Lieut.  Col.  Strange,  of  Cocke's 
brigade,  pursued  the  now  panic-stricken,  fugitive 
enemy.  Stuart,  with  his  cavalry,  and  Beckham, 
had  also  taken  up  the  pursuit  along  the  road  by 
which  the  enemy  had  come  upon  the  field  that 
morning ;  but,  soon  encumbered  by  prisoners, 
who  thronged  his  way,  the  former  was  unable 
to  attack  the  mass  of  the  fast-fleeing,  frantic 
Federalists.  Withers's,  R.  J.  Preston's,  Cash's, 
and  Kershaw's  regiments,  Hampton's  Legion 
and  Kemper's  battery,  also  pursued  along  the 
Warrenton  road  by  the  Stone  Bridge,  the  enemy 
having  opportunely  opened  a  way  for  them 
through  the  heavy  abatis  which  my  troops  had 
made  on  the  west  side  of  the  bridge,  several 
days  before.  But  this  pursuit  was  soon  recalled, 
in  consequence  of  a  false  report,  which  unfortu- 
nately reached  us,  that  the  eneimfs  reserves,  known 
to  be  fresh  and  of  considerable  strength  were  threat- 
ening the  position  of  Union  Mills  Ford.'1 

20  The  impression  that  the  Rebels,  had  they 
pursued,  might  have  captured  or  dispersed  our 
flying  forces,  is  un sustained  by  facts.  For  be- 
tween the  panic-stricken  fugitives  and  the  vic- 
tors were  not  merely  the  reserve  (5th)  di- 
vision, which  remained  in  position,  and  had 
not  fired  a  shot,  but  the  1st  (Tyler's)  division 
forming  our  left,  which  had  suffered  little  loss, 
but  had  signally  repulsed  the  demonstration 
made  upon  it  at  the  close  of  the  fight ;  while  the 
better  portion  of  our  beaten  right  and  center, 
including  the  regular  infantry  and  cavalry,  still 
stood  its  ground  and  sternly  faced  the  foe. 
Maj.  Barry,  our  Chief  of  Artillery  in  the  battle, 
in  his  official  report,  after  noticing  the  loss  of 
ten  of  his  guns  at  the  close,  through  the  flight  of 
their  supporting  infantry,  says: 

"  The  army  having  retired  upon  Centerville, 
I  was  ordered  by  Gen.  McDowell  in  person,  to 
post  the  artillery  in  position  to  cover  the  retreat. 

"The  batteries  of  Hunt,  Ayres,  Tidball,  Ed- 

35 


Gen.  McDowell  reports  our  losses 
in  this  engagement  at  481  killed  and 
1,011  wounded,  but  says  nothing  of 
how  many  wounded  or  others  were 
taken  prisoners.21  Gen.  Beauregard 
reports  the  Eebel  loss  at  269  killed 
and  1,533  wounded;22  in  all,  1,852; 
saying  nothing  of  any  loss  in  prison- 
ers, of  whom  two  or  three  hundred 
were  taken  by  our  soldiers  in  the 
early  part  of  the  battle,  and  duly  for- 
warded to  Washington.  He  says  he 
had  sent  1,460  wounded  and  other 
prisoners  to  Richmond,  and  estimates 

wards,  Green,  and  the  New- York  8th  regiment, 
(the  latter  served  by  volunteers  from  Wilcox's 
brigade,)  20  pieces  in  all,  were  at  once  placed  in 
position;  and  thus  remained  until  12  o'clock 
p.  m.,  when,  orders  having  been  received  to  re- 
tire upon  the  Potomac,  the  batteries  were  put 
in  march,  and,  covered  by  Richardson's  brigade, 
retired  in  good  order  and  without  haste,  and, 
early  next  morning,  reoccupied  their  former 
camps  on  the  Potomac." 

Col.  J.  B.  Richardson,  commanding  the  4th 
brigade  of  Tyler's  division,  remained  unmolested 
in  position  one  mile  in  advance  of  Centerville,  on 
the  Blackburn's  Ford  road,  until  2  a.  m.  of  Mon- 
day; then  retreated,  per  order,  through  Center- 
ville to  Fairfax  and  Arlington,  entirely  unassailed. 

21  Among  our  killed  were  Col.  James  Came- 
ron, brother  of  the  Secretary  of  War — of  the  79th 
New  York  (Highlanders);  Col.  Slocum,  and 
Major  Ballou,  of  the  2d  Rhode  Island ;  and  Lieut. 
Col.  Haggerty,  of  the  69th  New  York.  Among 
our  wounded  were  Gen.  David  Hunter  and  Gen. 
S.  P.  Heintzelman — commanding  divisions  ;  Col. 
Oliver  B.  Wilcox,  of  Michigan;  Col.  Gilman 
Marston,  of  the  1st  New  Hampshire ;  Col.  A.  M. 
Wood,  of  the  14th  New  "York;  Col.  H.  W. 
Slocum,  of  the  27th  New  York;  and  Col.  N.  L. 
Farnham,  of  the  11th  New  York  (Fire  Zouaves). 
Col.  Wilcox  was  also  taken  prisoner,  as  well  as 
Col.  Michael  Corcoran,  of  the  69th  New  York 
(Irish),  and  Maj.  James  D.  Potter,  of  the  38th 
New  York — both  slightly  wounded. 

22  "Se  De  Kay,"  a  Rebel  officer,  writing  to 
The  Louisville  Courier  from  Manassas  Junction, 
on  the  2 2d,  says: 

"  Our  loss  is  fully  two  thousand  killed  and 
wounded.  Among  the  killed  are  Gen.  Bee,  of 
South  Carolina;  Gen.  E.  K.  Smith,  [a  mistake], 
Gen.  Bartow,  of  Georgia;  Col.  Moore  and  all 
the  Alabama  field  officers;  Col.  Fisher  and  the 
North  Carolina  field  officers;  Adjt.  Branch,  of 
Georgia,  and  a  host  of  other  leading  men." 


546 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


[five  weeks  after  the  fight]  that  the 
number  may  be  increased  to  1,600. 
That  is  certainly  a  very  lean  exhibit 
of  prisoners  as  the  fruit  of  so  de- 
cisive a  victory ;  but  the  fleetness  of 
our  soldiers  is  to  be  taken  into  the 
account.  He  guesses  that  our  losses 
will  amount  to  4,500  in  killed,  wound- 
ed, and  prisoners,  and  adds : 

"The  ordnance  and  supplies  captured  in- 
clude some  28  23  field-pieces  of  the  best 
character  of  arms,24  with  over  100  rounds 
of  ammunition  for  each  gun,  37  caissons,  6 
forges,  4  battery- wagons,  64  artillery  horses, 
completely  equipped,  500,000  roundsof  small- 
arms  ammunition,  4,500  sets  of  accouter- 
ments,  over  500  muskets,  some  9  regimental 
and  garrison  flags,  with  a  large  number  of 
pistols,  knapsacks,  swords,  canteens,  blan- 
kets, a  large  store  of  axes  and  intrenching 
tools,  wagons,  ambulances,  horses,  camp  and 
garrison  equipage,  hospital  stores,  and  some 
subsistence." 

At  7  a.  m.,  of  Monday,  the  22d,  the 
last  of  our  stragglers  and  wounded 
left  Centerville,  which  a  Rebel  cav- 
alry force  was  about  to  enter.  But 


there  was  no  pursuit,  and  no  loss  on 
our  part  after  the  battle,  but  of  what 
our  men  threw  away.  Beauregard 
explains  his  failure  to  pursue,  after 
our  discomfiture,  as  follows : 

"  An  army  which  had  fought  like  ours  on 
that  day,  against  uncommon  odds,  under  a 
July  sun,  most  of  the  time  without  water 
and  without  food,  except  a  hastily  snatched 
meal  at  dawn,  was  not  in  condition  for  the 
toil  of  an  eager,  effective  pursuit  of  an  enemy 
immediately  after  the  battle. 

uOn  the  following  day,  an  unusually 
heavy  and  unintermitting  fall  of  rain  inter- 
vened to  obstruct  our  advance,  with  reason- 
able prospect  of  fruitful  results.  Added  to 
this,  the  want  of  a  cavalry  force  of  sufficient 
numbers  made  an  efficient  pursuit  a  military 
impossibility."   

The  forces  actually  engaged  in  this 
celebrated  battle,  so  decisive  in  its 
results  and  so  important  in  its  conse- 
quences, were  probably  not  far  from 
25,000  on  either  side ; 25  while  the  com- 
batants actually  on  the  battle-field,  or 
so  near  it  as  to  be  practically  at  the 
disposal  of  the  respective  command- 


23  Our  reports  admit  a  loss  of  1 7  guns ;  other 
accounts  make  it  22.  Beauregard,  writing  on 
the  2Gth  of  August,  should  have  been  able  to 
state  the  exact  number.  His  statement  of  the 
number  of  muskets  taken  at  "over  500,"  in- 
cluding all  those  dropped  by  our  dead  and 
wounded,  proves  that  the  stories  told  by  exci- 
ted correspondents  and  other  fugitives,  of  our 
men  throwing  away  everything  that  could  im- 
pede their  flight,  were  gross  exaggerations. 

24  Gen.  Heintzelman,  in  his  official  report  of 
the  battle,  giving  an  account  of  his  retreat  by 
the  circuitous  road  on  which  ho  had  advanced, 
says: 

"  Having  every  reason  to  fear  a  vigorous  pur- 
suit from  the  enemy's  fresh  troops,  I  was  desi- 
rous of  forming  a  strong  rear-guard ;  but  neither 
the  efforts  of  the  officers  of  the  regular  army,  nor 
the  coolness  of  the  regular  troops  with  me,  could 
induce  them  to  form  a  single  company.  We  re- 
lied entirely  for  our  protection  on  one  section  of 
artillery  and  a  few  companies  of  cavalry.  Most 
of  the  road  was  favorable  for  infantry,  but  unfa- 
vorable for  cavalry  and  artillery.  About  dusk, 
as  we  approached  the  Warrenton  turnpike,  we 
heard  a  firing  of  rifled  cannon  on  our  right,  and 
learned  that  the  enemy  had  established  a  battery 
enfilading  the  road.    Capt.  Arnold,  with  his  sec- 


tion of  artillery,  attempted  to  run  the  gauntlet 
and  reach  the  bridge  over  Cub  Run,  about  two 
miles  from  Centerville,  but  found  it  obstructed 
with  broken  vehicles,  and  was  compelled  to 
abandon  his  pieces,  as  they  were  under  the  fire 
of  these  rifled  cannon.  The  cavalry  turned  to 
the  left,  and,  after  passing  through  a  strip  of 
woods  and  some  fields,  struck  a  road  which  led 
them  to  some  camps  occupied  by  our  troops  in 
the  morning,  through  which  we  gained  the  turn- 
pike. At  about  8  p.  m.,  we  reached  the  camps 
we  had  occupied  in  the  morning.  Had  a  brigade 
from  the  reserve  advanced  a  short  distance  be- 
yond Centerville,  nearly  one-third  of  the  artil- 
lery lost  might  have  been  saved,  as  it  was  aban- 
doned at  or  near  this  crossing." 

These  were  the  only  guns  lost  by  us,  save 
those  abandoned  for  want  of  horses,  on  the  im- 
mediate field  of  conflict. 

"Pollard,  in  his  "Southern  History,''  says: 
"  Our  effective  force  of  all  arms  ready  for  action 

on  the  field,  on  the  eventful  morning,  was  less 

than  30,000  men." 

This  was  before  the  arrival  of  that  portion  of 
Johnston's  army  led  to  the  field  by  Kirby  Smith, 
and  afterward  commanded  by  Elzey,  or  the  brig- 
ade of  Early — to  say  nothing  of  the  reinforce- 
ments that  were  received  during  the  day  from 
the  direction  of  Richmond. 


CAUSES   OF    OUR   DEFEAT  —  SCOTT'S  STRATEGY. 


547 


ers,  were,  on  either  side,  not  far  from 
35,000.  But  the  Rebels,  who  were 
somewhat  the  fewer  at  day-break, 
fought  under  the  encouraging  stimu- 
lus of  a  knowledge  that  every  hour, 
as  it  passed,  added  to  their  strength ; 
that  each  railroad  train  arriving  at 
the  Junction,  brought  fresh  brigade 
after  brigade  to  their  support ; 26  and 
these,  as  they  arrived,  were  hastened 
to  that  part  of  the  field  whereon  their 
services  could  be  most  effective  : 
while  our  men,  who  had  been  called 
to  arms  at  2  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  had  generally  thrown  aside  their 
knapsacks  and  haversacks  to  facilitate 
their  movements,  had  been  fourteen 
hours  marching — some  of  them  on 
the  double-quick  for  miles — or  fight- 
ing, and  were  utterly  exhausted  and 
faint  with  hunger  and  thirst ;  while 
not  a  single  company  had  been  added 
to  their  numbers.  Some  regiments 
fought  badly,  and  had  been  demor- 
alized and  dispersed  prior  to  the  gen- 
eral .  catastrophe ;  but  the  great  ma- 
jority evinced  a  courage  and  devotion 
which,  under  favoring  auspices,  would 
have  commanded  victory.  They  gave 
way  only  when  hope  seemed  dead — 
when  the   ever-increasing  hosts  of 

26  Mr.  Julius  Bing,  on  his  return  from  captivity 
at  Richmond,  having  been  taken  prisoner  on  the 
battle-field,  after  seeing  and  hearing  all  that  ho 
could  on  both  sides,  reports  as  follows : 

"Beauregard's  force  at  Bull  Run  was  27,000 ; 
which  was  increased  by  8,000  of  Johnston's  the 
day  before,  and  by  5,000  more  during  the  en- 
gagement. This  statement  is  confirmed  from 
an  independent  and  trustworthy  source." 

27  The  New  York  Times  of  July  26th  contained 
a  carefully  prepared  statement,  by  its  Editor,  of 
a  conversation  with  Gen.  Scott  at  his  own  dinner- 
table  on  the  Tuesday  before  the  battle ;  wherein 
Gen.  Scott  developed  his  conception  of  the  strat- 
egy required  for  tho  overthrow  of  the  Rebellion, 
as  follows : 

"  If  tho  matter  had  been  loft  to  him,  ho  said, 
he  would  have  commenced  by  a  perfect  blockade 
of  every  Southern  port  on  tho  Atlantic  and  on 


their  foes  not  only  outnumbered  them 
in  their  front,  but  filled  the  woods  on 
their  right  flank,  exposing  them  to 
an  enfilading  fire,  which  they  could 
not  return  with  effect ;  and,  their  de- 
feat once  confessed,  the  confusion  and 
panic  of  their  flight  are  explained,  not 
excused,  by  the  fact  that,  owing  to 
the  long  detour  they  had  necessarily 
made  in  advancing  to  the  attack,  pur- 
suant to  the  plan  of  battle,  their  line 
of  retreat  lay  in  part  along  the  front 
of  the  foe,  much  of  whose  strength 
was  actually  nearer  to  Centerville 
than  they  were  when  the  fortunes  of 
the  day  turned  against  them. 

The  causes  of  this  disaster,  so  shame- 
fully misstated  and  perverted  at  the 
time,  are  now  generally  understood. 
~No  one  could,  at  this  day,  repeat  the 
misrepresentations  that  for  the  mo- 
ment prevailed,  without  conscious, 
palpable  guilt  and  ignominy.  The 
true,  controlling  reasons  of  our  defeat 
are,  briefly,  these : 

I.  The  fundamental,  fatal  error  on 
our  side  was  that  spirit  of  hesitation, 
of  indecision,  of  calculated  delay, 
of  stolid  obstruction,  which  guided 27 
our  Military  councils,  scattering  our 

the  Gulf  Then  he  would  have  collected  a  largo 
force  at  the  capital  for  defensive  purposes,  and 
another  large  one  on  the  Mississippi  for  offensive 
operations.  The  Summer  months,  during  which 
it  is  madness  to  take  troops  south  of  St.  Louis, 
should  have  been  devoted  to  tactical  instruction 
— and,  with  the  first  frosts  of  Autumn,  ho  would 
have  taken  a  column  of  80,000  well-disciplined 
troops  down  tho  Mississippi — and  taken  every 
important  point  on  that  river,  New  Orleans  in- 
cluded. It  could  have  been  done,  he  said,  with 
greater  ease,  with  less  loss  of  life,  and  with  far 
more  important  results,  than  would  attend  the 
marching  of  an  army  to  Richmond.  At  eight 
points,  the  river  would  probably  have  been  de- 
fended, and  eight  battles  would  have  been  ne- 
cessary; but,  in  every  one  of  them,  success 
would  havo  been  made  certain  for  us.  The 
Mississippi  and  the  Atlantic  onco  ours,  tho 
Southern  States  would  havo  been  compelled,  by 
the  natural  and  inevitable  pressuro  of  ovents,  to 
seek,  by  a  return  to  tho  Union,  escapo  from  the 


548 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


forces  and  paralyzing  our  efforts. 
Had  any  real  purpose  of  suppressing 
the  Rebellion  been  cherished  by  Gen. 
Scott,  he  would  never  have  scattered 
our  eastern  forces  along  the  line  of 
the  Potomac  and  Chesapeake,  from 
Cumberland  to  Fortress  Monroe,  di- 
vided into  three  or  four  distinct 
armies,  under  the  command  of  militia 


officers  who  had  never  smelt  burning 
powder,  unless  in  a  squirrel-hunt. 
His  advance  across  the  Potomac,  after 
having  been  put  off  so  long  as  possi- 
ble, was  made,  as  we  have  seen,  on 
the  24th  of  May.  Within  one  week 
thereafter,  a  column  of  50,000  men 
should  have  taken  the  road  to  Rich- 
mond, with  their  commander  in  their 


ruin  that  would  speedily  overwhelm  them,  out 
of  it.  'This,'  said  he,  '  was  my  plan.  But  I  am 
only  a  subordinate.  It  is  my  business  to  give 
advice  when  it  is  asked,  and  to  obey  orders  when 
they  are  given.  I  shall  do  it.  There  are  men  in 
the  Cabinet  who  know  much  more  about  war 
than  I  do,  and  who  have  far  greater  influence 
than  I  have  in  determining  the  plan  of  the  cam- 
paign. There  never  was  a  more  just  and  upright 
man  than  the  President — never  one  who  desired 
more  sincerely  to  promote  the  best  interest  of 
the  country.  But  there  are  men  among  his  ad- 
risers  who  consult  their  own  resentments  far 
more  than  the  dictates  of  wisdom  and  experi- 
ence, and  these  men  will  2)robably  decide  the  plan 
of  the  campaign.  I  shall  do,  or  attempt,  what- 
ever I  am  ordered  to  do.  But  they  must  nothold 
me  responsible.  If  I  am  ordered  to  go  to  Rich- 
mond, I  shall  endeavor  to  do  it.  But  I  know 
perfectly  well  that  they  have  no  conception  of 
the  difficulties  we  shall  encounter.  I  know  the 
country — how  admirably  adapted  it  is  for  de- 
fense, and  how  resolutely  and  obstinately  it  will 
be  defended.  I  would  like  nothing  better  than 
to  take  Richmond ;  now  that  it  has  been  dis- 
graced by  becoming  the  capital  of  the  Rebel 
Confederacy,  I  feel  a  resentment  toward  it,  and 
should  like  nothing  better  than  to  scatter  it3 
Congress  to  the  winds.  But  I  have  lived  long 
enough  to  know  that  human  resentment  is  a 
very  bad  foundation  for  public  policy ;  and  these 
gentlemen  will  live  long  enough  to  learn  it  also. 
I  shall  do  what  I  am  ordered.  I  shall  fight 
when  and  where  I  am  commanded.  But,  if  I 
am  compelled  to  fight  before  I  am  ready,  they  shall 
not  hold  me  responsible.  These  gentlemen  must 
take  the  responsibility  of  their  acts,  as  I  am 
willing  to  take  that  of  mine.  But  they  must  not 
throw  their  responsibility  upon  my  shoulders.' 

"  This  is  the  substance  and  very  nearly  the 
language  of  a  portion  of  Gen.  Scott's  conversa- 
tion on  the  occasion  referred  to.  It  proves  con- 
clusively that  he  was  opposed  to  the  advance 
upon  Richmond  by  way  of  Manassas,  at  that  time. " 

Hon.  Francis  P.  Blair,  in  a  speech  in  the  House 
(Aug.  1st,  1861),  after  repelling  the  false  impu- 
tation that  Gen.  Scott  had  been  constrained  by 
the  President  (his  only  superior)  to  fight  this  bat- 
tle prematurely,  in  opposition  to  the  dictates  of 
his  own  judgment,  stated  that 

"  The  President,  after  he  had  information  that 
Gen.  Johnston  had  escaped  through  the  hands 
of  Gen.  Patterson  and  had  joined  Gen.  Beaure- 


gard on  Friday  evening,  went  to  Gen.  Scott,  and 
suggested  the  propriety  of  waiting  until  Patter- 
son's corps  could  come  up  and  reenforce  the  army 
that  was  then  before  Manassas;  but,  so  firmly 
fixed  was  Gen.  Scott's  determination  to  attack  the 
enemy  then  and  there,  that  the  President's  sug- 
gestion was  disregarded.  The  Secretary  of  War 
also  returned  from  the  field  before  the  battle,  and 
endeavored  to  induce  Gen.  Scott  to  send  forward 
reinforcements ;  he  urged  it  again  and  again; 
and  finally  succeeded  in  having  five  regiments 
sent,  two  of  which  reached  Centerville  before  the 
retreat  commenced." 

Mr.  Blair  then  took  up  the  above  statement  of 
Tlie  Times,  and  thus  dealt  with  it : 

"  I  do  not  believe  that  it  was  Gen.  Scott's  plan. 
I  do  not  think  he  would  promulgate  his  plan.  I 
think,  even,  that,  if  such  was  his  plan,  gentlemen, 
without  arrogating  to  themselves  any  superior 
military  knowledge,  might  well  dissent  from  it.  I 
do  not  profess  to  have  any  knowledge  of  military 
matters  at  all ;  and  yet  I  can  say  that  any  such  plan 
as  that  would  lead  to  a  fatal  disaster  to  our  coun- 
try, in  the  relations  which  it  would  bring  about 
between  the  people  of  the  Northern  and  South- 
ern States  ;  in  the  relations  it  would  bring  about 
between  our  Government  and  foreign  govern- 
ments, and  between  the  Union  men  in  the  Bor- 
der States  and  their  enemies.  I  think  it  would 
be  a  fatal  mistake.  I  am  well  satisfied  that  it 
is  not  the  plan  of  the  Government,  and  will  not 
be  acted  upon,  whether  Gen.  Scott  favors  it  or 
not.  That  is  the  plan  which  the  Confederate 
troops  and  authorities  are  in  favor  of,  and  they 
have  proceeded  upon  it.  Their  desire  is  to  make 
the  whole  of  this  war  within  the  Border  States, 
and  escape  themselves  scot  free — not  only  free 
from  Scott,  but  from  all  our  other  Generals.  They 
wish  to  enjoy  entire  quietude,  in  order  to  raise 
their  cotton,  that  they  may  hold  it  out  to  foreign 
nations  as  a  bribe  to  break  our  blockade.  That 
is  their  object  and  their  heart's  desire. 

"  They  wish,  also,  to  intrench  themselves  with- 
in those  Border  States,  where  they  can  get  plen- 
ty of  subsistence,  and  wring  a  reluctant  support 
from  the  Union  men  of  those  States.  The  coun- 
ties of  Alexandria  and  Fairfax  gave  an  immense 
Union  vote  when  the  question  was  submitted  to 
them ;  and,  at  the  last  vote  upon  the  Ordinance 
of  Secession,  they  would  have  given  the  same 
vote  for  the  Union  if  they  had  not  been  re- 
strained by  the  bayonets  of  the  Confederate 
troops;  for,  in  whatever  part  of  Virginia  they 


F  .    P.    BLAIR  —  SCOTT  —  PATTERSON. 


midst,  even  though  he  had  to  travel 
in  an  ambulance.  Moving  slowly, 
steadily,  cautiously  forward,  our  army 
should  have  been  reenforced  by  two 
or  three  fresh  regiments  each  day, 
being  exercised  in  field  maneuvers  at 
every  opportunity.  On  or  before  the 
1st  day  of  July,  this  array,  one  hun- 
dred thousand  strong,  should  have 
been  before  Richmond,  not  then  for- 
tified to  any  serious  extent,  and  should 
have  replaced  the  Stars  and  Stripes 
on  the  steeples  of  that  city  by  the 

were  free  from  the  Confederate  bayonets,  they 
gave  a  majority  of  votes  against  Secession.  The 
same  was  the  case  in  Tennessee.  Any  such  plan 
as  that  which  The  Times  says  is  Gen.  Scott's  plan 
of  carrying  on  the  war  would  leave  the  unarmed 
Union  men  of  the  Border  States  and  of  the  South- 
ern States  at  the  mercy  of  the  armies  of  the  Con- 
federate States.  It  would  leave  the  25,000  ma- 
jority in  East  Tennessee,  the  vast  majority  in 
Missouri,  and  everywhere  else,  at  the  mercy  of 
the  Rebels. 

"  I  say,  further,  that,  if  we  remain  idle  for 
such  a  period  of  time,  doing  nothing  upon  the 
borders  of  these  revolted  States,  however  great 
an  army  we  might  possess,  we  should,  by  so  do- 
ing, proclaim  to  the  world  that  we  were  unable 
to  enter  those  States  and  put  down  Rebellion ; 
and  the  governments  of  Europe  would  make  it  a 
pretext  for  acknowledging  the  independence  of 
those  States. 

"  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  such  important 
political  considerations'  must  enter  largely  into 
any  plan  of  campaign ;  and  no  plan  is  admissible 
which,  by  its  delays,  destroys  the  business  of  the 
country,  leaves  the  Union  men  of  the  Border 
States  and  their  property  a  prey  to  the  Rebels, 
and  gives  a  pretext  to  foreign  Powers  to  inter- 
fere for  the  purpose  of  forcing  our  blockade." 

That  the  policy  of  'wait  and  get  ready,'  in- 
volved, in  fact,  a  virtual  admission  of  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  Confederacy,  while  enabling  the 
Rebels  to  crush  out  the  last  vestiges  of  Union- 
ism in  the  South,  as  also  to  cover  all  the  impor- 
tant points  with  impregnable  fortifications,  erect- 
ed in  good  part  by  slave  labor,  is  too  obvious  to 
need  enforcement.  It  was  the  policy  of  all  who 
wished  to  save  the  Union  by  surrendering  at  dis- 
cretion to  the  Rebels,  bidding  them  do  what 
they  pleased  with  the  Constitution,  the  Govern- 
ment, the  territories,  so  that  they  would  but  con- 
sent to  endure  us  as  fellow-countrymen. 

28  That  Gen.  Scott,  though  loyal  and  Union- 
loving,  was  always  in  favor  of  buying  off  the 
Rebellion  by  compromises  and  concessions,  and 
averse  to  what  was  most  unjustly  termed  'coer- 


549 

Fourth,  at  latest.  That  we  had  ample 
force  to  do  this,  is  now  beyond  doubt ; 
for  the  Rebels,  gathering  all  their 
strength  from  the  Shenandoah  on  the 
one  side  to  the  James  on  the  other, 
were  barely  able,  on  the  21st — three 
weeks  after  we  should  have  been  be- 
fore Richmond — to  beat  a  third  of 
our  regiments  that  might  and  should 
have  confronted  them.28 

II.  The  flagrant  disobedience  and 
defection  of  Gen.  Patterson,29  unac- 
countable on  any  hypothesis  consist- 

cion'  and  '  invasion,' is  no  secret.  How  eagerly 
he  jumped  upon  the  '  finality'  platform  when 
nominated  for  President,  in  1852,  and  ordered  a 
grand  salute  of  one  hundred  guns  in  honor  of  the 
passage  of  Mr.  Guthrie's  Compromise  proposi- 
tions in  the  "  Peace  Conference"  of  1861,  are 
matters  of  record.  That  he  sought  to  have  Fort 
Sumter  evacuated,  a  month  later,  as  a  "  military 
necessity,"  is  well  known.  Two  or  three  weeks 
thereafter,  on  the  very  morning  that  the  Rebels 
opened  fire  on  Sumter,  The  National  Intelligencer, 
of  April  12th,  contained  the  following,  which 
was  widely  understood  to  have  been  inspired,  if 
not  directly  written,  by  him : 

"  There  is  a  general  and  almost  universal  de- 
sire that  no  coercive  measures  should  be  resort- 
ed to,  so  as  to  induce  actual  collision  of  arms  be- 
tween the  States  that  say  they  have  seceded  and 
the  Government  of  the  United  States,  until  all 
peaceful  remedies  have  been  exhausted,  yet : 

"  Great  confidence  is  inspired  by  an  exhibi- 
tion of  the  actual  strength  and  power  of  the 
Government.  It  gratifies  national  pride  to  have 
the  consciousness  that  the  Government  is  in  pos- 
session of  power,  and  that,  when  it  is  not  exer- 
cised, it  may  receive  the  credit  of  forbearance. 
There  would  be  an  objection  that  this  attribute 
of  power  should  be  directed,  at  the  present  mo- 
ment, to  any  specific  end ;  even  though  that  end 
should  be  the  execution  of  the  laws.  But  no- 
thing can  be  more  evident  than  that  universal 
satisfaction  is  felt  and  security  inspired  by  the 
knowledge  that  the  power  of  the  Government  is 
ready,  at  a  moment's  notice,  to  be  applied  and 
used." 

29  Pollard,  in  his  "Southern  History,"  blandly 
says: 

"  The  best  service  which  the  army  of  the  She- 
nandoah could  render  was  to  prevent  the  defeat 
of  that  of  the  Potomac.  To  be  able  to  do  this, 
it  was  necessary  for  Gen.  Johnston  to  defeat 
Gen.  Patterson,  or  to  elude  him.  The  latter 
course  was  the  more  speedy  and  certain,  and 
was,  therefore,  adopted.  Evading  the  enemy  by 
the  disposition  of  the  advance  guard  under  Col 


550 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


ent  with  the  possession,  on  his  part,  of 
courage,  common  sense,  and  loyalty.30 

III.  The  failure  of  Gen.  Scott  to 
send  forward  with  Gen.  McDowell  a 
force  adequate  to  provide  against  all 
contingencies.  The  fact  that  20,000 
volunteers  remained  idle  and  useless, 
throughout  that  eventful  Sunday,  in 
and  immediately  around  Washing- 
ton— Scott  having  obstinately  resist- 
ed entreaties  that  they  should  be  dis- 
patched to  the  front — insisting  that 
McDowell  had  "  men  enough" — that 
he  needed  no  cavalry,  etc. — of  itself 
attests  strongly  the  imbecility  and 
lack  of  purpose  that  then  presided 
over  our  military  councils.31 

IV  The  Eebels  were  kept  thor- 


oughly acquainted  by  their  confeder^ 
ates,  left  by  Davis,  Floyd,  etc.,  in  our 
service,  with  everything  that  took 
place  or  was  meditated 82  on  our  side ; 
and  so  were  able  to  anticipate  and 
baffle  every  movement  of  our  ar- 
mies.33 Thus,  a  military  map  or  plan 
of  the  region  directly  west  of  Wash- 
ington had  been  completed  for  use 
at  the  War  Department  barely  two 
days  before  our  advance  reached  Cen- 
terville ;  but,  the  movement  being 
rapid,  the  Eebels  left  here  many  ar- 
ticles in  their  hasty  flight,  and,  among 
them,  a  copy  of  this  map,  which  was 
supposed  to  be  unknown  to  all  but  a 
few  of  our  highest  officers.  It  was 
so  throughout.  Washington  swarmed 


Stuart,  our  army  moved  through  Ashley's  Gap  to 
Piedmont,  a  station  of  the  Manassas  Gap  railroad. 
Hence,  the  infantry  were  to  be  transported  by 
the  railway,  while  the  cavalry  and  artillery  were 
ordered  to  continue  their  march.  Gen.  Johnston 
reached  Manassas  about  noon  on  the  20th,  pre- 
ceded by  the  7th  and  8th  Georgia  regiments  and 
by  Jackson's  brigade,  consisting  of  the  2d,  4th, 
5th,  27th,  and  33d  Virginia  regiments.  He  was 
accompanied  by  Gen.  Bee,  with  the  4th  Alaba- 
ma, the  2d,  and  two  companies  of  the  11th  Mis- 
sissippi. The  president  of  the  railroad  had  as- 
sured him  that  the  remaining  troops  should  arrive 
during  the  day." 

80  Patterson  was  a  Breckinridge  Democrat  of 
the  extreme  pro-Slavery  type — of  that  type  whose 
views  were  expressed  by  The  Pennsylvanian — 
(see  page  428).  When,  on  the  reception  of  the 
tidings  of  Fort  Sumter's  surrender,  a  great  pop- 
ular uprising  took  place  in  Philadelphia,  as  in 
other  cities,  and  immense  crowds  paraded  the 
streets,  demanding  that  the  flag  of  the  Union 
should  be  everywhere  displayed,  Gen.  Patter- 
son's was  one  of  the  mansions  at  which  this  pub- 
lic exaction  of  an  avowal  of  sympathy  with  the 
outraged  symbol  of  our  Union  was  longest  and 
Biost  sturdily  resisted. 

31 W.  H.  Russell,  writing  from  Washington  to 
Tlie  London  Times  on  the  19th,  two  days  before 
the  battle — doubtless  obtaining  his  information 
from  authentic  sources — thus  states  the  disposi- 
tion of  our  forces  at  that  moment : 

Under  McDowell,  at  Fairfax  and  Centerville  .   .  30.000 

Under  Patterson,  on  the  Shenandoah   22.000 

Under  Mansfield,  in  and  about  "Washington  .   .    .  16,000 

Under  Butler,  at  and  near  Fortress  Monroe    .   .  11,000 

Under  Banks,  in  and  near  Baltimore   7,400 

Total  S6.400 


Thus,  while  the  Rebels  concentrated,  from 
Richmond  on  the  south  to  Winchester  on  the 
north,  all  their  available  strength  upon  Manassas, 
and  had  it  in  hand  before  the  close  of  the  battle, 
McDowell  had  but  little  more  than  a  third  of  our 
corresponding  forces  wherewith  to  oppose  it — 
he  acting  on  the  offensive.  In  other  words,  we 
fought  with  35,000  men,  a  battle  in  which  we 
might  and  should  have  had  75,000. 

32  Mr.  Julius  Bing,  a  German  by  birth  but 
British  by  naturalization,  who  was  on  the  battle- 
field as  a  spectator,  and  was  there  taken  prison- 
er, and  conducted  next  morning  to  Beauregard's 
head-quarters,  whence  he  was  sent  to  Richmond, 
and  who  seems  to  have  had  the  faculty  of  making 
himself  agreeable  to  either  side,  stated,  after  his 
return,  that  among  the  men  he  met  at  Beaure- 
gard's head-quarters,  at  the  Junction,  was  Col. 
Jordan,  formerly  of  our  War  Department,  who 
boasted  that  he  had  received, 

"Before  the  attack  at  Bull  Run,  a  cipher  dis- 
patch from  some  well-informed  person  within 
our  lines,  giving  full  details  of  our  movements, 
including  the  particulars  of  the  plan  of  battle, 
the  time  at  which  operations  would  commence, 
and  the  number  of  our  troops." 

83  A  correspondent  of  The  New  York  Tribune, 
in  his  account  of  the  battle,  says : 

UA  remarkable  fact  to  be  considered  is,  that 
the  enemy  seemed  perfectly  acquainted  with  our 
plans.  The  feint  of  Col.  Richardson  availed 
nothing,  since  the  Rebel  force  had  nearly  all 
been  withdrawn  from  that  position.  Our  com- 
bined attack  was  thoroughly  met,  and  at  the 
very  points  where  partial  surprises  had  been  an- 
ticipated." 


CAUSES   OF   OUR   DEFEAT  — SHORT    ENLISTMENTS.  551 


with  traitors,  many  of  them  holding 
official  positions  of  the  gravest  re- 
sponsibility; and  whatever  it  was 
important  to  Beanregard  to  know  he 
speedily  ascertained.  To  cross  the 
Potomac,  a  little  below  or  above  our 
camps,  was  never  difficult ;  and,  once 
across,  trusty  messengers  knew  where 
to  find  fleet  horses  and  sure  guides  to 
take  them  to  the  Rebel  lines.  The 
Confederate  chiefs  knew  which  among 
our  officers  meant  them  any  harm, 
and  which  might  be  confidently  trust- 
ed never  to  take  them  at  disadvan- 
tage. They  evidently  had  no  more 
apprehension  that  Patterson  would 
obstruct  or  countervail  the  march 
of  Johnston  to  Manassas  than  that 
Breckinridge  or  Burnett  would  do 
them  mortal  harm  in  Congress. 

Y.  The  fall,  very  early  in  the  action, 
of  Gen.  David  Hunter,31  command- 
ing the  2d  or  leading  division,  was 
most  untimely  and  unfortunate.  He 
was  so  seriously  wounded  that  he  was 
necessarily  borne  from  the  field. 
Gen.  Heintzelman,35  commanding  the 
3d  division,  was  also  wounded;  not 
as  severely,  but  so  as  to  disable  him. 
Gen.  McDowell  either  had  control 
of  Runyon's  division,  guarding  his 
line  of  communication,  or  he  had  not. 
If  he  had,  he  should  have  ordered  the 
bulk  of  it  to  advance  that  morning 
on  Center ville,  so  as  to  have  had  it 
well  in  hand  to  precipitate  on  the  foe 
at  the  decisive  moment;  or,  if  he 
was  so  hampered  by  Scott  that  he 
was  not  at  liberty  to  do  this,  he 
should  have  refused  to  attack,  and 
resigned  the  command  of  the  army, 
rather  than  fight  a  battle  so  fettered. 

84  Colonel  of  the  3d  cavalry  in  the  regular  ser- 
vice. 

35  Colonel  in  the  regular  service. 

86  For  the  first  year  of  the  war,  no  regular 


After  the  mischief  was  done,  Run- 
yon's division  was  ordered  forward 
from  Fairfax — of  course,  to  no  pur- 
pose. But  it  should,  at  least,  have 
been  promptly  employed  to  block 
completely  with  its  bayonets  the 
roads  leading  to  Washington,  sternly 
arresting  the  flight  of  the  panic- 
stricken  fugitives,  and  gathering  them 
up  into  something  which  should  bear 
once  more  the  semblance  of  an  army. 

YI.  The  original  call  of  President 
Lincoln  on  the  States,  for  75,000 
militia  to  serve  three  months,  was  a 
deplorable  error.  It  resulted  natu- 
rally from  that  obstinate  infatuation 
which  would  believe,  in  defiance  of 
all  history  and  probability,  that  an 
aristocratic  conspiracy  of  thirty  years' 
standing,  culminating  in  a  rebellion 
based  on  an  artificial  property  valued 
at  Four  Thousand  Millions  of  Dol- 
lars, and  wielding  the  resources  of 
ten  or  twelve  States,  having  nearly 
ten  millions  of  people,  was  to  be  put 
down  in  sixty  or  ninety  days  by  some 
process  equivalent  to  reading  the 
Riot  Act  to  an  excited  mob,  and 
sending  a  squad  of  police  to  disperse 
it.  Hence,  the  many  prisoners  of  war 
taken  with  arms  in  their  hands,  in 
West  Virginia  and  Missouri,  had,  up 
to  this  time,  been  quite  commonly 
permitted  to  go  at  large  on  taking  an 
oath  36  of  fidelity  to  the  Constitution 
— a  process  which,  in  their  view,  wag 
about  as  significant  and  imposing  as 
taking  a  glass  of  cider.  The  Gov- 
ernment had  only  to  call  for  any  num- 
ber of  men  it  required,  to  serve  du- 
ring the  pleasure  of  Congress,  or  till 
the  overthrow  of  the  Rebellion,  and 

list  of  prisoners  taken  by  us— not  even  of  those 
paroled  —  was  kept  at  the  War  Department ; 
hence,  we  fell  deplorably  behind  in  our  account 
current  with  the  Rebels. 


552  THE  AMERICA 

they  could  have  been  had  at  once. 
Regiments  were  pressed  npon  it  from 
all  sides;  and  the  hotels  of  Washing- 
ton were  crowded  by  keen  competi- 
tors for  the  coveted  privilege  of  rais- 
ins: more  batteries  and  fresh  bat- 
talions.  JSTone  asked  for  shorter  terms 
to  serve,  or  would  have  then  hesi- 
tated to  enlist  for  the  war.  It  was 
entirely  proper  to  call  out  the  organ- 
ized and  uniformed  militia  as  minute- 
men  to  defend  Washington  and  pro- 
tect the  public  property  until  volun- 
teers could  be  raised ;  but  no  single 
regiment  should  have  been  organized 
or  enlisted,  during  that  springtide  of 
National  enthusiasm,  for  any  term 
short  of  the  duration  of  the  war. 

VII.  It  is  impossible  not  to  per- 
ceive that  the  Rebel  troops  were  bet- 
ter handled,  during  the  conflict,  than 
ours.  Gen.  McDowell,  who  does  not 
appear  to  have  actively  participated 
in  any  former  battle  but  that  of  Bue- 
na  Vista,  where  he  served  as  Aid  to 
Gen.  Wool,  seems  to  have  had  very 
little  control  over  the  movements  of 
his  forces  after  the  beginning  of  the 
conflict.  Gov.  Sprague,  who  fought 
through  the  day  as  brigadier  with  the 
2d  Rhode  Island,  whose  Colonel,  Slo- 
cum,  and  Major,  Ballou,  were  both 
left  dead  on  the  battle-field,  observed 
to  one  who  asked  him,  near  the  close  of 
the  fight,  what  were  his  orders,  that  he 
had  been  fighting  all  day  without  any. 
In  short,  our  army  was  projected  like 
a  bolt,  not  wielded  like  a  sword. 

VIII.  Although  our  army,  before 
fighting  on  that  disastrous  day,  was 
largely  composed  of  the  bravest  and 
truest  patriots  in  the  Union,  it  con- 
tained, also,  much  indifferent  material. 
Many,  in  the  general  stagnation  and 
dearth  of  employment,  had  volun- 
teered under  a  firm  conviction  that 


N  CONFLICT. 

there  would  be  no  serious  fighting ; 
that  the  Rebels  were  not  in  earnest ; 
that  there  would  be  a  promenade,  a 
frolic,  and,  ultimately,  a  compromise, 
which  would  send  every  one  home, 
unharmed  and  exultant,  to  receive 
from  admiring,  cheering  thousands 
the  guerdon  of  his  valor.  Hence, 
some  regiments  were  very  badly  offi- 
cered, and  others  gave  way  and  scat- 
tered, or  fled,  just  when  they  were  most 
needed. 

IX.  Col.  D.  J.  Miles,  a  Marylander, 
commanding  the  5th  (reserve)  divi- 
sion, was  drunk  throughout  the  action, 
and  playing  the  buffoon ;  riding  about 
to  attract  observation,  with  two  hats 
on  his  head,  one  within  the  other. 
As,  however,  he  was  pretty  certainly 
a  traitor,  and  was  not  ordered  to  ad- 
vance, it  is  hardly  probable  that  his 
drunkenness  did  any  serious  damage, 
save  as  it  disgusted  and  disheartened 
those  whose  lives  were  in  his  hands. 


~No  one  who  did  not  share  in  the 
sad  experience  will  be  able  to  realize 
the  consternation  which  the  news  of 
this  discomfiture — grossly  exagger- 
ated— diffused  over  the  loyal  portion 
of  our  country.  Only  the  tidings 
which  had  reached  Washington  up 
to  4  o'clock — all  presaging  certain 
and  decisive  victory — were  permitted 
to  go  north  by  telegraph  that  day  and 
evening ;  so  that,  on  Monday  morn- 
ing, when  the  crowd  of  fugitives  from 
our  grand  army  was  pouring  into 
Washington,  a  heedless,  harmless, 
worthless  mob,  the  loyal  States  were 
exulting  over  accounts  of  a  decisive 
triumph.  But  a  few  hours  brought 
different  advices ;  and  these  were  as 
much  worse  than  the  truth  as  the 
former  had  been  better:  our  army 
had  been  utterly  destroyed — cut  to 


EXTENT 


AND 


RESULTS 


OF    OUR   DISCOMFITURE.  553 


pieces,  with  a  loss  of  twenty-five  to 
thirty  thousand  men,  beside  all  its 
artillery  and  munitions,  and  Wash- 
ington lay  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy, 
who  were  soon  to  advance  to  the  cap- 
ture and  sack  of  our  great  commer- 
cial cities.  Never  before  had  so  black 
a  day  as  that  black  Monday  lowered 
upon  the  loyal  hearts  of  the  North  ; 
and  the  leaden,  weeping  skies  reflected 
and  hightened,  while  they  seemed  to 
sympathize  with,  the  general  gloom. 
It  would  have  been  easy,  with  ordi- 
nary effort  and  care,  to  have  gathered 
and  remanded  to  their  camps  or  forts 
around  Alexandria  or  Arlington,  all 
the  wretched  stragglers  to  whom  fear 
had  lent  wings,  and  who,  throwing 
away  their  arms  and  equipments,  and 
abandoning  all  semblance  of  military 
order  or  discipline,  had  rushed  to  the 
capital  to  hide  therein  their  shame 
behind  a  cloud  of  exaggerations  and 
falsehoods.  The  still  effective  bat- 
teries, the  solid  battalions,  that  were 
then  wending  their  way  slowly  back 
to  their  old  encampments  along  the 
south  bank  of  the  Potomac,  depressed 
but  unshaken,  dauntless  and  utterly 
un assailed,  were  unseen  and  unheard 
from  ;  while  the  panic-stricken  racers 
filled  and  distended  the  general  ear 
 *-  

37  GMti.  McDowell,  in  his  official  report,  in  giv- 
ing his  reasons  for  fighting  as  and  when  he  did, 
says: 

"  I  could  not.  as  I  have  said  more  early,  push 
on  faster,  nor  could  I  delay.  A  large  and  the 
best  part  of  my  forces  were  three  months'  volun- 
teers, whose  term  of  service  was  about  to  expire, 
but  who  were  sent  forward  as  having  long 
enough  to  serve  for  the  purpose  of  the  expedi- 
tion. On  the  eve  of  the  battle,  the  4th  Penn- 
sylvania regiment  of  volunteers,  and  the  battery 
of  volunteer  artillery  of  the  New  York  8th  mili- 
tia, whose  term  of  service  expired,  insisted  on 
their  discharge.  I  wrote  to  the  regiment,  ex- 
pressing a  request  for  them  to  remain  a  short 
time ;  and  the  Hon.  Secretary  of  War,  who  was 
at  the  time  on  the  ground,  tried  to  induce  tho 
battery  to  remain  at  least  five  days.  But  in 
vain.    They  insisted  on  their  discharge  that 


with  their  tales  of  impregnable  in- 
trenchments  and  masked  batteries,  of 
regiments  slaughtered,  brigades  ut- 
terly cut  to  pieces,  etc.,  making  out 
their  miserable  selves  to  be  about  all 
that  was  left  of  the  army.  That  these 
men  were  allowed  thus  to  straggle 
into  Washington,  instead  of  being 
peremptorily  stopped  at  the  bridges, 
and  sent  back  to  the  encampments  of 
their  several  regiments,  is  only  to  be 
accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  that 
the  reason  of  our  military  magnates 
had,  been  temporarily  dethroned,  so 
as  to  divest  them  of  all  moral  respon- 
sibility. 

The  consequences  of  this  defeat 
were  sufficiently  serious.  Our  75,000 
three  months'  men,  whose  term  of  en- 
listment, for  the  most  part,  expired 
within  the  three  weeks  following  the 
battle,  generally  made  haste  to  quit 
the  service  and  seek  their  several  fire- 
sides at  the  earliest  possible  moment.37 
Our  armies  were  thus  depleted  with 
a  rapidity  rarely  equaled ;  and  the 
Government,  which,  throughout  the 
preceding  month,  had  been  defending 
itself  as  best  it  could  against  impor- 
tunities and  entreaties  to  be  allowed 
to  furnish  a  regiment  here  or  a  bat- 
night.  It  was  granted :  and,  the  next  morning, 
when  the  army  moved  forward  into  battle,  these 
troops  moved  to  the  rear  to  the  sound  of  the  enemy1  s 
cannon. 

uIn  the  next  few  days,  day  by  day,  I  should 
have  lost  ten  thousand  of  the  best  armed,  drilled, 
officered,  and  disciplined  troops  in  the  army.  In 
other  words,  every  day,  which  added  to  the 
strength  of  the  enemy,  made  us  weaker." 

It  should  here  be  added,  that  a  member  of  the 
New  York  battery  aforesaid,  who  was  most 
earnest  and  active  in  opposing  Gen.  McDowell's 
request,  and  insisting  on  an  immediate  discharge, 
was,  at  the  ensuing  election,  in  full  view  of  all 
the  facts,  chosen  Sheriff"  of  the  city  of  New- 
York — probably  tho  most  lucrative  office  filled 
by  popular  election  in  the  country. 


554  THE  AMERICA 

tery  there,  was  glad  thenceforth,  to 
take  all  that  offered,  and  to  solicit 
where  it  had  been  so  earnestly  soli- 
cited. The  nation  awoke  from  a 
dream  of  invincibility  and  easy  tri- 
umph to  find  itself  inextricably  in- 
volved in  a  desperate  and  dubious 
struggle  for  life.  And  the  thinly 
disguised  or  utterly  undisguised  ex- 
ultation wherewith  the  news  of  this 
disaster  was  received  by  thousands 
whose  sympathy  with  the  Rebels  had 
hitherto  been  suppressed,  or  only  in- 
dulged in  secret,  proved  that,  in  the 
struggle  now  upon  ns,  the  Republic 
could  not  count  on  the  support  even 
of  all  those  who  still  claimed  to  be 
loyal  to  the  Constitution  and  Union. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Rebellion 
was  immensely  strengthened  and 
consolidated  by  its  victory.  Tens 
of  thousands  throughout  the  South, 
who  had  hitherto  submitted  in  si- 
lence to  proceedings  which  they  con- 
demned and  deplored,  but  lacked  the 
power  or  the  courage  to  resist,  yet 
whose  hearts  were  still  with  their 
whole  country  and  the  old  flag,  now 
abandoned  the  Union  as  hopelessly 
lost,  and  sought,  by  zeal  in  the  cause 
of  the  Rebellion,  to  efface  the  recol- 
lection of  their  past  coldness  and  in- 
fidelity ;  while  no  one  who  had  pre- 
viously been  a  Rebel  any  longer 
cherished  a  shadow  of  doubt  that  the 
independence  of  the  Confederacy  was 
secured.  The  vote  of  Tennessee  for 
Secession,  the  sudden  uprising  of  a 
great  Rebel  army  in  Missouri,  and 
the  strengthening  of  the  cause  and 
its  defenders  everywhere,  owe  much 
of  their  impulse  to  the  dispatches 
which  flashed  over  the  rejoicing 
South  assurances  that  the  grand  ar- 
my of  the  North,  35,000  to  50,000 


N  CONFLICT. 

strong,  had  been  utterly  routed  and 
dispersed  by  Beauregard's  15,000  to 
20,000  Confederates." 

Yet  it  is  to  be  added  that,  what- 
ever the  exultation  of  one  party,  the 
depression  of  the  other  was  not  with- 
out its  compensations.  The  North,  at 
first  stunned,  was  ultimately  rather 
chastened  and  sobered  than  disheart- 
ened or  unnerved  by  its  great  dis- 
aster;  while  the  South,  intoxicated 
by  its  astounding  success,  expended 
in  fruitless  exultation  energies  that 
might  better  have  been  devoted  to 
preparation  for  future  and  more  de- 
termined struggles.  If,  as  the  Con- 
federates were  told,  15,000  of  their 
raw  recruits,  badly  armed  and  provi- 
ded, had  sufficed  to  rout  and  scatter 
double  or  treble  their  number  of 
Yankees,  superbly  equipped  for  the 
contest,  what  need  could  there  be  for 
self-denial,  and  sacrifice,  and  a  gen- 
eral volunteering  to  recruit  their  vic- 
torious armies?  They  hastily  con- 
cluded that  the  struggle  was  virtually 
over — that  nothing  remained  but  to 
prescribe  the  terms  on  which  peace 
should  be  accorded  to  the  vanquished ; 
and  this  delusion  continued  for  months 
undispelled  and  effective. 

And  thus,  while  the  instant  effect 
of  the  tidings  was  the  doubling  of  the 
Rebel  numbers  in  the  field  and  a  re- 
duction of  ours  by  half,  yet  a  few 
weeks  sufficed  to  efface  this  disparity, 
and  the  expiration  of  three  months 
saw  our  forces  swelled  once  more  till 
they  exceeded  those  of  the  enemy. 
The  Nation,  flung  headlong  to  the 
earth,  and  temporarily  paralyzed  by 
her  fall,  rose  at  length  with  a  truer 
appreciation  of  the  power,  the  pur- 
pose, and  the  venom  of  her  foes,  and 
a  firmer  resolve  that  they  should  be 
grappled  with  and  overcome. 


ORGANIZATION   OF   THE   XXXYIITH  CONGRESS. 


555 


XXXIV. 
THE    E  X  TEA  SESSION. 


The  XXXVIIth  Congress  con- 
vened, pursuant  to  the  President's 
summons,  in  Extra  Session,  at  noon  on 
the  4th  of  July ;  when,  on  a  call  of 
the  roll,  an  ample  quorum  of  either 
House  was  found  in  attendance,  in- 
cluding full  delegations  from  Ken- 
tucky,1 Missouri,3  Maryland,3  and 
Delaware.4  Tennessee  had  not  yet 
chosen  Representatives;  and,  when 
she  did  choose,  at  her  regular  State 
election,  five  weeks  later,  only  the 
three  districts  east  of  the  mountains 
elected  members  to  the  Union  Con- 
gress ;  and,  of  these,  one — Thomas 
A.  R.  Nelson — being  arrested  by  the 
Rebels  while  on  his  way  to  Washing- 
ton, regained  his  liberty  by  renoun- 
cing the  Union  and  professing  ad- 
herence to  the  Rebellion.  Of  the 
seceded  States,  only  Arkansas  chose 
Representatives  to  Congress  in  1860  ; 
and  these  renounced  their  seats  by 
open  and  active  adhesion  to  the 
Southern  Confederacy.    In  the  Sen- 

1  The  Representatives  from  Kentucky  had 
been  chosen  a  few  weeks  before  at  a  special 
election,  wherein  nine  districts  elected  'conser- 
vative' or  pro-Slavery  Unionists,  while  the  1st 
reelected,  by  a  considerable  majority,  Henry  C. 
Burnett,  a  Secessionist,  who  only  served  through 
the  Extra  Session,  and  then  fled  to  participate 
openly  in  the  Rebellion.  The  only  remaining 
district  seriously  contested  was  the  8th  (Fayette, 
Bourbon,  etc.),  which  elected  John  J.  Crittenden 
(Union)  over  William  E.  Simms  (late  Democrat, 
now  Secessionist),  by  8,272  to  5,706.  The  ag- 
gregate vote  of  the  State  showed  a  preponder- 
ance of  more  than  two  to  one  for  the  Union. 

8  The  members  from  this  State  had  been  cho- 
sen in  August,  1 860 :  five  of  them  as  Democrats ; 
one  (Francis  P.  Blair,)  as  a  Republican;  another 
(James  S.  Rollins)  as  a  Bell-Everett  Unionist. 


ate,  the  four  States  first  named  were 
fully  represented ;  while  Andrew 
Johnson  was  present  from  Tennes- 
see, making  44  in  all.  Western  Vir- 
ginia had  chosen  three  members  at 
the  regular  State  election  in  April, 
while  another  had  been  elected  by  a 
light  vote,  either  then  or  subsequent- 
ly, from  the  district  lying  along  the 
Potomac,  above  and  below  Harper's 
Ferry.  Of  Representatives,  157  in  all 
answered  to  their  namee  at  the  first 
call.  Galusha  A.  Grow  [Republi- 
can], of  Pennsylvania,  was  chosen 
Speaker,  and  Emerson  Etheridge 
[Bell-Everett],  of  Tennessee,  Clerk  of 
the  House.  John  "W.  Forney  [Doug- 
las], of  Pennsylvania,  was  soon  after- 
ward elected  Clerk  of  the  Senate. 

President  Lincoln's  Message  was 
transmitted  to  both  Houses  on  the 
following  day.  It  was  largely  de- 
voted to  a  recital  of  occurrences  al- 
ready narrated.  It  did  not  distinctly 
avow  that  the  Government  had  ever 

One  of  the  Democrats  had  already  gone  over  to 
the  Rebellion,  as  two  more  of  them  did  after- 
ward. 

3  Maryland  had  very  recently  chosen  her  Rep- 
resentatives at  a  special  election,  wherein  each 
district  elected  a  professed  Unionist — the  6th 
(south-western)  by  barely  162  majority.  But 
Henry  May,  elected  as  a  Democrat  over  Win- 
ter Davis  in  the  Baltimore  city  district,  by  8,421 
votes  to  6,214,  received  the  unanimous  and  ar- 
dent support  of  the  Secessionists,  and,  as  after- 
ward appeared,  for  very  good  reasons. 

4  Delaware  had  elected  George  P.  Fisher 
(Unionist),  in  1860,  by  the  combined  vote  of  the 
Lincoln  and  Bell  parties — giving  him  257  major- 
ity over  Biggs  (Breckinridge);  while  Reed  (Doug- 
las) drew  away  161  votes. 


556 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


purposed  the  evacuation  of  Fort 
Sumter,  but  set  forth  the  material 
facts  as  follows : 

"  On  the  5th  of  March  (the  present  in- 
cumbent's first  full  day  in  office),  a  letter  of 
Major  Anderson,  commanding  at  Fort  Sum- 
ter, written  on  the  28th  of  February,  and 
received  at  the  "War  Department  on  the  4th 
of  March,  was,  by  that  Department,  placed 
in  his  hands.  This  letter  expressed  the  pro- 
fessional opinion  of  the  writer,  that  rein- 
forcements could  not  be  thrown  into  that 
fort  within  the  time  for  his  relief  rendered 
necessary  by  the  limited  supply  of  pro- 
visions, and  with  a  view  of  holding  posses- 
sion of  the  same,  with  a  force  of  less  than 
twenty  thousand  good  and  well-disciplined 
men.  This  opinion  was  concurred  in  by  all 
the  officers  of  his  command,  and  their  me- 
moranda on  the  subject  were  made  in- 
closures  of  Major  Anderson's  letter.  The 
whole  was  immediately  laid  before  Lieut.- 
Gen.  Scott,  who  at  once  concurred  with 
Major  Anderson  in  opinion.  On  reflection, 
however,  he  took  full  time,  consulting  with 
other  officers,  both  of  the  Army  and  of  the 
Navy,  and,  at  the  end  of  four  days,  came 
reluctantly  but  decidedly  to  the  same  con- 
clusion as  before.  He  also  stated,  at  the 
same  time,  that  no  such  sufficient  force  was 
then  at  the  control  of  the  Government,  or 
could  be  raised  and  brought  to  the  ground 
within  the  time  when  the  provisions  in  the 
fort  would  be  exhausted.  In  a  purely  mili- 
tary point  of  view,  this  reduced  the  duty  of 
the  Administration  in  the  case  to  the  mere 
matter  of  getting  the  garrison  safely  out  of 
the  fort." 

Thus  baffled  with  regard  to  Fort 
Sumter,  the  Administration  had  re- 
solved to  reenforce  and  provision 
Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  simply  as  an  indi- 
cation of  its  purpose  to  maintain,  in 
the  South,  the  constitutional  rights 
of  the  Government;  and  had  dis- 
patched the  steamship  Brooklyn  to 
Pensacola  for  that  purpose ;  but  had 
been  defeated  in  its  effort,  because 

"the  officer  commanding  the  Sabine,  to 
which  vessel  the  troops  had  been  transferred 
from  the  Brooklyn,  acting  upon  some  quasi 
armistice  of  the  late  Administration  (and 
of  the  existence  of  which  the  present  Ad- 
ministration, up  to  the  time  the  order  was 
dispatched,  had  only  too  vague  and  uncer- 
tain rumors  to  fix  attention),  had  refused  to 
land  the  troops." 


The  news  of  this  failure  reached 
Washington  "just  one  week  before 
the  fall  of  Sumter ;"  and  thereupon 
the  President  proceeded  at  once  to 
notify  Gov.  Pickens,  of  South  Caro- 
lina, that  he  should  provision  Fort 
Sumter.  "  Whereupon,  the  fort  was 
attacked  and  bombarded  to  its  fall, 
without  even  awaiting  the  arrival  of 
the  provisioning  expedition." 

The  President  sets  forth  the  course 
with  regard  to  the  seceded  States 
which  he  had  endeavored  to  pursue, 
until  forced  to  abandon  it  by  vio- 
lence and  bloodshed  on  their  part,  as 
follows : 

"The  policy  chosen  looked  to  the  ex- 
haustion of  all  peaceful  measures  before  a 
resort  to  any  stronger  ones.  It  sought  only 
to  hold  the  public  places  and  property  not 
already  wrested  from  the  Government,  and 
to  collect  the  revenue ;  relying  for  the  rest 
on  time,  discussion,  and  the  ballot-box.  It 
promised  a  continuance  of  the  mails,  at 
Government  expense,  to  the  very  people 
who  were  resisting  the  Government ;  and  it 
gave  repeated  pledges  against  any  disturb- 
ance to  any  of  the  people,  or  any  of  their 
rights.  Of  all  that  which  a  President  might 
constitutionally  and  justifiably  do  in  such  a 
case,  everything  was  forborne,  without 
which  it  was  believed  possible  to  keep  the 
Government  on  foot." 

But  this  policy  it  was  neither  the 

interest  nor  the  disposition  of  the 

Confederates,  as  such,  to  acquiesce 

in.    The  naked  fact  that  it  was 

deemed  advisable  on  the  part  of  the 

Union,  raises  the  presumption  that  it 

would  not  answer  the  ends  of  the 

Secessionists.    Says  the  President : 

"  They  have  forced  upon  the  country  the 
distinct  issue :  '  immediate  dissolution  or 
blood.' 

"  And  this  issue  embraces  more  than  the 
fate  of  these  United  States.  It  presents  to 
the  whole  family  of  man  the  question, 
whether  a  constitutional  republic  or  de- 
mocracy— a  government  of  the  people  by 
the  same  people — can  or  cannot  maintain 
its  territorial  integrity  against  its  own  do- 
mestic foes.  It  presents  the  question, 
whether  discontented  individuals,  too  few 
in  numbers  to  control  administration,  ac- 


BORDER- STATE    NEUTRALITY. -STATE  RIGHTS. 


557 


cording  to  organic  law,  in  any  case,  can 
always,  upon  the  pretenses  made  in  this 
case,  or  on  any  other  pretenses,  or  arbi- 
trarily, without  any  pretense,  break  up 
their  government,  and  thus  practically  put 
an  end  to  free  government  upon  the  earth. 
It  forces  us  to  ask :  '  Is  there  in  all  re- 
publics this  inherent  and  fatal  weakness?' 
'Must  a  government,  of  necessity,  be  too 
strong  for  the  liberties  of  its  own  people,  or 
too  iceak  to  maintain  its  own  existence?' 

"  So  viewing  the  issue,  no  choice  was  left 
but  to  call  out  the  war  power  of  the  Gov- 
ernment ;  and  so,  to  resist  force  employed 
for  its  destruction  by  force  employed  for  its 
preservation." 

After  a  brief  exposure  of  the  deceit 
and  violence  which  governed  the  issue 
of  the  pretended  submission,  in  Vir- 
ginia and  other  States,  of  the  question 
of  Secession  to  a  vote  of  the  people, 
after  they  had  been  bound  hand  and 
foot  to  the  car  of  the  Confederacy, 
Mr.  Lincoln  says : 

"  The  people  of  Virginia  have  thus  allowed 
this  giant  insurrection  to  make  its  nest  with- 
in her  borders ;  and  this  Government  has  no 
choice  left  but  to  deal  with  it  where  it  finds 
it.  And  it  has  the  less  regret,  as  the  loyal 
citizens  have,  in  due  form,  claimed  its  pro- 
tection. Those  loyal  citizens  this  Govern- 
ment is  bound  to  recognize  and  protect,  as 
being  Virginia.'1'' 

With  regard  to  the  self-styled  neu- 
trality of  Kentucky,  as  of  other  States 
which  had,  by  this  time,  passed  out 
of  that  chrysalis  condition  into  open 
rebellion,  the  President  forcibly  says : 

"  In  the  Border  States,  so  called — in  fact, 
the  Middle  States — there  are  those  who  favor 
a  policy  which  they  call 1  armed  neutrality 
that  is,  an  arming  of  these  States  to  prevent 
the  Union  forces  passing  one  way,  or  the 
Disunion  the  other,  over  their  soil.  This 
would  be  disunion  completed.  Figuratively 
speaking,  it  would  be  building  an  impassable 
wall  along  the  line  of  separation — and  yet, 
not  quite  an  impassable  one ;  for,  under  the 
guise  of  neutrality,  it  would  tie  the  hands  of 
the  Union  men,  and  freely  pass  supplies 
from  among  them  to  the  insurrectionists, 
which  it  could  not  do  as  an  open  enemy. 
At  a  stroke,  it  would  take  all  the  trouble  off 
the  hands  of  Secession,  except  only  what 
proceeds  from  the  external  blockade.  It 
would  do  for  the  Disunionists  that  which,  of 
all  things,  they  most  desire — feed  them  well, 


and  give  them  disunion  without  a  struggle 
of  their  own.  It  recognizes  no  fidelity  to 
the  Constitution,  no  obligation  to  maintain 
the  Union ;  and,  while  very  many  who 
favored  it  are,  doubtless,  loyal  citizens,  it  is, 
nevertheless,  very  injurious  in  effect." 

As  to  the  work  directly  in  hand, 
the  President  thus  briefly  proclaims  : 

"  It  is  now  recommended  that  you  give 
the  legal  means  for  making  this  contest  a 
short  and  decisive  one ;  that  you  place  at 
the  control  of  the  Government,  for  the  work, 
at  least  four  hundred  thousand  men  and 
$400,000,000.  That  number  of  men  is  about 
one-tenth  of  those  of  proper  ages  within  the 
regions  where,  apparently,  all  are  willing  to 
engage ;  and  the  sum  is  less  than  a  twenty- 
third  part  of  the  money  value  owned  by  the 
men  who  seem  ready  to  devote  the  whole. 
A  debt  of  $G00,000T000  now  is  a  less  sum 
per  head  than  was  the  debt  of  our  Revolu- 
tion when  we  came  out  of  that  struggle; 
and  the  money  value  in  the  country  now 
bears  even  a  greater  proportion  to  what  it 
was  then  than  does  the  population.  Surely, 
each  man  has  as  strong  a  motive  now  to  pre- 
serve our  liberties  as  each  had  then  to  estab- 
lish them. 

"  A  right  result,  at  this  time,  will  be  worth 
more  to  the  world  than  ten  times  the  men 
and  ten  times  the  money." 

The  cool  assumptions  and  fluent 
sophistries  of  the  Confederates,  with 
regard  to  State  Rights,  are  very 
frankly  and  thoroughly  handled  by 
the  President;  but  those  who  are 
familiar  with  the  teachings  of  Web- 
ster and  Jackson  on  this  subject  can 
need  no  further  argument.  Mr.  Lin- 
coln thus  deals  with  the  fiction  of 
'  State  Sovereignty :' 

"The  States  have  their  status  in  the 
Union  ;  and  they  have  no  other  legal  status. 
If  they  break  from  this,  they  can  only  do  so 
against  law  and  by  revolution.  The  Union, 
and  not  themselves  separately,  procured 
their  independence  and  their  liberty.  By 
conquest  or  purchase,  the  Union  gave  each 
of  thern  whatever  of  independence  and  lib- 
erty it  has.  The  Union  is  older  than  any  of 
the  States,  and,  in  fact,  it  created  thern  as 
States.  Originally,  some  independent  colo- 
nies made  the  Union ;  and,  in  turn,  the  Union 
threw  off  their  old  dependence  for  them  and 
made  them  States,  such  as  they  are.  Not 
one  of  them  ever  had  a  State  constitution 
independent  of  the  Union." 


558 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


As  to  the  proper  division,  or  parti- 
tion, of  powers  between  the  Federal 
and  the  State  governments,  he  says : 

"  Whatever  concerns  the  whole  should  be 
confided  to  the  whole — to  the  General  Gov- 
ernment ;  while  whatever  concerns  only  the 
State  should  be  left  exclusively  to  the  State. 
This  is  all  there  is  of  original  principle  about 
it.  Whether  the  National  Constitution,  in 
defining  boundaries  between  the  two,  has 
applied  the  principle  with  exact  accuracy,  is 
not  to  be  questioned.  We  are  all  bound  by 
that  defining,  without  question." 

As  to  the  abstract  justice  and 
rightfulness  of  Secession,  he  says : 

"  What  is  now  combated  is  the  principle 
that  Secession  is  consistent  with  the  Constitu- 
tion— is  lawful  and  peaceful.  It  is  not  con- 
tended that  there  is  any  express  law  for  it ; 
and  nothing  should  ever  be  implied  as  law 
which  leads  to  unjust  or  absurd  consequen- 
ces. The  nation  purchased,  with  money,  the 
countries  out  of  which  several  of  these  States 
were  formed.  Is  it  just  that  they  shall  go 
off  without  leave,  and  without  refunding? 
The  nation  paid  very  large  sums  (in  the  ag- 
gregate, I  believe,  nearly  a  hundred  millions) 
to  relieve  Florida  of  the  aboriginal  tribes.  Is 
it  just  that  she  shall  now  be  off  without  con- 
sent, or  without  making  any  return  ?  The 
nation  is  now  in  debt  for  money  applied  to 
the  benefit  of  these  so-called  seceding  States, 
in  common  with  the  rest.  Is  it  just,  either 
that  creditors  shall  go  unpaid,  or  the  remain- 
ing States  pay  the  whole  ?  A  part  of  the 
present  National  debt  was  contracted  to  pay 
the  old  debts  of  Texas.  Is  it  just  that  she 
shall  leave,  and  pay  no  part  of  this  herself? 

"  Again  :  If  one  State  may  secede,  so  may 
another ;  and  when  all  shall  have  seceded, 
none  is  left  to  pay  the  debts.  Is  this  quite 
just  to  creditors  ?  Did  we  notify  them  of 
this  sage  view  of  ours  when  we  borrowed 
their  money  ?  If  we  now  recognize  this  doc- 
trine, by  allowing  the  seceders  to  go  in  peace, 
it  is  difficult  to  see  what  we  can  do  if  others 
choose  to  go,  or  to  extort  terms  upon  which 
they  will  promise  to  remain." 

The  following  illustration  of  the 
essential  unreasonableness  of  Seces- 
sion is  ingenious  and  striking : 

"  If  all  the  States,  save  one,  should  assert 
the  power  to  drive  that  one  out  of  the  Union, 
it  is  presumed  the  whole  class  of  seceder  poli- 
ticians would  at  once  deny  the  power,  and 
denounce  the  act  as  the  greatest  outrage  upon 
State  Rights.  But  suppose  that  precisely 
the  same  act,  instead  of  being  called  'driving 
the  one  out,'  should  be  called  'the  seceding 


of  the  others  from  that  one:'  it  would  be 
exactly  what  the  seceders  claim  to  do ;  un- 
less, indeed,  they  make  the  point,  that  the 
one,  because  it  is  a  minority,  may  rightfully 
do  what  the  others,  because  they  are  a  ma- 
jority, may  not  rightfully  do." 

No  mention  of  Slavery  as  the 
grand,  inciting  cause  of  the  Rebel- 
lion occurs  in  this  Message ;  yet 
there  is  significance  in  the  fact,  sta- 
ted by  the  President,  that,  while  all 
the  Free  States  had  been,  beyond  ex- 
ception, firm,  hearty,  and  zealous  in 
responding  to  his  calls  for  troops : 

"None  of  the  States  commonly  called 
Slave  States,  except  Delaware,  gave  a  regi- 
ment through  regular  State  organization. 
A  few  regiments  have  been  organized  within 
some  others  of  those  States,  by  individual 
enterprise,  and  received  into  the  Govern- 
ment service." 

But  that  this  is  essentially  a  con- 
test between  aristocratic  assumption 
and  popular  liberty  the  President 
perceives,  and  does  not  hesitate  to 
declare.    He  says : 

"  Our  adversaries  have  adopted  some  dec- 
larations of  independence,  in  which,  unlike 
the  good  old  one  penned  by  Jefferson,  they 
omit  the  words  '  all  men  are  created  equal.1 
Why?  They  have  adopted  a  temporary 
National  Constitution,  in  the  preamble  of 
which,  unlike  our  good  old  one  signed  by 
Washington,  they  omit,  '  We,  the  people,' 
and  substitute  '  We,  the  deputies  of  the  sove- 
reign and  independent  States.'  Why  ?  Why 
this  deliberate  pressing  out  of  view  the  rights 
of  men  and  the  authority  of  the  people  ? 

"  This  is  essentially  a  people's  contest.  On 
the  side  of  the  Union,  it  is  a  struggle  for 
maintaining  in  the  world  that  form  and  sub- 
stance of  government  whose  leading  object 
is  to  elevate  the  condition  of  men— to  lift 
artificial  weights  from  all  shoulders — to  clear 
the  paths  of  laudable  pursuit  for  all — to 
afford  all  an  unfettered  start  and  a  fair 
chance  in  the  race  of  life.  Yielding  to  par- 
tial and  temporary  departures,  from  neces- 
sity, this  is  the  leading  object  of  the  Gov- 
ernment for  whose  existence  we  contend. 

"  I  am  most  happy  to  believe  that  the 
plain  people  understand  and  appreciate  this. 
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  while,  in  this  the 
Government's  hour  of  trial,  large  numbers 
of  those  in  the  Army  and  Navy  who  have 
been  favored  with  the  offices  have  resigned, 
and  proved  false  to  the  hand  that  pampered 


CONTESTED    SEATS   IN"   THE  HOUSE. 


559 


them,  not  one  common  soldier  or  common 
sailor  is  known  to  have  deserted  his  flag. 

"  Great  honor  is  due  to  those  officers  who 
remained  true,  despite  the  example  of  their 
treacherous  associates ;  but  the  greatest  hon- 
or, and  most  important  fact  of  all,  is  the 
unanimous  firmness  of  the  common  soldiers 
and  common  sailors.  To  the  last  man,  so 
far  as  known,  they  have  successfully  resisted 
the  traitorous  efforts  of  those  whose  com- 
mands, but  an  hour  before,  they  obeyed  as 
absolute  law.  This  is  the  patriotic  instinct 
of  plain  people.  They  understand,  without 
an  argument,  that  the  destroying  the  Gov- 
ernment which  was  made  by  Washington 
means  no  good  to  them. 

"  Our  popular  government  has  often  been 
called  an  experiment.  Two  points  in  it  our 
people  have  already  settled :  the  successful 
establishing  and  the  successful  administer- 
ing of  it.  One  still  remains :  its  successful 
maintenance  against  a  formidable  internal 
attempt  to  overthrow  it.  It  is  now  for  them 
to  demonstrate  to  the  world  that  those  who 
can  fairly  carry  an  election  can  also  suppress 
a  rebellion ;  that  b^lots  are  the  rightful  and 
peaceful  successors™ bullets;  and  that,  when 
ballots  have  fairly  and  constitutionally  deci- 
ded, there  can  be  no  successful  appeal  back 
to  bullets ;  that  there  can  be  no  successful 
appeal  except  to  ballots  themselves,  at  suc- 
ceeding elections.  Such  will  be  a  great  les- 
son of  peace ;  teaching  men  that  what  they 
cannot  take  by  an  election,  neither  can  they 
take  by  a  war — teaching  ali  the  folly  of  be- 
ing the  beginners  of  a  war." 

He  concludes  liis  Message  with 

these    impressive    and  memorable 

words : 

"It  was  with  the  deepest  regret  that  the 
Executive  found  the  duty  of  employing  the 
war  power,  in  defense  of  the  Government, 
forced  upon  him.  He  could  but  perform 
this  duty,  or  surrender  the  existence  of  the 
Government.  No  compromise  by  public- 
servants  could,  in  this  case,  be  a  cure ;  not 
that  compromises  are  not  often  proper,  but 
that  no  popular  government  can  long  sur- 
vive a  marked  precedent,  that  those  who 
carry  an  election  can  only  save  the  Govern- 
ment from  immediate  destruction  by  giving 
up  the  main  point  upon  wThich  the  people 
gave  the  election.  The  people  themselves, 
and  not  their  servants,  can  safely  reverse 
their  own  deliberate  decisions. 

"As  a  private  citizen,  the  Executive  could 
not  have  consented  that  these  institutions 
shall  perish ;  much  less  could  he,  in  betrayal 
of  so  vast  and  so  sacred  a  trust  as  these  free 
people  had  confided  to  him.  lie  felt  that 
he  had  no  moral  right  to  shrink,  not  even  to 
count  the  chances  of  his  own  life,  in  what 


might  follow.  In  full  view  of  his  great  re- 
sponsibility, he  has,  so  far,  done  what  he 
has  deemed  his  duty.  You  will  now,  ac- 
cording to  your  own  judgment,  perform 
yours.  He  sincerely  hopes  that  your  views 
and  your  action  may  so  accord  with  his  as 
to  assure  all  faithful  citizens  who  have  been 
disturbed  in  their  rights,  of  a  certain  and 
speedy  restoration  to  them,  under  the  Con- 
stitution and  the  laws. 

"And,  having  thus  chosen  our  course, 
without  guile  and  with  pure  purpose,  let  us 
renew  our  trust  in  God,  and  go  forward 
without  fear  and  with  manly  hearts." 

Several  of  the  opening  days  of  the 
Session  were  mainly  devoted  by  the 
House  to  the  consideration  of  dis- 
puted claims  to  seats — there  being 
rival  claimants  from  Oregon,  from 
Nebraska,  and  from  the  1st  district 
of  Pennsylvania,  beside  three  mem- 
bers in  all  from  Virginia,  whereof 
two  (Messrs.  Carlile  and  Whaley) 
were  chosen  from  Western  districts, 
by  heavy  votes,  on  the  regular  day 
of  election ;  while  the  other  (Mr. 
Upton)  was  chosen  under  different 
auspices.  The  Convention  which 
passed  the  Ordinance  of  Secession 
had  assumed  power  to  annul  or  sus- 
pend the  law  which  provides  that  a 
regular  election  shall  be  held,  and 
Members  of  Congress  semi-annually 
chosen  thereat,  on  the  fourth  Thurs- 
day of  May  ;  but  the  people  of  West 
Virginia  had  treated  this  action  of 
the  Convention  as  a  nullity,  not  hav- 
ing been  ratified  by  a  popular  vote, 
as  the  law  calling  the  Convention  re- 
quired ;  and  had  elected  in  its  despite. 
Congress  approved  and  sustained  this 
action,  and  Messrs.  Carlile  and  Wha- 
ley  held  their  seats  with  very  little 
dissent.  There  was  more  demur  as 
to  Mr.  Upton's  case — his  poll  being 
light,  the  time  and  manner  of  his 
election  irregular,  and  he  having 
voted  in  Ohio  the  preceding  Novem- 
ber ;  but  he  was  not  unseated.  The 


560 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


remaining  contests  involved  no  ques- 
tion connected  with  Slavery  or  se- 
cession. On  the  8th,  the  House,  on 
motion  of  Mr.  Holman  (Dem.),  of 
Ind.,  modified  at  the  suggestion  of 
Mr.  Hickman  (Republican),  of  Pa., 

"  Resolved,  That  the  House,  during  the 
present  extraordinary  session,  will  only  con- 
sider bills  and  resolutions  concerning  the 
military  and  naval  operations  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, and  the  financial  affairs  therewith 
connected,  and  the  general  questions  of  a 
judicial  character;  and  all  bills  and  resolu- 
tions of  a  private  character,  and  all  other  bills 
and  resolutions  not  directly  connected  with 
the  raising  of  revenue,  or  affecting  the  mili- 
tary or  naval  affairs  of  the  Government, 
shall  be  referred  to  the  appropriate  Com- 
mittees without  debate,  to  be  considered  at 
the  next  regular  session  of  Congress.1' 

On  the  9th,  Mr.  Lovejoy,  of  111., 
moved  the  following : 

"  Resolved,  That,  in  the  judgment  of  this 
House,  it  is  no  part  of  the  duty  of  the  sol- 
diers of  the  United  States  to  capture  and 
return  fugitive  slaves." 

After  a  strenuous  effort  to  rule 
this  out  of  order,  as  precluded  by 
the  resolve  before  quoted,  a  vote  was 
taken  on  a  motion  of  Mr.  Mallory,  of 
Ky.,  that  it  do  lie  on  the  table ; 
which  was  negatived  :  Yeas  66 ; 
Nays  81.  Mr.  Lovejoy's  resolve  was 
then  adopted  :  Yeas  92 ;  Nays  55  ; 
[the  Yeas  all  Republicans ;  Nays,  all 
the  Democrat  and  Border-State  con- 
servatives, with  Messrs.  Sheffield,  of 
E.  I.,  Fenton,  of  N.  Y.,  Horton,  of 
Ohio,  Wm.  Kellogg,  of  111.,  Nixon, 
of  N.  J.,  and  AYoodruff,  of  Conn.] 

On  the  10th,  Mr.  Clark,  of  N.  H., 
proposed,  and  on  the  11th  the  Sen- 
ate adopted,  the  following : 

"  Whereas,  a  conspiracy  has  been  formed 
against  the  peace,  union,  and  liberties  of  the 
People  and  Government  of  the  United  States ; 
and,  in  furtherance  of  such  conspiracy,  a 
portion  of  the  people  of  the  States  of  Vir- 
ginia, North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,  Ten- 
nessee, Arkansas,  and  Texas,  have  attempted 
to  withdraw  those  States  from  the  Union, 
and  are  now  in  arms  against  the  Govern- 


ment;  And  irhereas,  James  M.  Mason  nnd 
Robert  M.  T.  Hunter,  Senators  from  Vir- 
ginia; Thomas  L.  Clingman  and  Thomas 
Bragg,  Senators  from  North  Carolina;  James 
Chesnut,  Jr.,  a  Senator  from  South  Carolina  ; 
A.  O.  P.  Nicholson,  a  Senator  from  Tennes- 
see;  William  K.  Sebastian  and  Charles  B. 
Mitchell,  Senators  from  Arkansas  ;  and  John 
Hemphill  and  Louis  T.  Wigfall,  Senators 
from  Texas,  have  failed  to  appear  in  their 
seats  in  the  Senate,  and  to  aid  the  Govern- 
ment in  this  important  crisis ;  and  it  is  ap- 
parent to  the  Senate  that  said  Senators  are 
engaged  in  said  conspiracy  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Union  and  Government,  or,  with 
full  knowledge  of  such  conspiracy,  have 
failed  to  advise  the  Government  of  its  pro- 
gress, or  aid  in  its  suppression :  Therefore, 

"  Resolved,  That  the  said  Mason,  Hunter, 
Clingman,  Bragg,  Chesnut,  Nicholson,  Se- 
bastian, Mitchell,  Hemphill,  and  Wigfall,  be, 
and  they  hereby  are,  each  and  all  of  them, 
expelled  from  the  Senate  of  the  United 
States." 

Messrs.  Bayard,  q£  Del.,  and  La- 
tham, of  Cal.,  sought  to  have  this  so 
modified  as  merely  to  declare  the 
seats  of  the  indicated  Senators  vacant 
and  strike  their  names  from  the  roll  * 
but  the  Senate  rejected  the  amend- 
ment (Yeas  11 ;  Nays  32)  and  passed 
the  original  resolve:  Yeas  31  Eepub- 
licans  and  McDougall,  of  Cal., — in 
all,  32 ; 

Nays  —  Messrs.  Bayard,  Breckinridge, 
Bright,  Johnson,  of  Mo.,  Johnson,  ofTenn., 
Latham, Nesmith,  Polk,Powell,and  Rice — 10. 

The  Yice-President  thereupon  de- 
clared the  resolve  adopted  by  a  two- 
thirds  vote. 

On  the  10th,  a  bill  reported  from 
the  Committee  of  Commerce,  by  Mr. 
Washburne,  of  111.,  providing  for  the 
collection  of  revenue  from  imports — 
adapting  our  revenue  laws  to  the 
state  of  facts  created  by  a  formida- 
ble rebellion — authorizing  the  Presi- 
dent to  designate  other  places  as  ports 
of  delivery  instead  of  those  held  by 
Eebels — also,  to  close,  by  proclama- 
tion, ports  so  held — to  prohibit  all  in- 
tercourse between  loyal  and  insurgent 


PROPOSALS    TO    CRIPPLE    OR   ARREST    THE  WAR. 


561 


districts,  etc.  etc. — was  passed,  under 
the  Previous  Question — Yeas  136  ; 

Nays — Messrs.  Burnett,  (Ky.,)  Harding, 
(Kv.,)  Norton,  (Mo..)  George  H.  Pendleton, 
(Ohio.)  Reid,  (Mo.,)  Robinson,  (111.,)  Vallan- 
digham, (Ohio,)Voorhees,  (Ind.,)Wadsworth, 
(Ky.,)  and  Wood,  (N.  Y.)— 10. 

This  bill  came  up  in  the  Senate, 
on  the  12th ;  and,  after  a  brief  debate, 
was  passed  :  Yeas  36  ; 

Nats — Messrs.  Breckinridge,  (Ky.,)  Bright, 
(Ind.,)  Johnson,  (Mo.,)Kennedy,  (Md.,)  Polk, 
(Mo.,)  and  Powell,  (Ky.)— 6. 

The  House,  on  the  10th,  likewise 
passed  its  first  Loan  bill — authorizing 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  bor- 
row Two  Hundred  and  Fifty  Millions 
of  Dollars,  for  the  support  of  the 
Government  and  the  prosecution  of 
the  War.  Mr.  Yallandigham,  of 
Ohio,  made  an  elaborate  speech,  in 
thorough-going  opposition  to  the  bill 
and  to  the  entire  policy  of  6 coercion;' 
submitting,  in  reply  to  a  question 
from  Mr.  Holman  (Dem.),  of  Ind., 
the  following  proposition,  as  embody- 
ing his  views  touching  the  general 
subject,  but  asking  no  present  action 
thereon : 

44  Resolved,  That  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment is  the  agent  of  the  people  of  the  seve- 
ral States  composing  the  Union ;  that  it  con- 
sists of  three  distinct  departments — the  le- 
gislative, the  executive,  and  the  judicial — 
each  equally  a  part  of  the  Government,  and 
equally  entitled  to  the  confidence  and  sup- 
port of  the  States  and  the  people ;  and  that 
it  is  the  duty  of  every  patriot  to  sustain  the 
several  departments  of  the  Government 
in  the  exercise  of  all  the  constitutional 
powers  of  each  which  may  be  necessary 
and  proper  for  the  preservation  of  the  Gov- 
ernment in  its  principles  and  in  its  vigor 
and  integrity,  and  to  stand  by  and  to  defend 
to  the  utmost  the  flag  which  represents  the 
Government,  the  Union,  and  the  country." 

Mr.  Holman.  "While the  gentleman  cen- 
sures the  Administration,  let  me  ask  him 
whether,  with  his  own  constituents,  he  is 
resolved  that  the  Union  shall  be  maintained. 

Mr.  Vallandigham.  "My  votes  shall 
speak  for  me  on  that  subject.  My  position 
is  defined  in  the  resolution  just  read.  I  am 
answerable  only  to  my  conscience  and  to 
my  constituents,  and  not  to  the  gentleman 
from  Indiana." 

36 


The  bill  passed  under  the  previous 

question  :  Yeas  150  ; 

Nays — Messrs.  Burnett,  of  Ky.,  Norton 
and  Reid,  of  Mo.,  Vallandigham,  of  Ohio, 
and  B.  Wood,  of  K  Y.  [The  three  first- 
named  went  over  to  the  Rebels  soon  after 
the  close  of  the  session.] 

On  the  11th,  the  Army  Appropri- 
ation bill  being  under  consideration 
in  Committee  of  the  Whole,  Mr. 
Vallandigham  moved  to  add  this 
proviso : 

"  Provided,  however,  That  no  part  of  the 
money  hereby  appropriated  shall  be  em- 
ployed in  subjugating,  or  holding  as  a  con- 
quered province,  any  sovereign  State  now 
or  lately  one  of  the  United  States ;  nor  in 
abolishing  or  interfering  with  African  Sla- 
very in  any  of  the  States." 

The  proviso  was  voted  down,  and 
the  bill  (appropriating  $161,000,000) 
reported  and  passed. 

On  the  13th,  the  bill  calling  out 
Half  a  Million  Yolunteers  being 
under  consideration,  Mr.  Yallandig- 
ham moved  to  add  to  it  (as  he  had 
already  done  in  Committee  of  the 
Whole)  the  following : 

"Provided  further,  That,  before  the 
President  shall  have  the  right  to  call  out 
any  more  volunteers  than  are  now  in  the 
service,  he  shall  appoint  seven  Commission- 
ers, whose  mission  it  shall  be  to  accompany 
the  army  on  its  march,  to  receive  and  con- 
sider such  propositions,  if  any,  as  may  at 
any  time  be  submitted  by  the  Executive  of 
the  so-called  Confederate  States,  or  of  any 
one  of  them,  looking  to  a  suspension  of  hos- 
tilities, and  the  return  of  said  States,  or  any 
of  them,  to  the  Union,  or  to  obedience  to 
the  Federal  Constitution  and  authorities." 

The  amendment  was  voted  down 

without  a  division,   and  the  bill 

passed. 

This  day,  Messrs.  John  S.  Carlile 
and  Waitman  T.  Willey  presented 
themselves  as  Senators  from  the  State 
of  Yirginia  (not  the  new  State  of 
West  Yirginia,  since  organized),  vice 
Hunter  and  Mason,  expelled  as  trai- 
tors. They  presented  credentials,  set- . 
ting  forth  their  appointment  by  Gov. 


562 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Pierpont  to  fill  the  existing  vacan- 
cies. Messrs.  Bayard  and  Saulsbury, 
of  Del.,  strenuously  resisted  their 
admission — the  former  wishing  their 
credentials  referred  to  the  Committee 
on  the  Judiciary.  Mr.  Powell,  of 
Ky.,  also  opposed  their  acceptance  as 
Senators;  which  wTas  advocated  by 
Messrs.  Andrew  Johnson,  of  Tenn., 
Latham,  of  Cal.,  Trumbull,  of  111., 
Collamer,  of  Vt.,  and  Ten  Eyck,  of 
N.  J.  Mr.  Bayard's  motion  to  refer 
was  voted  down  :  Yeas — -Messrs. 
Bayard,  Bright,  Polk,  Powell,  and 
Saulsbury ;  Nays  35 :  And  Messrs. 
Carlile  and  Willey  were  then  sworn 
in  and  took  their  seats. 

On  motion  of  Mr.  F.  P.  Blair,  the 
House  this  day  expelled  John  B. 
Clark,  a  member-elect  from  Missouri 
(but  who  had  not  taken  his  seat),  be- 
cause he  had 

"  taken  up  arms  against  the  Government 
of  the  United  States,  and  now  holds  a  com- 
mission in  what  is  called  the  State  Guard  of 
Missouri,  under  the  Rebel  Government  of 
that  State,  and  took  part  in  the  engagement 
at  Booneville  against  the  United  States 
forces." 

This  was  adopted  (after  an  at- 
tempt to  send  it  to  the  Committee  of 
Elections),  by  Yeas  94  to  Nays  45, 
(nearly,  but  not  entirely,  a  party  vote). 

On  the  15th,  Mr.  B.  Wood,  of 
N.  Y.,  moved  that  it  be 

"  Resolved,  That  this  Congress  recommend 
the  Governors  of  the  several  States  to  con- 
vene their  Legislatures,  for  the  purpose  of 
calling  an  election  to  select  two  delegates 
from  each  congressional  district,  to  meet  in 
general  Convention  at  Louisville,  in  Ken- 
tucky, on  the  first  Monday  in  September 
next:  the  purpose  of  the  said  Convention 
to  be  to  devise  measures  for  the  restoration 
of  peace  to  the  country." 

On  motion  of  Mr.  Washburne,  of 
111.,  this  was  laid  on  the  table  :  Yeas 
92  ;  Nays  51. 

Mr.  ¥m.  Allen  (Dem.),  of  Ohio, 
moved  that  it  be 


"  Resolved,  That,  whenever  the  States  now 
in  rebellion  against  the  General  Govern- 
ment shall  cease  their  rebellion  and  become 
loyal  to  the  Union,  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Government  to  suspend  the  farther  prosecu- 
tion of  the  present  war. 

"Resolved,  That  it  is  no  part  of  the  object 
of  the  present  war  against  the  rebellious 
States  to  interfere  with  the  institution  of 
Slavery  therein." 

This  was  ruled  out  of  order  with- 
out dissent. 

Mr.  Vallandigham  here  moved  a 
long  series  of  resolves,  condemning 
as  unconstitutional  the  increase  of 
the  Army,  the  blockade  of  the  ports 
of  the  insurgent  States,  the  seizure 
of  dispatches  in  the  telegraph  offices, 
the  arbitrary  arrest  of  persons  sus- 
pected of  complicity  with  treason, 
and  nearly  every  important  act  of 
the  President  in  resistance  to  the 
Rebellion.  On  motion  of  Mr.  Love- 
joy,  of  111.,  these  resolves  were  un- 
ceremoniously laid  on  the  table. 

A  bill,  introduced  by  Mr.  Hick- 
man, of  Pa.,  defining  and  punishing 
conspiracies  against  the  United  States 
— providing  that  persons  who  con- 
spire to  overthrow,  put  down,  or  de- 
stroy by  force,  the  government  of  the 
United  States,  or  to  levy  war  against 
the  same,  may  be  arraigned  for  trial 
before  any  U.  S.  district  or  circuit 
court,  and,  on  due  conviction,  may 
be  punished  by  fine  not  exceeding 
$5,000,  or  by  imprisonment  for  not 
more  than  six  years,  was  now  called 
up  and  passed :  Yeas  123  ;  Nays  7. 
Most  of  the  Nays  were  opposed  not 
to  the  bill,  but  to  the  precipitancy  of 
its  passage/  The  Senate  concurred, 
a  few  days  thereafter,  and  the  bill 
became  a  law. 

Mr.  McClernand  (Dem.),  of  111., 
moved,  and  the  House,  by  121  to  5, 
voted,  that 

'*  Whereas,  a  portion  of  the  people  of  the 


HENRY    MAY'S    VISIT    TO  RICHMOND. 


563 


United  States,  in  violation  of  their  Constitu- 
tional obligations,  have  taken  up  arms 
against  the  National  Government,  and  are 
now  striving,  by  aggressive  and  iniquitous 
war,  to  overthrow  it,  and  break  up  the 
Union  of  these  States :  Therefore, 

"  Resolved,,  That  this  House  hereby  pledges 
itself  to  vote  for  any  amount  of  money  and 
any  number  of  men  which  may  be  necessary 
to  insure  a  speedy  and  effectual  suppression 
of  such  Rebellion,  and  the  permanent  resto- 
ration of  the  Federal  authority  everywhere 
within  the  limits  and  jurisdiction  of  the 
United  States.11 

Nays — Messrs.  Burnett,  Grider,  (Ky.,) 
Norton,  Reid,  and  Wood — 5. 

Mr.  Potter,  of  Wise,  offered  the 
following,  which  was  adopted : 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Committee  on  the 
Judiciary  be  directed  to  inquire  whether 
Hon.  Henry  May,  a  Representative  in  Con- 
gress from  the  fourth  district  of  the  State  of 
Maryland,  has  not  been  found  holding  crimi- 
nal intercourse  and  correspondence  with 
persons  in  armed  rebellion  against  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States,  and  to  make 
report  to  the  Ilou.-e  as  to  what  action 
should  betaken  in  the  premises:  and  that 
said  Committee  have  power  to  send  for  per- 
sons and  papers,  and  to  examine  witnesses 
on  oath  or  affirmation  ;  and  that  said  Hon. 
Henry  May  be  notified  of  the  passage  of 
this  resolution,  if  practicable,  before  action 
thereon  by  the  Committee.'" 

Mr.  May,  being  ill,  was  not  then 
in  his  seat ;  but,  the  Committee  hav- 
ing reported,  on  the  18th,  that  no 
evidence  had  been  presented  to  them 
tending  to  inculpate  Mr.  May,  he 
took  the  floor,  and  made  what  he 
termed  a  personal  explanation,  avow- 
ing that  he  had  been  to  Richmond 
on  an  errand  of  conciliation  and 
peace,  evincing  intense  hostility  to 
the  Administration  and  the  War  on 
its  part,  and  very  thorough  sympathy, 
at  least,  with  the  Baltimore  friends 
of  the  Rebels.    He  said : 

"  At  the  time  I  received  notice  of  this  ac- 
cusation, it  was  under  my  consideration 
whether  I  could,  with  honor,  come  here, 
and  enter  upon  the  duties  of  a  Representa- 
tive upon  this  floor.  The  humiliation  that  I 
felt  at  the  condition  of  my  constituents, 
bound  in  chains;  absolutely  without  the 
rights  of  a  free  people  in  this  land ;  every 


precious  right  belonging  to  them,  under  the 
Constitution,  prostrated  and  trampled  in  the 
dust ;  military  arrests  in  the  dead  hour  of 
the  night ;  dragging  the  most  honorable  and 
virtuous  citizens  from  their  beds,  and  con- 
fining them  in  forts ;  searches  and  seizures 
the  most  rigorous  and  unwarrantable,  with- 
out pretext  of  justification ;  that  precious 
and  priceless  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  for 
which,  from  the  beginning  of  free  govern- 
ment, the  greatest  and  best  of  men  have 
lived  and  died — all  these  prostrated  in  the 
dust;  and  hopeless  imprisonment  inflicted 
without  accusation,  without  inquiry  or  in- 
vestigation, or  the  prospect  of  a  trial — Sir, 
is  there  a  representative  of  the  people  of  the 
United  States  here  in  this  body,  acknowl- 
edging the  sympathy  due  to  popular  rights 
and  constitutional  liberty,  wrho  does  not  feel 
indignant  at  the  perpetration  of  these  out- 
rages?11 

With  regard  to  his  permission  to 
visit  Richmond,  he  said  : 

"I  did  not  feel  at  liberty  to  go  across  the 
Potomac  without  permission  of  the  authori- 
ties of-  this  Government.  And  so,  I  felt  it 
my  duty  to  wait  on  the  Chief  Magistrate, 
and  tell  him,  as  1  did,  most  frankly  and 
fully,  the  objects  of  my  visit.  I  did  not  ask 
for  his  sanction  ;  I  did  not  desire  it.  I  did 
not  wish  to  embarrass  the  Chief  Magistrate 
in  such  a  way.  I  had  no  claim  upon  his  confi- 
dence ;  I  had  no  right  to  ask  him  for  any 
commission  or  authority;  but  I  felt  it  was 
my  duty  to  state  to  him  distinctly  the  ob- 
jects which  governed  me,  and  obtain  his  per- 
mission to  cross  the  Potomac.  It  was  most 
distinctly  understood,  between  the  President 
and  ine,  that  I  took  no  authority  from  him 
— none  whatever ;  that  I  asked  for  none,  and 
disclaimed  asking  for  any  ;  that  1  went  on 
the  most  private  mission  on  which  a  hum- 
ble citizen  could  go.  I  asked  his  consent, 
also,  to  obtain  from  the  military  authorities 
a  pass.  Having  jurisdiction  on  the  other 
side  of  the  Potamac,  they  were  to  be  con- 
sulted, and  the  necessary  formalities  ob- 
served. The  President  authorized  me  to  say 
to  Gen.  Scott  that  I  had  conversed  with  him, 
and  that,  while  he  gave  no  sanction  what- 
ever to  my  visit  to  Richmond,  he  did  not 
object  to  my  going  there  on  my  own  respon- 
sibility.11 

Mr.  May  carefully  avoided  all  dis- 
closure of  the  purport  of  his  confer- 
ences with  the  Rebel  chiefs  at  Rich- 
mond ;  but  it  was  manifest  that  he 
visited  and  was  received  by  them  as 
a  sympathizing  friend,  and  that  his 


564 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


communications  were  not  intended  to 
discourage  them  in  their  efforts.  The 
conclusion  is  irresistible,  that  he  went 
to  Richmond  hoping  to  elicit  from 
the  Confederate  chiefs  some  proffer, 
overture,  or  assent,  looking  to  reunion 
on  their  own  terms,  but  had  been  ut- 
terly disappointed  and  rebuffed.  He 
closed  as  follows : 

"  Mr.  Speaker,  all  the  crime,  all  the  trea- 
son of  this  act,  rests  on  me,  and  me  alone ; 
and  I  am  content,  in  the  sight  of  high  Heav- 
en, to  take  it  and  press  it  to  my  heart." 

Mr.  Francis  Thomas,  of  Maryland, 
replied  ably  and  thoroughly  to  Mr. 
May's  assaults  on  the  Administration 
and  its  policy  of 4  coercion;' pointing 
to  the  recent  vote  of  the  People  of 
Maryland  (44,000  "  Union"  to  24,000 
"Peace")  as  their  verdict  on  the 
issues  whereon  the  President  was  ar- 
raigned by  his  colleague.    He  said  : 

uThe  apportionment  of  representatives  in 
the  Legislature  was  made  in  old  colonial 
times.  It  has  been  modified ;  but,  up  to  this 
day  and  hour,  the  majority  of  the  people  of 
Maryland  have  no  voice  in  the  choice  of 
their  Legislature.  Under  our  new  Consti- 
tution, however,  the  majority,  by  a  general 
ticket,  elect  a  Governor;  and,  at  the  last 
election,  they  elected  one  responsive  to  the 
sentiment  that  beats  warmly  in  the  hearts  of 
the  people  of  Maryland.  But  the  Legisla- 
ture of  Maryland,  elected  two  years  ago,  not 
with  a  view  to  this  issue,  have  been  engaged 
in  embarrassing  the  Governor  in  all  his  mea- 
sures of  policy.  One  of  those  measures,  which 
GoV.  Hicks  thought  a  very  prudent  measure 
under  the  existing  state  of  things  in  Mary- 
land, was  to  collect  the  arms  held  by  private 
citizens,  without  distinction  of  party.  This 
the  Legislature  prevented  from  being  carried 
into  execution,  and  passed  a  law  which  goes 
very  far  to  secure  arms  in  the  hands  of  indi- 
viduals. Why?  If  the  citizens  of  Maryland 
are  for  warring  against  the  Government,  they 
should  not  be  permitted  to  have  arms.  If 
they  are  for  peace,  they  do  not  need  them ; 
for  the  arm  of  the  United  States  protects 
them,  and  the  banner  of  the  confederacy 
floats  over  them.  Why,  then,  have  the  Le- 
gislature interposed  obstructions,  by  law,  to 
the  collection  of  arms?  Do  they  think  it 
prudent  to  leave  them  in  the  hands  of  pri- 
vate holders,  to  be  concealed  where  they  can- 
not be  found  ?    It  could  not  be  for  the  pur- 


pose of  upholding  the  laws  of  the  Union.  It 
could  not  be  to  uphold  the  statutes  of  Mary- 
land. The  President  of  the  United  States  is 
faithful  to  his  duty ;  and  the  people  of  Ma- 
ryland are  faithful  to  theirs." 

The  bill  providing  for  the  reorgan- 
ization of  the  Army  being  this  day 
before  the  Senate,  Mr.  Powell,  of 
Kentucky,  proposed  to  add  to  it  the 
following : 

^And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  no  part 
of  the  Army  or  Navy  of  the  United  States 
shall  be  employed  or  used  in  subjecting  or 
holding  as  a  conquered  province  any  sove- 
reign State  now  or  lately  one  of  the  United 
States.1' 

Mr.  J.  H.  Lane,  of  Kansas,  moved 
to  amend  this,  by  adding, 

"  Unless  a  military  necessity  shall  exist  in 
enforcing  the  laws  and  maintaining  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  Union." 

A  very  able  and  earnest  debate 
arose  hereon,  wherein  Messrs.  Pow- 
ell, Polk,  and  Bright,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  Messrs.  Sherman,  of  Ohio, 
Browning,  of  Illinois,  Lane,  of  Kan- 
sas, Fessenden,  of  Maine,  etc.,  on  the 
other,  took  part.  Mr.  Lane's  amend- 
ment was  rejected  by  Yeas  11  (all 
Republicans)  to 

Nays  —  Messrs.  Breckinridge,  Bright, 
Browning,  Oarlile,  Doolittle,  Fessenden, 
Foster,  Grimes,  Hale,  Harris,  Howe,  John- 
son, of  Tenn.,  Johnson,  of  Mo.,  Kennedy, 
Latham,  McDougall,  Morrill,  Nesmith,  Polk, 
Powell,  Saulsbury,  Sherman,  Ten  Eyck,  and 
Willey— 24. 

Mr.  Sherman,  of  Ohio,  now  moved 

the  following  as  a  substitute  for  Mr. 

Powell's  proposition : 

"  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  the  pur- 
poses of  the  military  establishment  provided 
for  in  this  act  are  to  preserve  the  Union,  to 
defend  the  property,  and  to  maintain  tho 
constitutional  authority,  of  the  Government." 

This  was  adopted,  after  debate; 
Yeas  33;  Nays  4.  [Breckinridge  and 
Powell,  of  Ky.,  Johnson  and  Polk,  of 
Missouri.] 

As  Mr.  Powell's  amendment  was 
thus  superseded,  Mr.  Breckinridge 


VIEWS    OF    CONSERVATIVE  REPUBLICANS. 


565 


now  moved  the  following,  as  an  addi- 
tion to  the  amendment  just  adopted  : 

"But  the  Army  and  Navy  shall  not  be 
employed  for  the  purpose  of  subjugating  any 
State,  or  reducing  it  to  the  condition  of  a 
Territory  or  province,  or  to  abolish  Slavery 
therein." 

This  was  rejected  by  the  following 
vote  : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Breckinridge,  Bright, "W.  P. 
Johnson,  of  Mo., Kennedy,  Latham,  Nesmith, 
Polk,  Powell,  and  Saulsbury— 9. 

Xays — Messrs.  Anthony,  Bingham,  Brown- 
ing, Carlile,  Chandler,  Clark,  Collamer, 
Cowan,  Doolittle,  Fessenden,  Foot,  Foster, 
Grimes,  Hale,  Harlan,  Harris,  Howe.  John- 
son, of  Tenn.,  King,  Lane,  of  Ind.,  Lane,  of 
Kansas,  McDougall,  Morrill,  Pomeroy,  Sher- 
man, Sumner,  Ten  Eyck,  Wade,  Willey,  and 
Wilson— 30. 

The  original  amendment  was  then 
rejected,  so  as  to  strike  out  all  these 
declaratory  propositions,  and  leave 
the  bill  as  it  came  from  the  Commit- 
tee of  the  Whole ;  when  it  was  en- 
grossed, read  a  third  time,  and  passed. 

Bearing  in  mind  that  this  debate 
occurred  three  days  before  the  battle 
of  Bull  Run,  that  it  was  initiated  by 
a  pro- Slavery  Democrat  from  Ken- 
tucky, and  that  it  occurred  when 
loyal  men  still  generally  and  confi- 
dently expected  that  the  Rebellion 
would  soon  be  suppressed,  leaving 
Slavery  intact,  it  may  be  well  to  note 
some  of  the  significant  intimations 
which  it  elicited  from  the  more  con- 
servative Republicans;  as  follows : 

Mr.  Dixon  (of  Conn.)  "Mr.  President, 
the  Senator  from  Kentucky  [Mr.  PoweliJ 
has  alluded  to  remarks  of  mine,  and  has  said 
that  I  have  declared  on  this  floor,  that,  if  it 
were  necessary  to  abolish  Slavery  in  order 
to  save  the  Union,  Slavery  should  be  abol- 
ished. Mr.  President,  I  have  said  no  such 
thing.  What  I  said  was  this:  that,  if  the 
war  should  be  persisted  in,  and  be  long  pro- 
tracted, on  the  part  of  the  South,  and,  in  the 
course  of  its  progress,  it  should  turn  out  that 
either  this  Government  or  Slavery  must  be 
destroyed,  then  the  people  of  the  North — 
the  conservative  people  of  the  North — would 
say,  '  Rather  than  let  tho  Government,  per- 
ish, let  Slavery  perish.1    That  is  what  I 


said ;  and  I  say  it  now,and  shall  continue  at  all 
times  to  say  the  same ;  not,  by  any  means, as  a 
threat,  but  as  a  warning  and  an  admonition." 

Mr.  Beowxino  (of  111.)  "  Mr.  President, 
I  cannot  say,  in  common  with  the  Senator 
from  Virginia  [Mr.  Carlile],  that  I  regret 
that  this  amendment  has  been  proposed  to 
the  Senate.  I  shall  certainly  vote  against 
it ;  it  does  not  meet  my  views,  nor  receive  my 
approbation  ;  but  it  may  still  be  well  that  it 
has  been  offered ;  as  it  affords  us  an  oppor- 
tunity of  comparing  notes,  understanding 
the  opinions  of  each  other,  and  giving  the 
country  at  large  a  distinct  understanding  of 
what  the  purpose  and  intentions  of  the  Con- 
gress of  the  United  States  are.  I  speak  only 
for  one;  I  intend  to  speak  very  briefly,  but 
very  plainly,  my  sentiments  on  this  subject. 

"I  differ,  furthermore,  from  the  Senator 
from  Virginia,  in  the  supposition  that  the  in- 
stitution of  Slavery  has  had  nothing  to  do 
in  involving  the  country  in  the  calamities 
which  now  press  upon  it.  Had  it  not  been 
for  the  sentiments  and  opinions  which  are 
engendered,  fostered,  and  cherished  by  the 
institution  of  Slavery,  I  cannot  persuade  my- 
self to  believe  that  there  ever  would  have 
been  found  a  disloyal  heart  to  the  American 
Constitution  upon  the  American  conti- 
nent. I  believe  that  the  whole  trouble 
has  grown  out  of  the  institution  of  Slavery, 
and  its  presence  among  us ;  and  (as  I  re- 
marked) the  sentiments  and  opinions  which 
it  necessarily  engenders,  fosters,  and  cher- 
ishes. The  war,  it  is  true,  is  not  a  war  for 
the  extermination  of  Slavery.  With  the  in- 
stitution of  Slavery  where  it  exists,  the  Gen- 
eral Government  has  nothing,  as  a  Govern- 
ment, to  do;  nor  has  the  General  Govern- 
ment ever  assumed  the  power  of,  in  any 
shape  or  manner,  controlling  the  institution 
of  Slavery,  or  its  management,  in  the  States 
where  it  exists.  The  General  Government 
has  never  been  aggressive  either  upon  the 
Slave  States  or  upon  the  institution  of  Sla- 
very. These  troubles  have  all  grown  out  of 
precisely  the  opposite — not  the  aggressions 
of  the  General  Government,  or  of  the  Free 
States — but  out  of  the  aggressions  of  Slavery 
itself,  and  its  continual  struggles  for  expan- 
sion and  extension  to  countries  where  it  had 
no  right  to  go,  and  where  our  fathers  never 
intended  it  should  go.  If  Slavery  had  been 
content  to  remain  where  the  Constitution 
placed  it — if  it  had  been  content  with  the 
privileges  and  immunities  Avhich  the  Consti- 
tution guaranteed  to  it — the  Free  States  and 
the  Slave  States  of  this  Union  could  have  lived 
together  in  a  perpetual  bond  of  fraternity. 

"  Mr.  President,  History  gives  no  instance, 
in  my  judgment,  of  such  long-suffering  and 
forbearance  as  there  has  been,  not  by  the 
people  of  the  Slave  States,  but  as  there  has 
been  exhibited  by  the  people  of  the  Free 


566 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


States  of  this  Union,  in  the  endurance  of  out- 
rages, wrongs,  and  oppressions,  that  they 
have -suffered  at  the  hands  of  that  institution, 
and  those  who  maintain  the  institution,  and 
have  suffered  from  their  strong  and  enduring 
devotion  to  the  General  Government — to  the 
institutions  that  our  fathers  achieved  for  us, 
and  transmitted  to  us.  I  think  I  should  not 
be  at  all  mistaken  in  asserting  that,  for  every 
slave  that  has  ever  been  seduced  from  the 
service  of  his  owner,  by  the  interference  of 
citizens  of  the  Free  States  with  the  institu- 
tion where  it  exists,  more  than  ten  free 
white  men  of  the  Free  States  of  this  Union 
have  been  outraged — every  privilege  of  free- 
dom trodden  upon — every  right  of  person  vio- 
lated—  by  lawless  mobs  in  the  Slave  States. 
We  have  borne  all  this  uncomplainingly ; 
we  have  borne  it  without  a  murmur,  because 
we  were  willing  to  bear  it — willing  to  make 
the  sacrifice,  for  the  sake  of  the  glorious  in- 
stitutions that  were  the  common  property 
and  common  blessing  of  us  all. 

"  Mr.  President,  we  have  not  invited  this 
war:  the  people  of  the  loyal  States  of  the 
Union  are  in  no  degree  responsible  for  the 
calamities  that  are  now  upon  the  country : 
we  gave  no  occasion  for  them.  There  is,  in 
the  history  of  man,  no  instance  of  so  stupen- 
dous a  conspiracy,  so  atrocious  a  treason, 
so  causeless  a  rebellion,  as  that  which  now 
exists  in  this  country ;  and  for  what  purpose  ? 
What  wrong  had  we  ever  done  to  the  Slave 
States,  or  to  the  institution  of  Slavery  ?  I 
have  heard,  in  all  the  assaults  that  have  been 
made  on  tins  Administration,  no  single  spe- 
cification of  one  injustice  that  they  had  ever 
suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  General  Govern- 
ment, or  at  the  hands  of  the  Free  States,  or 
of  the  people  of  the  Free  States. 

"  Mr.  President,  I  am  not  prepared  to  ad- 
mit, either — as  some  gentlemen  take  pains 
to  explain — that  this  is  not  a  war  of  subju- 
gation. If  it  is  not  a  war  of  subjugation, 
what  is  it?  What  was  it  set  on  foot  for,  if 
it  is  not  for  the  sole,  identical  purpose  of 
subjugating  the  atrocious  Rebellion  that 
exists  in  the  country  ?" 

Mr.  Shermax.  uMy  friend  will  allow  me?" 

Mr.  Browning.    "  Certainly." 

Mr.  Shermax.  "  My  friend  misunderstood 
my  language.  I  said  distinctly  that  it  was 
not  the  purpose  of  this  war  to  subjugate  a 
State,  a  political  community  ;  but  I  will  go 
as  far  as  he  or  any  other  living  man  to  up- 
hold the  Government  against  all  rebellious 
citizens,  whether  there  be  one  or  many  of 
them  in  a  State.  If  nine-tenths  of  the  peo- 
ple of  any  State  rebel  against  the  authority 
of  this  Government,  the  physical  power  of 
this  Government  should  be  brought  to  re- 
duce those  citizens  to  subjection.  The  State 
survives ;  and,  I  have  no  doubt,  the  State  of 
South  Carolina,  and  the  State  of  Florida, 


and  the  State  of  Virginia,  will  be  repre- 
sented on  this  floor  long  after  the  honorable 
Senator  and  I  have  filled  the  mission  allotted 
to  us." 

Mr.  Browning.  "I  trust  so.  I  will  not 
stop  to  deal  with  technicalities;  I  care  not 
whether  you  call  it  the  subjugation  of  the 
people  or  the  subjugation  of  the  State, 
where  all  the  authorities  of  a  State,  where 
all  the  officers,  who  are  the  embodiment  of 
the  power  of  the  State,  who  speak  for  the 
State,  who  represent  the  government  of  the 
State,  where  they  are  all  disloyal  and  banded 
in  treasonable  confederation  against  this 
Government,  I,  for  one,  am  for  subjugating 
them;  and  you  may  call  it  the  subjugation 
of  the  State,  or  of  the  people,  just  as  you 
please.  I  want  this  Rebellion  put  down, 
this  wicked  and  causeless  treason  punished, 
and  an  example  given  to  the  world  that  will 
teach  them  that  there  is  a  power  in  the  free- 
men of  this  continent  to  maintain  a  consti- 
tutional government. 

"  Why.  Mr.  President,  it  is  just  a  struggle 
to-day — the  whole  of  this  fight  is  about  that, 
and  nothing  else — whether  there  shall  be 
any  longer  any  such  thing  as  government  on 
this  continent  or  not;  and  the  very  moment 
that  the  doctrine  of  Secession,  the  very  mo- 
ment that  the  astounding  heresy  of  Seces- 
sion, is  admitted,  in  any  sense  or  in  any 
degree,  government  is  overthrown ;  be- 
cause, if  there  be  any  such  thing  as  a  right 
existing  in  a  State  to  secede  at  any  time  at 
her  will  —  causelessly  to  dismember  this 
Union  and  overthrow  this  Government — 
there  is  an  end  to  all  constitutions  and  all 
laws ;  and  it  is  a  struggle  to-day  for  the  life 
of  the  nation.  They  have  assailed  that  life  : 
ire  have  not  done  it ;  and  all  that  the  Gov- 
ernment has  done,  and  all  that  the  Adminis- 
tration proposes  to  do,  is  in  necessary  self- 
defense  against  assaults  that  are  made  upon 
the  very  life  of  the  nation.  *  *  *  Now, 
Mr.  President,  one  thing  more.  It  is  better 
that  people  everywhere  should  under.-tand 
precisely  what  is  going  on,  what  has  hap- 
pened, and  what  is  to  happen.  For  one, 
I  should  rejoice  to  see  all  the  States  in  re- 
bellion return  to  their  allegiance ;  and,  if 
they  return,  if  they  lay  down  the  arms  of 
their  rebellion,  and  come  back  to  their  duty 
and  their  obligations,  they  will  be  as  fully 
protected  now,  and  at  all  times  hereafter,  as 
they  have  ever  been  before,  in  all  their 
rights,  including  the  ownership,  use,  and 
management  of  slaves.  Let  them  return  to 
their  allegiance;  and  I,  for  one,  am  now  for 
giving  to  the  Slave  States  as  fully  and  com- 
pletely all  the  protection  of  the  Constitution 
and  laAvs  as  they  have  ever  enjoyed  in  any 
past  hour  of  our  existence. 

a  But,  sir,  let  us  understand  another 
tiling.    As  I  have  already  said,  the  power 


VIEWS   OF   MR.   BROWNING,    OF  ILL. 


567 


to  terminate  this  war  now  is  not  witli  us. 
The  power  is  with  us,  but  not  to  terminate 
it  instantly.  We  will  terminate  it,  if  it  is 
not  terminated,  as  it  should  be,  by  those 
who  began  it.  But,  sir,  I  say,  for  one — I 
speak  for  myself,  and  myself  only,  but  I  be- 
lieve, in  so  speaking,  I  utter  the  sentiments 
which  will  burst  from  every  free  heart  in 
all  the  Northern  States  of  the  confederacy — 
that,  if  our  brethren  of  the  South  do  force 
upon  us  the  distinct  issue — 'Shall  this  Gov- 
ernment be  overthrown,  and  it  and  all  the 
hopes  for  civil  liberty,  all  the  hopes  for  the 
oppressed  and  down-trodden  of  all  the  des- 
potisms of  the  earthy  go  down  in  one  dark, 
dreary  night  of  hopelessness  and  despair  V — 
if  they  force  upon  us  the  issue  whether  the 
Government  shall  go  down,  to  maintain  the 
institution  of  Slavery,  or  whether  Slavery 
shall  be  obliterated,  to  sustain  the  Constitu- 
tion and  the  Government  for  which  our 
fathers  fought  and  bled,  and  the  principles 
that  were  cemented  in  their  blood — 1  say, 
sir,  when  the  issue  comes,  when  they  force 
it  upon  us,  that  one  or  the  other  is  to  be 
overthrown,  then  I  am  for  the  Government 
and  against  Slavery ;  and  my  voice  and  my 
vote  shall  be  for  sweeping  the  last  vestige 
of  barbarism  from  the  face  of  the  continent. 
I  trust  that  necessity  may  not  be  forced  on 
us ;  but,  when  it  is  forced  upon  us,  let  us 
meet  it  like  men,  and  not  shrink  from  the 
high  and  holy  and  sacred  duties  that  are 
laid  upon  us,  as  the  conservators  not  only  of 
government,  but  as  the  conservators  of  the 
eternal  principles  of  justice  and  freedom  for 
the  whole  human  family. 

"  It  is  better,  Mr.  President,  that  we 
should  understand  each  other ;  and  I  repeat, 
in  conclusion,  that,  when  the  issue  comes — 
ami  if  it  comes — it  comes  because  it  is  forced 
upon  us ;  it  comes  upon  us  as  a  hard,  un- 
welcome necessity — I  trust  we  shall  be  found 
adequate  to  the  emergency  ;  I  trust  that  our 
hearts  will  not  fail  us  in  the  day  of  that  ter- 
rible conllict — for  it  is  to  be  a  terrible  one, 
if  this  war  goes  on.  If  rebellion  does  not 
recover  of  its  madness — if  American  citizens 
will  continue  so  infatuated  as  to  prosecute 
still  further  this  unnatural  war  against  the 
best  and  most  blessed  Government  that  the 
world  has  ever  known — this  issue  may  be 
forced  upon  us.  I  say  it  is  not  true,  as  gen- 
tlemen have  ventured  to  assert,  that,  if  it 
were  known  by  the  people  of  the  great 
Northwest  that,  in  any  possible  contingency, 
this  war  might  result  in  the  overthrow  and 
extermination  of  Slavery,  they  would  no 
longer  give  their  support  to  this  Govern- 
ment. If  it  were  known  or  believed  by 
the  people  of  the  great  Northwest  that  this 
Government  should  become  so  recreant  to 
its  duties  as  to  shrink  from  meeting  that 
great  question,  when  forced  upon  us,  in  my 


opinion,  they  would  descend  in  an  avalanche 
upon  this  Capitol,  and  hurl  us  from  the 
places  we  should  be  unworthy  to  fill. 

"  We  do  not  desire  this  issue  \  we  do  not 
want  this  necessity ;  but  we  have  no  power 
to  prevent  it;  and  it  is  better  that  the  peo- 
ple everywhere  should  understand  that,  if 
the  necessity  is  forced  upon  us,  our  choice 
is  promptly,  instantly,  manfully  made,  and 
made  for  all  time — that  we  make  the  de- 
cision, and  we  will  abide  by  the  decision,  to 
stand  by  the  Government;  and,  if  it  does 
go  down — if  not  only  this  nation,  but  the 
great  brotherhood  of  mankind  everywhere, 
is  to  witness  that  unspeakable  and  unheard 
of  calamity  of  the  overthrow  of  constitu- 
tional government  here — let  us  go  down  in 
a  manly  effort  to  sustain  and  uphold  it,  and 
to  sweep  away  the  causes  that  brought  upon 
us  all  this  trouble."     *     *     *    *    *  * 

Mr.  Carlile,  of  Ya.,  having  de- 
murred to  these  views,  Mr.  Browning 
rejoined,  as  follows : 

"  If  he  understood  me  as  announcing  any 
wish  or  any  intention  that  this  war  should 
be  a  war  waged  against  Slavery,  he  totally 
misapprehended  my  meaning." 

Mr.  Carlile.  "  I  did  not  so  understand 
the  Senator." 

Mr.  Browning.  "For  I  took  especial 
pains  to  say  that  I  would  rejoice  to  see  this 
war  terminated  •  and,  if  the  institution  stid 
existed  when  it  is  terminated,  I  should  be 
for  giving  it  then,  as  we  had  always  done 
heretofore,  in  the  best  faith  in  the  world, 
every  possible  protection  that  the  Constitu- 
tion and  laws  intended  it  should  have  ;  but 
that,  if  the  issue  was  forced  upon  us — as  it 
might  be — to  make  a  choice  between  the 
Government,  on  the  one  side,  and  Slavery 
on  the  other,  then  I  was  for  the  Government." 

Mr.  Sherman,  of  Ohio.  "  I  do  not  under- 
stand either  the  Senator  from  Kansas  on  my 
right,  or  the  Senator  from  Connecticut,  or 
the  Senator  from  Kansas  behind  me,  to  say 
that  it  is  the  purpose  of  this  war  to  abolish 
Slavery.  It  is  not  waged  for  any  such  pur- 
pose, or  with  any  such  view.  They  have 
all  disclaimed  it.  Why,  then,  does  the  Sen- 
ator [Mr.  Powell]  insist  upon  it  ?  I  will  now 
say,  and  the  Senator  may  make  the  most  of 
it,  that,  rather  than  see  one  single  foot  of 
this  country  of  ours  torn  from  the  national 
domain  by  traitors,  I  will  myself  see  the 
slaves  set  free;  but,  at  the  same  time,  I 
utterly  disclaim  any  purpose  of  that  kind. 
If  the  men  who  are  now  waging  war  against 
the  Government,  fitting  out  pirates  against 
our  commerce,  going  back  to  the  old  mode  of 
warfare  of  the  middle  ages,  should  prosecute 
this  Kebellion  to  such  an  extent  that  there 


568 


THE    AMERICAN"  CONFLICT. 


is  no  way  of  conquering  South  Carolina,  for 
instance,  except  by  emancipating  her  slaves, 
I  say,  Emancipate  her  slaves  and  conquer  her 
rebellious  citizens ;  and,  if  they  have  not 
people  there  enough  to  elect  members  of 
Congress  and  Senators,  we  will  send  people 
there.  Let  there  be  no  misunderstanding 
my  position ;  I  wish  it  distinctly  understood  ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  I  utterly  disclaim  that 
it  was  any  purpose,  or  idea,  or  object  of  this 
Avar  to  free  the  slaves.  On  the  contrary,  I 
am  in  favor  of  the  Constitution  as  it  is ;  I  am 
in  favor  of  giving  the  people — the  loyal  peo- 
ple— of  the  Southern  States,  every  constitu- 
tional right  that  they  now  possess.  I  voted 
last  Winter  to  change  the  Constitution  for 
their  benefit— to  give  them  new  guarantees, 
new  conditions.  I  would  not  do  that  now  ; 
but  I  did  last  Winter.  I  will  give  them  all 
the  Constitution  gives  them,  and  no  more." 

Mr.  John  J.  Crittenden,  of  Ky.,  on 
the  19th,  submitted  to  the  House1  the 
following : 

"  Resolved  hy  the  House  of  Representatives 
of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  That 
the  present  deplorable  civil  war  has  been 
forced  upon  the  country  by  the  Disunionista 
of  the  Southern  States  now  in  revolt  against 
the  constitutional  Government,  and  in  arms 
around  the  capital ;  that,  in  this  national 
emergency.  Congress,  banishing  all  feeling 
of  mere  passion  or  resentment,  will  recollect 
only  its  duty  to  the  whole  country;  that 
this  war  is  not  waged,  on  our  part,  in  any 
spirit  of  oppression,  nor  for  any  purpose  of 
conquest  or  subjugation,  nor  purpose  of  over- 
throwing or  interfering  with  the  rights  or 
established  institutions  of  those  States;  but 
to  defend  and  maintain  the  supremacy  of  the 
Constitution,  and  to  preserve  the  Union,  with 
all  the  dignity,  equality,  and  rights,  of  the 
several  States  unimpaired;  and,  as  soon  as 
these  objects  are  accomplished,  the  war 
ought  to  cease." 

Mr.  Stevens,  of  Pa.,  objecting, 
The  resolution  could  not  be  con- 
sidered forthwith ;  but  it  was  taken 
up  on  Monday,  and,  on  motion  of  Mr. 
Burnett,  of  Ky.,  divided — the  vote 
being  first  taken  on  so  much  of  the 
resolution  as  precedes  and  includes 
the  word  "  capital,"  which  was  adopt- 
ed by  Yeas  121 ;  Nays — Messrs.  Bur- 
nett and  Keid — (Rebels :)  when  the 
remainder  was  likewise  adopted: 
Yeas  11 7 ;  Nays — Messrs.  Potter,  of 


Wis.,  and  Kiddle,  of  Ohio — (Repub- 
licans.) Mr.  Burnett  declined  to  vote. 

It  is  worthy  of  record  that  on  this 
sad  day,  while  Washington,  crowded 
with  fugitives  from  the  routed  Union 
Grand  Army,  seemed  to  lie  at  the 
mercy  of  the  Rebels,  Congress  legis- 
lated calmly  and  patiently  through- 
out ;  and  the  House,  on  motion  of 
Mr.  Yandever,  of  Iowa,  unanimously 

"  Resolved,  That  the  maintenance  of  the 
Constitution,  the  preservation  of  the  Union, 
and  the  enforcement  of  the  laws,  are  sacred 
trusts  which  must  be  executed  ;  that  no  dis- 
aster shall  discourage  us  from  the  most  am- 
ple performance  of  this  high  duty  ;  and  that 
we  pledge  to  the  country  and  the  world  the 
employment  of  every  resource,  national  and 
individual,  for  the  suppression,  overthrow, 
and  punishment  of  Rebels  in  arms." 

Mr.  Andrew  Johnson,  of  Tenn., 
on  the  21th,  moved  in  the  Senate  a 
resolution  identical  with  that  of  Mr. 
Crittenden,  so  recently  adopted  by 
the  House ;  which  was  zealously  op- 
posed by  Messrs.  Polk  and  Breckin- 
ridge, and,  on  special  grounds,  by 
Mr.  Trumbull,  who  said  : 

"  As  that  resolution  contains  a  statement 
which,  in  my  opinion,  is  untrue,  that  this 
capital  is  surrounded  by  armed  men,  who 
started  this  revolt,  I  cannot  vote  for  it.  I 
shall  say  1  Nay.' 

"  I  wish  to  add  one  word.  The  revolt 
was  occasioned,  in  my  opinion,  by  people 
who  are  not  here  nor  in  this  vicinity.  It  was 
started  in  South  Carolina.  I  think  the  reso- 
lution limits  it  to  a  class  of  persons  who 
were  not  the  originators  of  this  Rebellion." 

But  the  resolution  was  nevertheless 
adopted,  by  the  following  vote  : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Anthony,  Browning, Chan- 
dler, Clark,  Cowan,  Dixon,  Doolittle,  Fes-- 
senden.  Foot.  Foster,  Grimes,  Harlan.  Har- 
ris, Howe,  Johnson,  of  Tenn.,  Kennedy, 
King,  Lane,  of  Ind.,  Lane,  of  Kansas,  Latham, 
Morrill,  Nesmith,  Pomerov.  Saulsbury,  Sher- 
man, Ten  Eyck,  Wade,  Wilkinson,  Willey. 
and  Wilson— 30. 

Nays — Messrs.  Breckinridge,  Johnson,  of 
Mo.,  Polk,  Powell,  Trumbull— 5. 

This  day,  the  Senate  considered  a 
bill  to  confiscate  property  used  for 


CONFISCATION  — 


EMANCIPATION 


569 


insurrectionary  purposes  by  persons 
engaged  in  rebellion  or  forcible  re- 
sistance to  the  Government ;  and 
Mr.  Trumbull,  of  111.,  moved  the  fol- 
lowing amendment: 

u  And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  when- 
ever any  person,  claiming  to  be  entitled  to 
the  service  or  labor  of  any  other  person, 
under  the  laws  of  any  State,  shall  employ 
such  person  in  aiding  or  promoting  any  in- 
surrection, or  in  resisting  the  laws  of  the 
United  States,  or  shall  permit  him  to  be  so 
employed,  he  shall  forfeit  all  right  to  such 
service  or  labor,  and  the  person  Avhose  labor 
or  service  is  thus  claimed  shall  be  thence- 
forth discharged  therefrom — any  law  to  the 
contrary  notwithstanding." 

This  proposition  was  advocated  by 
Mr.  Ten  Eyck,  of  IS".  J.,  who  had  op- 
posed it  two  days  before,  in  Commit- 
tee, but  who  now  urged  its  passage 
on  the  assumption  that  slaves  had 
been  engaged  on  the  Rebel  side  in 
the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  Mr.  Pearce, 
of  Md.,  earnestly  opposed  it,  saying : 

"It  will  inflame  suspicions  which  have 
had  much  to  do  with  producing  our  present 
evils ;  will  disturb  those  who  are  now  calm 
and  quiet;  inflame  those  who  are  restless; 
irritate  numbers  who  would  not  be  exas- 
perated by  any  thing  else  ;  and  will,  in  all 
probability,  produce  no  other  real  efiectthan 
these.  Being,  then,  useless,  unnecessary, 
and  irritating,  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  unwise." 

The  vote  was  then  taken,  and  the 
amendment  adopted  :  Yeas  33  ;  JSTays 
— Breckinridge  and  Powell,  of  Ky., 
Johnson  and  Polk,  of  Mo.,  Kennedy 
and  Pearce,  of  Md. — 6.  The  bill  Avas 
then  engrossed,  read  a  third  time, 
and  passed. 

When  this  bill  reached  the  House, 
it  encountered  a  most  strenuous  and 
able  opposition  from  Messrs.  Critten- 
den and  Burnett,  of  Ky.,  Vallandig- 
ham  and  Pendleton,  of  Ohio,  and 
Diven,  ofK  Y. 

Mr.  Cox,  of  Ohio,  moved  (August 
2d)  that  the  bill  do  lie  on  the  table ; 
which  was  negatived :  Yeas  57 ; 
Nays  71. 


Mr.  Thaddeus  Stevens  closed  a 
vigorous  speech  in  its  favor  with  this 
impressive  admonition : 

"  If  this  war  is  continued  long,  and  is 
bloody,  I  do  not  believe  that  the  free  people 
of  the  North  will  stand  by  and  see  their 
sons  and  brothers  and  neighbors  slaughtered 
by  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  by 
rebels,  with  arms  in  their  hands,  and  forbear 
to  call  upon  their  enemies  to  be  our  friends, 
and  to  help  us  in  subduing  them.  I,  for  one, 
if  it  continues  long,  and  has  the  consequences 
mentioned,  shall  be  ready  to  go  for  it,  let  it 
horrify  the  gentleman  from  New  York  [Mr. 
Divenj  or  anybody  else.  That  is  my  doc- 
trine: and  that  will  be  the  doctrine  of  the 
whole  free  people  of  the  North  before  two 
years  roll  around,  if  this  war  continues. 

"  As  to  the  end  of  the  war,  until  the 
Rebels  are  subdued,  no  man  in  the  North 
thinks  of  it.  If  the  Government  are  equal 
to  the  people— and  I  believe  they  are — there 
will  be  no  bargaining,  there  will  be  no  nego- 
tiation, there  will  be  no  truces  with  the 
Rebels,  except  to  bury  the  dead,  until  every 
man  shall  have  laid  down  his  arms,  dis- 
banded his  organization,  submitted  himself 
to  the  Government,  and  sued  for  mercy. 
And,  sir,  if  those  who  have  the  control  of 
the  Government  are  not  fit  for  this  task, 
and  have  not  the  nerve  and  mind  for  it,  the 
people  will  take  care  that  there  are  others 
who  are — although,  sir,  I  have  not  a  bit  of 
fear  of  the  present  Administration  or  of  the 
present  Executive. 

"I  have  spoken  more  freely,  perhaps, 
than  gentlemen  within  my  hearing  might 
think  politic ;  but  I  have  spoken  just  what  I 
felt.  I  have  spoken  what  I  believe  will  be 
the  result ;  and  I  warn  Southern  gentlemen 
that,  if  this  war  is  to  continue,  there  will  be 
a  time  when  my  friend  from  New  York  [Mr. 
Divenj  will  see  it  declared  by  this  free  nation 
that  every  bondman  in  the  South — belong- 
ing to  a  Rebel,  recollect;  I  confine  it  to 
them — shall  be  called  upon  to  aid  us  in  war 
against  their  masters,  and  to  restore  this 
Union." 

The  bill  was  now  recommitted,  on 
motion  of  Mr.  Pendleton,  of  Ohio ; 
and  an  attempt  by  Mr.  Stevens  to 
reconsider  this  decision  was  defeated 
by  laying  on  the  table — Yeas  71  ; 
Nays  61.  It  was  reported  back  next 
day  from  the  Judiciary  Committee 
by  Mr.  Bingham,  of  Ohio,  so  amended 
as  to  strike  out  the  section  relating 
to  slaves — adopted  on  motion  of  Mr. 


570 


THE  AMERICA 


N  CONFLICT. 


Trumbull  as  aforesaid — and  insert 
instead  the  following : 

"Sec.  4.  And  he  it  further  enacted,  That, 
whenever  hereafter,  during  the  present  in- 
surrection against  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  any  person  claimed  to  be 
held  to  labor  or  service,  under  the  laws  of 
any  State,  shall  be  required  or  permitted  by 
the  person  to  whom  such  labor  or  service  is 
claimed  to  be  due,  or  by  the  lawful  agent  of 
such  person,  to  take  up  arms  against  the 
United  States,  or  shall  be  required  or  per- 
mitted by  the  person  to  whom  such  service 
or  labor  is  claimed  to  be  due,  or  his  lawful 
agent,  to  work  or  be  employed  in  or  upon 
any  fort,  navy-yard,  dock,  armory,  ship,  or 
intrenchment,  or  in  any  military  or  naval 
service  whatever,  against  the  Government 
and  lawful  authority  of  the  United  States, 
then,  and  in  every  such  case,  the  person  to 
whom  such  service  is  claimed  to  be  due 
shall  forfeit  his  claim  to  such  labor,  any  law 
of  the  State  or  of  the  United  States  to  the 
contrary  notwithstanding;  and  whenever 
thereafter  the  person  claiming  such  service 
or  labor  shall  seek  to  enforce  his  claim,  it 
6hall  be  a  full  and  sufficient  answer  to  such 
claim,  that  the  person  whose  service  or 
labor  is  claimed  had  been  employed  in  hos- 
tile service  against  the  Government  of  the 
United  States,  contrary  to  the  provisions  of 
this  act." 

Mr.  Bingham  called  for  the  previ- 
ous question  on  the  reading  of  the 
bill,  as  thus  amended,  which  was 
seconded.  Mr.  Holman,  of  Indiana, 
moved  that  the  bill  be  laid  on  the 
table  ;  which  was  beaten  :  Yeas  47  ; 
Nays  66.  The  amendment  of  the 
Judiciary  Committee  was  then  agreed 
to ;  the  bill,  as  amended,  ordered  to 
be  read  a  third  time,  and  passed,  as 
follows : 

Yeas  —  Messrs.  Aldrich,  Alley,  Arnold, 
Ashley,  Babbitt,  Baxter,  Beaman,  Bingham, 
Francis  P.  Blair,  Samuel  S.  Blair,  Blake, 
Bufrinton,  Chamberlain,  Clark,  Colfax,  Fred- 
erick A.  Conkling,  Covode,  Duell,  Edwards, 
Eliot,  Fenton,  Fessenden,  Franchot,  Frank, 
Granger,  Gurley,  Hanchett,  Harrison,  Hutch- 
ins,  Julian,  Kelley,  Francis  W.  Kellogg,  Wil- 
liam Kellogg,  Lansing,  Loomis,  Lovejoy,  Mc- 
Kean,  Mitchell,  Justin  S.  Morrill,  Olin,  Pot- 
ter, Alex.  H.  Rice,  Edward  H.  Rollins,  Sedg- 
wick. Sheffield, Shellabarger,  Sherman,  Sloan, 
Spaulding,  Stevens,  Benj.  F.  Thomas,  Train, 

6  July  25,  1861. 


Van  Home,  Verree,  "Wallace,  Charles  W. 
Walton,  E.  P.  Walton,  Wheeler,  Albert  S. 
White,  and  Windom — 00. 

Nays — Messrs.  Allen,  Ancona,  Joseph  Bai- 
ly,  George  H.  Browne,  Burnett,  Calvert,  Cox, 
Cravens,  Crisfield,  Crittenden,  Diven,  Dun- 
lap,  Dunn,  English,  Fouke,  Grider,  Haight, 
Hale,  Harding,  Holman,  Horton,  Jackson, 
Johnson,  Law,  May,  McClernand,  McPher- 
son,  Mallory,  Menzies,  Morris,  Noble,  Norton, 
Odell,  Pendleton,  Porter,  Reid,  Robinson, 
James  S.  Rollins,  Sheil,  Smith,  John  B. 
Steele,  Stratton,  Francis  Thomas,  Vallandig- 
ham,  Voorhees,  Wadsworth,  Webster,  and 
Wickliffe— 48. 

The  bill,  thus  amended,  being  re- 
turned to  the  Senate,  Mr.  Trumbull 
moved  a  concurrence  in  the  House 
amendment,  which  prevailed  by  the 
following  vote : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Anthony,  Bingham,  Brown- 
ing, Clark,  Collamer,  Dixon,  Doolittle,  Fes- 
senden, Foot,  Foster,  Grimes,  Hale,  Harris., 
King,  Lane,  of  Ind.,  Lane,  of  Kansas,  McDou- 
gall,  Sherman,  Simmons,  Sumner,  Ten  Eyck, 
Trumbull,  Wade,  and  Wilson — 24. 

Nays — Messrs.  Breckinridge,  Bright,  Car- 
lile,  Cowan,  Johnson,  of  Mo.,  Latham,  Pearce, 
Polk,  Powell,  Rice,  and  Saulsbury — 11. 

Mr.  Clark,  of  New  Hampshire,  sub- 
mitted5 the  following: 

"Be  it  resolved  by  the  Senate  and  House 
of  Representatives  of  the  United  States  of 
America,  in  Congress  assembled,  That  we,  as 
representatives  of  the  people  and  States,  re- 
spectively, do  hereby  declare  our  fixed  deter- 
mination to  maintain  the  supremacy  of  the 
Government  and  the  integrity  of  the  Union  of 
all  these  United  States ;  and  to  this  end,  as 
far  as  we  may  do  so,  we  pledge  the  entire  re- 
sources of  the  Government  and  people,  until 
all  rebels  shall  submit  to  the  one  and  cease 
their  efforts  to  destroy  the  other." 

Which  was  adopted :  Yeas  31 ; 
Nays  1 — Mr.  Breckinridge. 

Mr.  S.  S.  Cox,  of  Ohio,6  asked  the 

House  to  suspend  its  rules  to  enable 

him  to  offer  the  following : 

"  Whereas,  it  is  the  part  of  rational  beings 
to  terminate  their  difficulties  by  rational 
methods,  and,  inasmuch  as  the  differen- 
ces between  the  United  States  authorities 
and  the  seceding  States  have  resulted  in  a 
civil  war,  characterized  by  bitter  hostility 
and  extreme  atrocity ;  and,  although  the 
party  in  the  seceded  States  are  guilty  of 

6  July  29th. 


4 


S.    S.    COX    AND    W.  P. 


JOHNSON    FOR  'PEACE.' 


571 


breaking  the  national  unity  and  resisting 
the  national  authority :  Yet, 

'■'Be  it  resolved,  First:  That,  while  we 
make  undiminished  and  increased  exertions 
by  our  Navy  and  Army  to  maintain  the 
integrity  and  stability  of  this  Government, 
the  common  laws  of  war,  consisting  of  those 
maxims  of  humanity,  moderation,  and  hon- 
or, which  are  a  part  of  the  international 
code,  ought  to  be  observed  by  both  parties, 
and  for  a  stronger  reason  than  exists  be- 
tween two  alien  nations,  inasmuch  as  the 
two  parties  have  a  common  ancestry,  histo- 
ry, prosperity,  glory, Government,  and  Union, 
and  are  now  unhappily  engaged  in  lacera- 
ting their  common  country.  Second:  That, 
resulting  from  these  premises,  while  there 
ought  to  be  left  open,  as  between  two  alien 
nations,  the  same  means  for  preventing  the 
war  being  carried  to  outrageous  extremities, 
there  ought,  also,  to  be  left  open  some  means 
for  the  restoration  of  peace  and  Union. 
Third:  That,  to  this  end — the  restoration  of 
peace  and  union  on  the  basis  of  the  Consti- 
tution— there  be  appointed  a  Committee  of 
one  member  from  each  State,  who  shall  re- 
port to  this  House,  at  its  next  session,  such 
amendments  to  the  Constitution  of  the  Uni- 
ted States  as  shall  assuage  all  grievances, 
and  bring  about  a  reconstruction  of  the  na- 
tional unity;  and  that,  for  the  preparation 
of  such  adjustment,  and  the  conference  re- 
quisite for  that  purpose,  there  be  appointed 
a  commission  of  seven  citizens  of  the  United 
States,  consisting  of  Edward  Everett,  of  Mas- 
sachusetts, Franklin  Pierce,  of  New  Hamp- 
shire, Millard  Fillmore,  of  New  York,  Rev- 
erdy  Johnson,  of  Maryland,  Martin  Van 
Buren,  of  New  York,  Thomas  Ewing,  of 
Ohio,  and  James  Guthrie,  of  Kentucky,  who 
shall  request  from  the  so-called  Confederate 
States  the  appointment  of  a  similar  commis- 
sion, and  who  shall  meet  and  confer  on  the 
subject  in  the  city  of  Louisville,  on  the  first 
Monday  of  September  next.  And  that  the 
Committee  appointed  from  this  House  notify 
said  Commissioners  of  their  appointment  and 
function,  and  report  their  action  to  the  next 
session,  as  an  amendment  of  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  to  be  proposed  by  Con- 
gress to  the  States  for  their  ratification, 
according  to  the  fifth  article  of  the  Constitu- 
tion.'1 

The  House  refused  to  suspend : 
Yeas  41  :  Nays  85. 

Mr.  Waldo  P.  Johnson,7  of  Mo., 
proposed  (Aug.  5th)  to  add  to  the  bill 
providing  for  an  increase  of  the  En- 
gineer Corps  the  following : 


11  And  le  it  farther  enacted,  That  this 
Congress  recommend  the  Governors  of  the 
several  States  to  convene  their  Legislatures 
for  the  purpose  of  calling  an  election  to 
select  two  delegates  from  each  Congressional 
district  to  meet  in  general  Convention  at 
Louisville,  in  Kentucky,  on  the  first  Monday 
in  September  next ;  the  purpose  of  the  said 
Convention  to  be  to  devise  measures  for  the 
restoration  of  peace  to  our  country." 

Mr.  Carlile,  of  Va.  "  Mr.  President, 
there  is  no  one,  perhaps,  within  the  limits 
of  the  Union,  who  is  more  anxious  that 
peace  should  be  restored  to  our  country 
than  I  am ;  but,  sir,  in  the  presence  of  a 
large,  organized  army,  engaged  in  an  effort 
to  overthrow  the  institutions  of  the  country, 
and  permanently  to  divide  these  States  that 
have  so  long  existed  as  one  people,  I  do  not 
think  any  such  proposition  as  this  ought  to 
be  made  until  that  army  shall  be  disbanded, 
and  until  an  offer  to  meet  those  who  desire 
peace  shall  be  made  to  them  by  those  who 
are  engaged  in  this  Rebellion.  I  cannot, 
therefore,  entertaining  these  views,  vote  for 
the  amendment  offered  by  the  Senator  from 
Missouri — not  that  I  would  not  go  as  far  as 
he  will  go,  or  any  other  Senator  on  this 
floor,  to  allay  the  strife  in  our  land ;  but  I 
think  that  propositions  of  this  kind,  coming 
from  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  at  this 
hour,  are  inopportune ;  and,  instead  of  aid- 
ing the  effort  that  may  be  made  for  peace, 
they  will  prolong  the  civil  war  that  is  now 
raging  in  the  country/' 

Mr.  McDougall,  of  Cal.  "  I  wish  merely 
to  amend  the  remark  made  by  the  Senator 
from  Virginia.  He  says  this  proposition 
would  be  inopportune.  I  say  it  would  be 
intensely  cowardly." 

Mr.  Johnson's  proposition  was  re- 
jected by  the  following  vote  : 

Yeas  —  Messrs.  Bayard,  Breckinridge, 
Bright,  Johnson,  of  Mo.,  Latham,  Pearce, 
Polk,  Powell,  and  Saulsbury — 9. 

Nats — Messrs.  Baker,  Browning,  Carlile, 
Chandler,  Clark,  Collamer,  Cowan,  Dixon, 
Doolittle,  Fessenden,  Foot,  Foster,  Grimes, 
Harris,  Howe,  King,  Lane,  of  Ind.,  Lane,  of 
Kansas,  McDougall,  Morrill,  Rice,  Sherman, 
Sumner,  Ten  Eyck,  Trumbull,  Wade,  Wil- 
kinson, Wilmot,  and  Wilson — 29. 

The  bill  increasing  the  pay  of  sol- 
diers being  that  day  under  considera- 
tion, Mr.  Wilson,  of  Mass.,  moved  to 
add  the  following : 

"And  be  it  further  enacted,  That  all  the 
acts,  proclamations,  and  orders  of  the  Presi- 


7  Who,,  with  Jus  colleague,  Trusten  Polk, 


openly  joined  the  Rebels  soon  afterward. 


572  THE  AMERICA 

dent  of  the  United  States,  after  the  4th  of 
March,  1861,  respecting  the  Army  and  Navy 
of  the  United  States,  and  calling  out  or  re- 
lating to  the  militia  or  volunteers  from  the 
States,  are  hereby  approved,  and  in  all  re- 
spects legalized  and  made  valid,  to  the  same 
intent,  and  with  the  same  effect,  as  if  they 
had  been  issued  and  done  under  the  previous 
express  authority  and  direction  of  the  Con- 
gress of  the  United  States.1' 

The  amendment  was  agreed  to, 
and  the  bill  thereupon  passed,  as  fol- 
lows :  Yeas  33  ; 

Nays — Messrs.    Breckinridge,  Kennedy, 
Polk,  Powell,  and  Saulsbury — 5. 

This  bill  was,  the  same  day,  recon- 
sidered, and  the  above  amendment, 
being  moved  afresh,  was  again  adopt- 
ed :  Yeas  37 ; 

Nays  —Messrs.  Breckinridge,  Bright,Ken- 
nedy,  Pearce,  and  Powell — 5. 

So  the  amendment  was  once  more 
agreed  to,  and  the  bill  passed. 

The  bill  being  thus  returned  to 
the  House,  Mr.  Yallandigham  moved 
to  strike  out  the  above  section,  which 
was  defeated  by  the  following  vote : 

Yeas — Messrs.  Allen,  Ancona,  George  H. 
Browne,  Calvert,  Cox,  Cristield,  Jackson, 
Johnson,  May,  Noble,  Pendleton,  James  S. 
Kollins,  Sheii,  Smith,  Yallandigham,  Voor- 
hees,  Wadsworth,  Ward,  and  Webster — 19. 

Nays— 74. 

The  bill  was  thereupon  passed. 
Mr.  Calvert,  of  Md.,  offered  the 
following : 


N  CONFLICT. 

"  That,  whilst  it  is  the  duty  of  Congress, 
by  appropriate  legislation,  to  strengthen  the 
hands  of  Government  in  its  efforts  to  main- 
tain the  Union  and  enforce  the  supremacy 
of  the  laws,  it  is  no  less  our  duty  to  examine 
into  the  original  causes  of  our  dissensions, 
and  to  apply  such  remedies  as  are  best  cal- 
culated to  restore  peace  and  union  to  the 
country:  Therefore,  it  is 

u  Resolved  (The  Senate  concurring  here- 
in),  that  a  Joint  Committee,  to  consist  of 
nine  members  of  this  House  and  four  mem- 
bers of  the  Senate,  be  appointed  to  consider 
and  report  to  Congress  such  amendments  to 
the  Constitution  and  laws  as  may  be  neces- 
sary to  restore  mutual  confidence  and  insure 
a  more  perfect  and  endurable  Union  amongst 
these  States.11 

This  proposition  was  laid  on  the 
table  :  Yeas  72  ;  Nays  39 — nearly  a 
party  division.  And  Mr.  Diven,  of 
N.  Y.,  thereupon  asked  the  unani- 
mous consent  of  the  House  to  enable 
him  to  offer  the  following  : 

"  Resolved,  That,  at  a  time  when  an  armed 
rebellion  is  threatening  the  integrity  of  the 
Union,  and  the  overthrow  of  the  Govern- 
ment, any  and  all  resolutions  or  recommend  - 
ations  designed  to  make  terms  with  armed 
rebels  are  either  cowardly  or  treasonable." 

Mr.  Yallandigham  objected ;  and 
the  House  refused  to  suspend  the 
rules :  Noes  36  ;  Ays  56 — not  two- 
thirds. 

The  session  terminated  by  adjourn- 
ment at  noon,  August  6th,  having 
lasted  but  thirty-three  days. 


XXXV. 
MISSOURI. 


"We  have  seen  Conventions  of  the 
people  of  several  States  coolly  assume 
the  power,  asserted  or  reserved  in  no 
one  of  their  respective  Constitutions, 
to  take  those  States  out  of  the  Union, 
and  absolve  their  people  from  all  ob- 


ligation to  uphold  or  obey  its  Govern- 
ment, in  flagrant  defiance  of  that 
Federal  charter,  framed  for  and 
adopted  by  the  people  of  the  United 
States,  and  by  them  recognized  and 
accepted  as  the  supreme  law  of  the 


MISSOURI    BETRAYED    BY   JACKS  ON. 


573 


land,  anything  in  the  Constitution 
and  laws  of  any  State  to  the  contrary 
notwithstanding.  We  have  seen  one 
of  these  Conventions  assume  and  ex- 
ercise the  right  of  revoking  a  funda- 
mental compact  between  the  State 
and  the  Union,  which  is,  by  its  ex- 


press terms,  irrevocable.  We  have 
seen  State  Legislatures,  in  default  of 
Conventions,  usurp,  practically,  this 
tremendous  power  of  secession  ;  and 
have  heard  a  now  loyal  Governor 
proclaim  that  a  popular  majority  for 
Secessionists,  in  an  election  of  mem- 


MAP  OF  MISSOURI. 


bers  of  Congress,  might  serve  to  nul- 
lify the  obligation  of  the  citizens  of 
that  State  to  the  Federal  Constitu- 
tion and  Union.  We  are  now  to  con- 
template more  directly  the  spectacle 
of  a  State  plunged  into  secession  and 


civil  war,  not  in  obedience  to,  but  in 
defiance  of,  the  action  of  her  Conven- 
tion and  the  express  wTill  of  her  peo- 
ple— not,  even,  by  any  direct  act  of 
her  Legislature,  but  by  the  will  of 
her  Executive  alone.1    Gov.  Jackson, 


'Pollard,  in  his  "Southern  History,"  says: 
"  Upon  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  the 


Border  States  were  unwilling  to  rush  into  disso- 
lution until  every  hope  of  a  peaceful  settlement 


574- 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


as  we  have  seen,  having  found  the 
Convention,  which  his  Legislature 
had  called,  utterly  and  emphatically 
intractable  to  the  uses  of  treason,  had 
reconvened  his  docile  Legislature.3 
But  even  this  body  could  not  be^in- 
duced  to  vote  the  State  out  of  the 
Union.  Below  that  point,  however, 
it  stood  ready  enough  to  aid  the 
bolder  conspirators ;  and  its  pliancy 
was  taxed  to  the  utmost.  The  State 
School  Fund,  the  money  provided  to 
pay  the  July  interest  on  the  heavy 
State  Debt,  and  all  other  available 
means,  amounting  in  the  aggregate 
to  over  three  millions  of  dollars,  were 
appropriated  to  military  uses,  and 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  Jackson,  un- 
der the  pretense  of  arming  the  State 
against  any  emergency.  By  another 
act,  the  Governor  was  invested  with 
despotic  power — even  verbal  opposi- 
tion to  his  assumptions  of  authority 
being  constituted  treason ;  while  every 
citizen  liable  to  military  duty  was 
declared  subject  to  draft  into  active 
service  at  Jackson's  will,  and  an  oath 
of  obedience  to  the  State  Executive 
exacted.  Under  these  acts,  Jackson 
appointed  ex-Gov.  Sterling  Price 
Major-General  of  the  State  forces, 
with  nine  Brigadiers — Parsons,  M.  L. 
Clark,  John  B.  Clark,  Slack,  Harris, 
Rains,  McBride,  Stein,  and  Jeff. 
Thompson,  commanding  in  so  many 
districts  into  which  the  State  was  di- 
vided. These  Brigadiers  were  or- 
dered by  Maj.  Gen.  Price  to  muster 
and  organize  the  militia  of  their  sev- 
eral districts  so  fast  as  possible,  and 
send  it  with  all  dispatch  to  Boone- 
ville and  Lexington,  two  thriving 
young  cities  on  the  Missouri,  respect- 

of  the  question  had  vanished.  This  was  the 
position  of  Missouri,  to  whose  Convention  not  a 
single  Secessionist  was  elected.    Gov.  Price  was 


ively  some  forty  and  one  hundred 
miles  west  of  Jefferson,  and  in  the 
heart  of  the  slaveholding  region. 
This  call  having  been  made,  Jackson 
and  Price,  fearing  an  attack  from  the 
Federal  forces  gathering  at  St.  Louis, 
started  westward  with  their  follow- 
ers, reaching  Booneville  on  the  18th 
of  June.  Price,  being  sick,  kept  on 
by  steamboat  to  Lexington. 

They  had  not  moved  too  soon. 
Gen.  Lyon  and  his  army  left  St. 
Louis  by  steamboats  on  the  13th,  and 
reached  Jefferson  City  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  15th,  only  to  find  that  the 
Confederate  chiefs  had  started  when 
he  did,  with  a  good  hundred  miles 
advantage  in  the  race.  Reembark- 
ing  on  the  16th,  he  reached  Rockport, 
nearly  opposite  Booneville,  next 
morning,  and  espied  the  Rebel  en- 
campment just  across  the  river.  In 
it  were  collected  some  two  or  three 
thousand  men,  only  half  armed,  and 
not  at  all  drilled,  under  the  imme- 
diate command  of  Col.  Marmaduke. 
Jackson,  utterly  disconcerted  by 
Lyon's  unexpected  rapidity  of  move- 
ment, had  ordered  his  '  State  Guard' 
to  be  disbanded,  and  no  resistance  to 
be  offered.  But  Marmaduke  deter- 
mined to  fight,  and  started  for  the 
landing,  where  he  hoped  to  surprise 
and  cut  up  the  Unionists  while  de- 
barking. He  met  Lyon  advancing 
in  good  order,  and  was  easily  routed 
by  him,  losing  two  guns,  with  much 
camp-equipage,  clothing,  etc.  His 
raw  infantry  were  dispersed,  but  his 
strength  in  cavalry  saved  him  from 
utter  destruction. 

Jackson  fled  to  Warsaw,  on  the 
Osage,  some  eighty  miles  south-west. 

elected  from  his  district  as  a  Union  man,  with- 
out opposition;  and,  on  the  assembling  of  the 
Convention,  was  chosen  its  President. "  2  May  3d. 


SIGEL'S   FIGHT   NEAR  CARTHAGE. 


575 


Fifteen  miles  north  of  that  place,  at 
Camp  Cole,  a  half-organized  regiment 
of  Unionists,  under  Capt.  Cook,  was 
asleep  in  two  barns,  with  no  pickets 
out  save  northward,  when,  during 
the  night  of  the  18th,  they  were  sur- 
prised by  a  Rebel  force  from  the 
southward,  under  Col.  O'Kane,  and 
utterly  routed — being  unable  to  offer 
any  serious  resistance.  Capt.  Cook 
and  a  portion  of  his  followers  barely 
escaped  with  their  lives.3  Jackson, 
reenforced  by  O'Kane,  halted  two 
days  at  Warsaw,  then  continued  his 
retreat  some  fifty  miles  to  Montevallo, 
in  Vernon  County,  near  the  west  line 
of  the  State,  and  was  here  joined  on 
the  3d  of  July  by  Price,  with  such 
aid  as  he  had  been  able  to  gather  at 
Lexington  and  on  his  way.  Their 
united  force  is  stated  by  Pollard  at 
3,600.  Being  pursued  by  Lyon,  they 
continued  their  retreat  next  day, 
halting  at  9  p.  m.,  in  Jasper  County, 
twenty- three  miles  distant.  Ten 
miles  hence,  at  10  a.  m.,  next  morn- 
ing, they  were  confronted  by  a  Union 
force  1,500  strong,  under  Col.  Franz 
Sigel,  who  had  been  dispatched  from 
St.  Louis  by  the  South-western  Pacific 
road,  to  Polla,  had  marched  thence 
to  Springfield,  and  had  pushed  on  to 
Mount  Vernon,  Lawrence  County, 
hoping  to  prevent  a  junction  between 
Jackson  and  some  forces  which  his 
Brigadiers  were  hurrying  to  his  sup- 
port. Each  army  appears  to  have 
started  that  morning  with  intent  to 
find  and  fight  the  other ;  and  such 
mutual  intentions  are  seldom  frus- 

3  It  seems  to  be  pretty  well  agreed  that  Cook's 
men  were  about  400  in  number :  but  he  reported 
that  he  was  attacked  by  1,200.  while  Pollard 
makes  O' Kane's  force  only  350.  Cook's  ac- 
count makes  his  loss  23  killed,  20  wounded,  and 
30  prisoners ;  while  Pollard  says  we  lost  206 


trated.  Sigel  found  the  Rebels,  halt- 
ed after  their  morning  march,  well 
posted,  vastly  superior  in  numbers 
and  in  cavalry,  but  inferior  in  artil- 
lery, which  he  accordingly  resolved 
should  play  a  principal  part  in  the 
battle.  In  the  cannonade  which 
ensued,  he  inflicted  great  damage 
on  the  Rebels  and  received  very 
little,  until,  after  a  desultory  combat 
of  three  or  four  hours,  the  enemy  re- 
solved to  profit  by  their  vast  superior- 
ity in  cavalry  by  outflanking  him, 
both  right  and  left.  This  compelled 
Sigel  to  fall  back  on  his  baggage- 
train,  three  miles  distant,  which  was 
otherwise  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 
The  retreat  was  made  in  perfect  order, 
with  two  cannon  on  either  flank,  two 
in  front,  and  four  in  the  rear,  keeping 
the  Rebel  cavalry  at  a  respectful 
distance ;  save  when,  at  the  crossing 
of  Dry  Fork  creek,  where  the  road 
passes  between  bluffs,  an  effort  was 
made  to  stop  him  by  massing  a  strong 
cavalry  force  in  his  front.  This  was 
easily  routed  by  bringing  all  his  guns 
to  bear  upon  it ;  when  he  continued 
his  retreat  to  Carthage,  and  through 
that  town  to  Sarcoxie,  some  fifteen 
miles  eastward.  It  was  well,  indeed, 
that  he  did  so ;  for  Jackson's  force 
was  augmented,  during  that  night 
and  next  morning,  by  the  arrival  of 
Price  from  the  southward,  bringing 
to  his  aid  several  thousand  Arkansas 
and  Texas  troops,  under  Gens.  Ben. 
McCulloch  and  Pearce.  Our  loss 
in  the  affair  of  Carthage  was  13 
killed  and  31  wounded — not  one  of 

killed,  a  large  number  wounded,  and  over 
100  taken  prisoners;  while  the  Rebels  lost 
but  4  killed,  15  or  20  wounded,  and  captured 
362  muskets.  Such  are  the  materials  out  of 
which  History  is  necessarily  distilled.  Pollard 
is  probably  the  nearer  right  in  this  case. 


576 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


them  abandoned  to  the  enemy ;  while 
the  Rebels  reported  their  loss  at  40 
to  50  killed  and  125  to  150  wounded. 
Sigel,  now  outnumbered  three  or  four 
to  one,  was  constrained  to  continue 
his  retreat,  by  Mount  Vernon,-  to 
Springfield;  where  Gen.  Lyon,  who 
had  been  delayed  by  lack  of  trans- 
portation, joined  and  outranked  him 
on  the  10th. 

Meantime,  Gen.  Harris,  Jackson's 
Brigadier  for  north-eastern  Missouri, 
had  rallied  a  considerable  force  at 
Paris,  near  the  Mississippi,  and  hence 
commenced  the  work  of  destroying 
the  Hannibal  and  St.  Joseph  Rail- 
road. Col.  Smith's  Union  force  at- 
tacked him  on  the  10th  at  Palmyra, 
whence  Harris  fell  back  to  Monroe, 
fifiteen  miles  west,  where  he  destroyed 
much  of  the  railroad  property.  Here 
he  was  again  attacked  by  Smith,  and 
worsted,  losing  one  gun  and  75  pris- 
oners. He  thereupon  disappeared ; 
but  continued  actively  organizing 
guerrilla  parties,  and  sending  them 
out  to  harass  and  plunder  Unionists, 
destroying  their  property  through  all 
this  section,  until  he  finally  joined 
Price,  with  2,700  men,  at  the  siege 
of  Lexington.  In  fact,  all  over  Mis- 
souri, partisan  fights  and  guerrilla  out- 
rages were  now  the  order  of  the  day. 

The  State  Convention  reassembled 
at  Jefferson  City  July  20th,  and  pro- 
ceeded— 52  to  28 — to  declare4  the 
offices  of  Governor,  Lieut.  Governor, 
Secretary  of  State,  with  those  of  mem- 
bers of  the  Legislature,  vacant  by  the 
treason  of  their  occupants,  and  all  the 
acts  of  said  Executive  and  Legisla- 
ture, in  contravention  of  the  Federal 
Constitution,  and  in  hostility  to  the 
Union,  null  and  void.    They  desig- 


nated the  first  Monday  of  the  No- 
vember ensuing  as  a  day  of  election, 
whereat  the  people  should  ratify  or 
disapprove  this  decisive  action  ;  and, 
meantime,  elected  Hamilton  P.  Gam- 
ble Governor,  Willard  P.  Hall  Lieut. 
Governor,  and  Mordecai  Oliver  Sec- 
retary of  State.  These  officers  were 
that  day  inaugurated,  and  the  Con- 
vention, immediately  thereupon,  ad- 
journed to  the  third  Monday  in  De- 
cember. Their  action  was  ratified, 
of  course,  and  the  functionaries  above 
named  continued  in  their  respective 
offices.  These  proceedings  were  met 
by  a  proclamation  from  the  Rebel 
Lieut.  Governor,  Reynolds,  styling 
himself  acting  Governor,  dated  New 
Madrid,  July  31st;  wherein  he  de- 
clares that  he  has  been  absent  for  two 
months,as  a  Commissioner  of  Missouri 
to  the  Confederate  States,  and  that  now 

"  I  return  to  the  State,  to  accompany,  in 
my  official  capacity,  one  of  the  armies 
which  the  warrior  statesman,5  whose  genius 
now  presides  over  the  atfairs  of  our  half  of 
the  Union,  has  prepared  to  advance  against 
the  common  foe.  *  *  * 

"  I  particularly  address  myself  to  those  who, 
though  Southerners  in  feeling,  have  permit- 
ted a  love  of  peace  to  lead  them  astray  from 
the  State  cause.  You  now  see  the  State  au- 
thorities about  to  assert,  with  powerful  for- 
ces, their  constitutional  rights;  you  behold 
the  most  warlike  population  on  the  globe, 
the  people  of  the  lower  Mississippi  valley, 
about  to  rush,  with  their  gleaming  bowie- 
knives  and  unerring  rifles,  to  aid  us  in  driving 
out  the  Abolitionists  and  their  Hessian  al- 
lies. If  you  cordially  join  our  Southern 
friends,  the  war  must  soon  depart  Missouri's 
borders ;  if  you  still  continue,  either  in 
apathy,  or  in  indirect  support  of  the  Lincoln 
Government,  you  only  bring  ruin  upon  your- 
selves by  fruitlessly  prolonging  the  contest. 
The  road  to  peace  and  internal  security  is 
only  through  union  with  the  South.  We 
will  receive  you  as  brothers,  and  let  bygones 
be  bygones.  Eally  to  the  Stars  and  Bars, 
in  union  with  our  glorious  ensign  of  the 
Grizzly  Bear  1" 

Jackson  followed  this  (August  6th) 


4  July  UOth. 


5  Jefferson  Davis,  to  wit. 


JACKSON'S   SECESSION— DUG-  SPRINGS. 


577 


by  a  Declaration  of  Independence, 
mainly  made  up  of  abuse  of  the  Fed- 
eral Government,  and  its  efforts  to 
maintain  its  authority  in  Missouri. 
He  thus  established  his  right  to  take 
that  State  out  of  the  Union : 

"By  the  recognized  universal  public  law 
of  all  the  earth,  war  dissolves  all  political 
compacts.  Our  forefathers  gave  as  one  of 
their  grounds  for  asserting  their  indepen- 
dence that  the  King  of  Great  Britain  had 
'abdicated  government  here,  by  declaring 
us  out  of  his  protection,  and  waging  war 
upon  us.'  The  people  and  Government  of 
the  Northern  States  of  the  late  Union  have 
acted  in  the  same  manner  toward  Missouri, 
and  have  dissolved,  by  war,  the  connection 
heretofore  existing  between  her  and  them. 

"  The  General  Assembly  of  Missouri,  the 
recognized  political  department  of  her  Gov- 
ernment, by  an  act  approved  May  10th, 
1861,  entitled,  'An  act  to  authorize  the 
Governor  of  the  State  of  Missouri  to  sup- 
press rebellion  and  repel  invasion,'  has 
vested  in  the  Governor,  in  respect  to  the 
rebellion  and  invasion  now  carried  on  in 
Missouri  by  the  Government  and  people  of 
the  Northern  States  and  their  allies,  power 
and  authority '  to  take  such  measures,  as  in  his 
judgment  he  may  deem  necessary  or  proper, 
to  repel  such  invasion  or  put  down  such  re- 
bellion.' 

"  Now,  therefore,  by  virtue  of  the  au- 
thority in  me  vested  by  said  act,  I,  Claiborne 
F.  Jackson,  Governor  of  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri, appealing  to  the  Supreme  Judge  of 
the  world  for  the  rectitude  of  my  intentions, 
and  firmly  believing  that  I  am  herein  carry- 
ing into  effect  the  will  of  the  people  of  Mis- 
souri, do  hereby,  in  their  name,  by  their  au- 
thority, and  on  their  behalf,  and  subject  at 
all  times  to  their  free  and  unbiased  control, 
make  and  publish  this  provisional  declara- 
tion, that,  by  the  acts  of  the  people  and 
Government  of  the  United  States  of  Amer- 
ica, the  political  connection  heretofore  ex- 
isting between  said  States  and  the  people 
and  Government  of  Missouri  is  and  ought  to 
be  totally  dissolved ;  and  that  the  State  of 
Missouri,  as  a  sovereign,  free,  and  indepen- 
dent republic,  has  full  power  to  levy  war, 
conclude  peace,  contract  alliances,  establish 
commerce,  and  to  do  all  other  acts  and 
things  which  independent  States  may  of 
right  do." 

On  the  strength  of  the  preceding, 
there  was  negotiated  at  Richmond, 
on  the  31st  of  October  ensuing,  by 
E.  C.  Cabell  and  Thomas  L.  Snead, 
37 


on  the  part  of  Jackson,  and  R.  M.  T. 
Hunter  acting  for  Davis,  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance  between  Mis- 
souri and  the  Confederacy ;  whereby 
all  the  military  force,  materiel  of  war, 
and  military  operations  of  the  former 
were  transferred  to  the  said  Davis,  as 
though  she  were  already  in  the  Con- 
federacy ;  to  which  was  added  a  stipu- 
lation that  she  should,  so  soon  as  pos- 
sible, be  admitted  into  the  Confed- 
eracy ;  and  she  has  since  been  repre- 
sented in  its  Congress,  although  no 
election  for  members  thereof  was  ever 
held  by  her  people. 

The  Rebels,  largely  reenforced  from 
the  South,  and  immensely  strong  in 
cavalry,  soon  overran  all  southern  Mis- 
souri, confining  Gen.  Lyon  to  Spring- 
field and  its  immediate  vicinity. 
Aware  of  their  great  superiority  in 
numbers,  Lyon  waited  long  for  rein- 
forcements ;  but  the  disaster  at  Bull 
Run,  and  the  general  mustering  out 
of  service  of  our  three-months'  men, 
prevented  his  receiving  any.  At 
length,  hearing  that  the  enemy  were 
advancing  in  two  strong  columns, 
from  Cassville  on  the  south  and  Sar- 
coxie  on  the  west,  to  overwhelm  him, 
he  resolved  to  strike  the  former 
before  it  could  unite  with  the  latter. 
He  accordingly  left  Springfield,  Au- 
gust 1st,  with  5,500  foot,  400  horse, 
and  18  guns ;  and,  early  next  morn- 
ing, encountered  at  Dug  Springs  a 
detachment  of  the  enemy,  whom  he 
lured  into  a  fight  by  pretending  to 
fly,  and  speedily  routed  and  dispersed. 
The  Rebels,  under  McCulloch,  there- 
upon recoiled,  and,  moving  westward, 
formed  a  junction  with  their  weaker 
column,  advancing  from  Sarcoxie  to 
strike  Springfield  from  the  west. 
Lyon  thereupon  retraced  his  steps  to 
Springfield.    The  Rebels,  now  com- 


578 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


manded  by  Price,  their  best  General, 
advanced  slowly  and  warily,  reaching 
Wilson's  Creek,  ten  miles  south  of 
Springfield,  on  the  7th.  Lyon  pur- 
posed here  to  surprise  them  by  a  night 
attack ;  but  it  was  so  late  when  all 
was  ready  that  he  deferred  the  at- 
tempt until  the  9th,  when  he  again 
advanced  from  Springfield  in  two 
columns ;  his  main  body,  led  by  him- 


self, seeking  the  enemy  in  front; 
while  Sigel,  with  1,200  men,  was  to 
gain  their  rear  by  their  right. 

Price  had  planned  an  attack  on 
our  camps  that  night ;  but,  jealousies 
arising,  had  resigned  the  chief  com- 
mand to  McCulloch,  who  had  recalled 
the  order  to  advance,  because  of  the 
intense  darkness  of  the  night.  %  At  5 
a.  m.,  of  August  10th,  Lyon  opened 


WILSON'S  CKKKK. 


Explanations  to  the  Plan  of  the  Battle  of  Wilson's  Creek. 


A  Capt.  Totten's  Batterr. 

B  Section  of  Totten's  Battery. 

C  Dubois's  Battery. 

F  Road  to  Cassville. 

G  2d  Missouri  Volunteers. 

H  2d  Kansas  Volunteers. 

I  Spot  where  Gen.  Lyon  felL 

K  Rebel  batteries  masked. 

L  1st  Kansas,  1st  Missouri,  1st  Iowa,  and  Capt 
Shaler^  Battalion. 


M  Capt.  Plummer's  Battalion. 

N  Home  Guards. 

O  Kansas  Rangers  (Cavalry). 

P  Col.  Sigel's  Position. 

Q  Part  of  Rebel  train. 

R  Concealed  Rebel  Batteries. 

V  Rebel  Cavalry. 

W  Sigel's  Brigade.  3d  and  5th  Missouri. 

X  Road  through  Rebel  camp. 

Y  McCulloch's  Head-Quarters. 
Z  Rains'6  Head-Quarters. 


UNION"   HEROISM  —  DE 


AT  H    OF   GEN.  LYON. 


579 


upon  the  Rebels  in  front,  while  Sigel, 
with  his  1,200  men  and  6  guns,  'al- 
most simultaneously,  assailed  the  rear 
of  the  enemy's  right.    The  "battle  was 
obstinate  and  bloody;  but  the  dis- 
parity of  numbers  was  too  great,  and 
the  division  of  forces  proved,  there- 
fore, a  mistake.    The  Rebels,  at  first 
surprised  by  Sigel's  unexpected  at- 
tack, and  most  gallantly  charged  by 
him,  gave  way  before  him ;  and  he 
soon  secured  a  commanding  position 
for  his  artillery.    But  the  weakness 
of  his  force  was  now  manifest ;  and 
he  was  deceived  by  the  advance  of  a 
Rebel  regiment,  which  was  mistaken 
by  his  men  for  Lyon's  victorious  van- 
guard, and  thus  came  close  to  them 
unopposed.    At  a  signal,  Sigel  was 
assailed  by  two  batteries  and  a  strong 
column   of  infantry,  and  instantly 
thrown  into  confusion.    The  enemy's 
fire  was  so  hot  that  our  cannoneers 
I  were  driven  by  it  from  their  pieces, 
the  horses  killed,  and  five  guns  cap- 
tured.   Our  infantry  fell  back  in  con- 
fusion, followed  and  assailed  by  large 
bodies  of  Rebel  cavalry.    Of  Sigel's 
1,200,  less  than  400  were  present  at 
the  next  roll-call.    One  of  his  regi- 
ments, 400  strong,  under  Col.  Salo- 
Imon,  was  composed  of  three-months' 
men,  who  had  already  overstaid  their 
■m  of  enlistment,  and  who  had  re- 
luctantly consented  to  take  part  in 
:his  battle ;  but  who,  when  charged  by 
m  overwhelming  Rebel  force,  were 
uddenly  seized  with  a  fit  of  home- 
ickness,  and  fled  in  all  directions, 
j  Meantime,  our  front  or  main  ad- 
ance,  under  Gen.  Lyon,  had  waked 
ip  the  great  body  of  the  Rebels; 
Dapt.  Totten's  and  Lieut.  Dubois's 
•atteries  opening  upon  their  immense 
lasses  with  great  vigor  and  decided 
fleet.    Yery  soon,  the  infantry  on 


both  sides  were  brought  into  action  ; 
and  the  1st  Missouri,  1st  and'  2d 
Kansas,  and  1st  Iowa  regiments,  with 
Steele's  battalion  of  regulars,  won 
immortal  honor  by  the  persistent  and 
heroic  gallantry  with  which  they  for 
hours  maintained  their  ground  against 
immense  odds.  The  Rebels  were  re- 
peatedly driven  back  in  confusion, 
and  the  firing  would  be  nearly  or  quite 
suspended  for  ten  to  twenty  minutes ; 
when,  perceiving  their  decided  su- 
periority in  numbers,  since  the  rout 
and  flight  of  Sigel's  command,  the 
Confederate  officers  would  rally  their 
men  and  bring  them  once  more  to 
the  charge.  Meantime,  Gen.  Lyon, 
who  had  led  out  his  little  army  to 
fight  against  his  own  judgment,  upon 
the  representation  of  Gen.  Sweeny, 
that  to  abandon  all  south-west  Mis- 
souri without  a  battle  would  be  worse 
than  a  defeat,  and  who  had  evinced 
the  most  reckless  bravery  throughout, 
had  been  twice  wounded,  and  had 
had  his  horse  killed  under  him.  The 
second  ball  struck  him  in  the  head, 
and  seemed  for  the  moment  to  con- 
fuse him.  He  walked  a  few  paces  to 
the  rear,  saying  to  Maj.  Schofield,  his 
Adjutant,  "  I  fear  the  day  is  lost ;" 
to  which  Schofield  responded,'  "  No, 
General ;  let  us  try  them  once  more." 
Maj.  Stnrgis  offered  him  his  own 
horse,  which  Lyon  at  first  declined, 
but  soon  after  mounted,  and,  bleed- 
ing from  his  two  wounds,  swung  his 
hat  in  the  air,  and  called  upon  the 
troops  nearest  him  to  prepare  for  a 
bayonet-charge  on  the  lines  of  the 
enemy.  The  2d  Kansas  rallied 
around  him,  but  in  a  moment  its 
brave  Col.  Mitchell  fell  severely 
wounded,  and  his  soldiers  cried  Out : 
"  We  are  ready  to  follow— who  will 
lead  us  ?"  "/  will  lead  you  !"  replied 


580 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Lyon  ;  "  come  on,  brave  men  !"  and 
at  that  moment  a  third  bullet  struck 
him  in  his  breast,  and  he  fell  mor- 
tally wounded. 

Still,  the  battle  was  not  lost.  For 
the  enthusiastic,  death -defying  valor 
of  the  Unionists  had  repelled  the  as- 
saults of  their  enemies  along  their 
entire  front,  and  scarcely  a  shot  was 
fired  for  the  twenty  minutes  following 
Gen.  Lyon's  death.  Maj.  Sturgis,  in 
his  official  report  of  the  battle,  says : 

"  After  the  death  of  Gen.  Lyon,  when  the 
enemy  fled  and  left  the  field  clear,  so  far  as 
we  conld  see,  an  almost  total  silence  reigned 
for  a  space  of  twenty  minutes.  Maj.  Scho- 
field  now  informed  me  of  the  death  of  Gen. 
Lyon,  and  reported  for  orders.  The  respon- 
sibility which  now  rested  upon  me  was  duly 
felt  and  appreciated.  Our  brave  little  army 
was  scattered  and  broken;  over  20,000  foes 
were  still  in  our  front ;  and  our  men  had  had 
no  water  since  5  o'clock  the  evening  before, 
and  could  hope  for  none  short  of  Springfield, 
twelve  miles  distant ;  if  we  should  go  for- 
ward, our  own  success  would  prove  our 
certain  defeat  in  the  end ;  if  we  retreated, 
disaster  stared  us  in  the  face  ;  our  ammuni- 
tion was  well-nigh  exhausted ;  and,  should 
the  enemy  make  this  discovery,  through  a 
slackening  of  our  fire,  total  annihilation  was 
all  we  could  expect.  The  great  question  in 
my  mind  was,  '  Where  is  Sigel?'  If  I  could 
still  hope  for  a  vigorous  attack  by  him  on 
the  enemy's  right  flank  or  rear,  then  we 
could  go  forward  with  some  hope  of  success. 
If  he  had  retreated,  there  was  nothing  left 
for  us  but  to  retreat  also.  In  this  perplexing 
condition  of  affairs,  I  summoned  the  principal 
officers  for  consultation.  The  great  question 
with  most  was,  '  Is  retreat  possible  V  The 
consultation  was  brought  to  a  close  by  the 
advance  of  a  heavy  column  of  infantry  from 
the  hill,  where  Sigel's  guns  had  been  heard 
before.  Thinking  they  were  Sigel's  men,  a 
line  was  formed  for  an  advance,  with  the 
hope  of  forming  a  junction  with  him.  These 
troops  wore  a  dress  much  resembling  that  of 
Sigel's  brigade,  and  carried  the  American 
flag.  They  were,  therefore,  permitted  to 
move  down  the  hill  within  easy  range  of 
Dubois's  battery,  until  they  had  reached  the 
covered  position  at  the  foot  of  the  ridge  on 
which  we  were  posted,  and  from  which  we 
had  been  fiercely  assailed  before ;  when, 
suddenly,  a  battery  was  planted  on  the  hill 
in  our  front,  and  began  to  pour  upon  us 
shrapnell  and  canister — a  species  of  shot  not 


before  fired  by  th  e  enemy.  At  this  moment, 
the  enemy  showed  his  true  colors,  and  at 
once  commenced  along  our  entire  lines  the 
fiercest  and  most  bloody  engagement  of  the 
day.  Lieut.  Dubois's  battery  on  our  left, 
gallantly  supported  by  Maj.  Osterhaus's  bat- 
talion and  the  rallied  fragments  of  the  Mis- 
souri 1st,  soon  silenced  the  enemy's  battery 
on  the  hill,  and  repulsed  the  right  wing  of 
his  infantry.  Oapt.  Totten's  battery,  in  the 
center,  supported  by  the  Iowas  and  regulars, 
was  the  main  point  of  attack.  The  enemy 
could  frequently  be  seen  within  twenty  feet 
of  Totten's  guns,  and  the  smoke  of  the  op- 
posing lines  was  often  so  confounded  as  to 
seem  but  one.  Now,  for  the  first  time  dur- 
ing the  day,  our  entire  line  maintained  its 
position  with  perfect  firmness.  Not  the 
slightest  disposition  to  give  way  was  mani- 
fested at  any  point ;  and,  while  Capt.  Steele's 
battery,  which  was  some  yards  in  front  of 
the  line,  together  with  the  troops  on  the 
right  and  left,  were  in  imminent  danger  of 
being  overwhelmed  by  superior  numbers, 
the  contending  lines  being  almost  muzzle  to 
muzzle,  Capt.  Granger  rushed  to  the  rear 
and  brought  up  the  supports  of  Dubois's 
battery,  consisting  of  two  or  three  compa- 
nies of  the  1st  Missouri,  three  companies  of 
the  1st  Kansas,  and  two  companies  of 
the  1st  Iowa,  in  quick  time,  and  fell  upon 
the  enemy's  right  flank,  and  poured  into  it 
a  murderous  fire,  killing  or  wounding  nearly 
every  man  within  sixty  or  seventy  yards. 
From  this  moment,  a  perfect  rout  took  place 
throughout  the  Rebel  front,  while  ours,  on 
the  right  flank,  continued  to  pour  a  galling 
fire  into  their  disorganized  masses. 

"  It  was  then  evident  that  Totten's  bat- 
tery and  Steele's  little  battalion  were  safe. 
Among  the  officers  conspicuous  in  leading 
this  assault  were  Adj.  Hezcock,  Capts. 
Burke,  Miller,  Maunter,  Maurice,  and  Rich- 
ardson, and  Lieut.  Howard,  all  of  the  1st 
Missouri.  There  were  others  of  the  1st 
Kansas  and  1st  Iowa  Avho  participated,  and 
whose  names  I  do  not  remember.  The 
enemy  then  fled  from  the  field. 

"A  few  moments  before  the  close  of  the 
engagement,  the  2d  Kansas,  which  had  firm- 
ly maintained  its  position,  on  the  extreme 
right,  from  the  time  it  was  first  sent  there, 
found  its  ammunition  exhausted,  and  I  di- 
rected it  to  withdraw  slowly,  and  in  good 
order,  from  the  field,  which  it  did,  bringing 
off  its  wounded,  which  left  our  right  flank 
exposed,  and  the  enemy  renewed  the  attack 
at  that  point,  after  it  had  ceased  along  the 
whole  line;  but  it  was  gallantly  met  by 
Capt.  Steele's  battalion  of  regulars,  which 
had  just  driven  the  enemy  from  the  right  of 
the  center,  and,  after  a  sharp  engagement, 
drove  him  precipitately  from  the  field. 

"Thus  closed— at  about   half-past  11 


RESULT    AXD  LOSSES 


AT    "WILSON'S  CREEK. 


5S1 


o'clock — an  almost  uninterrupted  conflict  of 
six  hours.  The  order  to  retreat  was  given 
soon  after  the  enemy  gave  way  from  our 
front  and  center,  Lieut.  Dubois's  battery 
having  been  previously  sent  to  occupy,  with 
its  supports,  the  hill  in  our  rear.  Capt. 
Totten's  battery,  as  soon  as  his  disabled 
horses  could  be  replaced,  retired  slowly 
with  the  main  body  of  the  infantry,  while 
Capt.  Steele  was  meeting  the  demonstra- 
tions upon  our  right  flank.  This  having 
been  repulsed,  and  no  enemy  being  in  sight, 
the  whole  column  moved  slowly  to  the  high, 
open  prairie,  about  two  miles  from  the  bat- 
tle-ground; our  ambulances,  meanwhile, 
passing  to  and  fro,  carrying  off  our  wounded. 
After  making  a  short  halt  on  the  prairie,  we 
continued  our  march  to  Springfield. 

"It  should  be  here  remembered  that,  just 
after  the  order  to  retire  was  given,  and 
while  it  was  undecided  whether  the  retreat 
should  be  continued,  or  whether  we  should 
occupy  the  more  favorable  position  of  our 
rear,  and  await  tidings  of  Col.  Si  gel,  one  of 
his  non-commissioned  officers  arrived,  and 
reported  that  the  Colonel's  brigade  had  been 
totally  routed,  and  all  his  artillery  captured, 
Col.  Sigel  himself  having  been  either  killed 
or  made  prisoner.  Most  of  our  men  had 
fired  away  all  their  ammunition,  and  all  that 
could  be  obtained  from  the  boxes  of  the 
killed  and  wounded.  Nothing,  therefore, 
was  left  to  do  but  to  return  to  Springfield ; 
where  250  Home  Guards,  with  two  pieces 
of  artillery,  had  been  left  to  take  care  of  the 
train.  On  reaching  the  Little  York  road, 
we  met  Lieut.  Farrand,  with  his  company 
of  dragoons,  and  a  considerable  portion  of 
Col.  Sigel's  command,  with  one  piece  of 
artillery.  At  5  o'clock,  p.  m.,  we  reached 
Springfield." 

Of  course,  the  Confederates  claimed 
the  result  as  a  success ;  and  with  good 
reason,  since  they  stood  on  the  de- 
fensive and  held  the  field,  and  could 

6  It  was  very  hard  for  our  soldiers  engaged  in 
the  main  or  front  attack  to  admit  that  the  day 
went  against  us,  when  they  never  saw  the  faces 
of  the  Rebels  throughout  the  fight  without  see- 
ing their  backs  directly  afterward.  Thus  Col. 
John  B.  Plummer,  11th  Missouri  (who  was  bad- 
ly wounded),  testifies  before  the  Committee  on 
the  Conduct  of  the  War : 

"I  have  but  little  more  to  say  in  regard  to  the 
battle  except  that  we  whipped  them.  *  *  * 
I  was  severely  wounded,  and,  in  the  course  of 
an  hour  and  a  half,  was  myself  in  an  ambulance. 
I  did  not  see  the  latter  part  of  the  action,  but 
Major  Schofield  stated  to  me  that,  after  the  last 
repulse,  it  was  a  perfect  rout— that  the  enemy 
fled  in  the  wildest  confusion.    Everybody  says 


show  as  trophies  five  of  Sigel's  six 
guns;  but  there  is  no  pretense,  on 
their  part,  of  having  pursued  those 
whom  they  claimed  to  have  beaten  ; 
and  McCulloch's  first  official  report 
only  says  of  our  army,  "  They  have 
met  with  a  signal  repulse" — which 
was  the  truth.  He  admits  a  loss  of 
265  killed,  800  wounded,  and  30 
missing.  Our  official  reports  make 
our  loss  223  killed,  721  wounded,  and 
292  missing.6  McCulloch  says :  uMy 
effective  force  was  5,300  infantry,  15 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  6,000  horse- 
men, armed  with  flint-lock  muskets, 
rifles,  and  shot-guns.  There  were 
other  horsemen  with  the  army,  who 
were  entirely  unarmed,  and,  instead  # 
of  being  a  help,  were  continually  in 
the  way."  Lieut.  Col.  Merritt,  of 
the  1st  Iowa,  in  his  report,  says : 

"  The  enemy  brought  to  the  field  14,000 
well-armed  and  well-disciplined  troops,  and 
10,000  irregular  troops ;  and  our  own  force 
amounted  to  about  5,000  troops  in  the  early 
part  of  the  engagement,  and  considerably 
less  than  4,000  troops  for  the  concluding 
four  hours  of  it." 

Maj.  Sturgis,  in  his  official  report 
of  the  battle,  says  : 

"  That  3,700  men,  after  a  fatiguing  night- 
march,  attacked  the  enemy,  numbering 
23,000,  on  their  own  ground,  and,  after  a 
bloody  conflict  of  six  hours,  withdrew  at 
their  pleasure,  is  the  best  eulogiuin  I  can 
pass  on  their  conduct  that  day.1' 7 


that.  *  *  *  Schofield  also  stated  that,  in 
attempting  to  ride  forward  to  reconnoiter  and 
see  where  the  enemy  were,  their  dead  were 
piled  up  so  thick  that  he  could  not  ride  over 
them,  but  had  to  make  a  considerable  detour. 

"  There  was  a  flag  of  truce  sent  out  after  otir 
return  to  Springfield,  as  I  heard.  A  young  doc- 
tor of  the  army  went  out  with  it,  with  a  few  men 
and  some  wagons,  to  obtain  the  body  of  Gen. 
Lyon,  and  to  look  for  our  wounded  left  on  the 
field.  He  told  me  that  Gen.  McCulloch  remarked 
to  a  non-commissioned  officer — a  sergeant — who 
attended  the  party,  '  Your  loss  was  very  great ; 
but  ours  was  four  times  yours  ;'  and  I  think  it 
but  a  fair  estimate  to  put  their  loss  at  least  as 
high  as  4,000  men,  killed  and  wounded." 

7  Gen.  Lyon's  entire  force,  as  returned  by  his 


532 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


He  further  says : 

"  Our  total  loss,  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  amounts  to  1.235 — that  of  the 
enemy  will  probably  reach  3,000." 

Beyond  doubt,  the  Rebel  army 
was  considerably  larger  than  ours — 
probably  about  two  to  one.  It  em- 
bodied not  only  the  mass  of  the  Mis- 
souri Rebels  under  Gen.  Price,  as  well 
as  those  of  Arkansas  under  McCul- 
loch,  but  a  considerable  force,  also, 
from  Texas,  with  one  regiment  from 
Louisiana.  Among  its  losses  were 
Col.  Weightman,  commanding  a  brig- 
ade of  Missourians,  while  Gens.  Slack 
and  Clark  were  severely,  and  Gen. 
Price  slightly  wounded.  Yet  the  pre- 
•  ponderance  of  losses  was  undoubted- 
ly on  our  side ;  that  of  Lyon  alone 
being  a  national  disaster.8  McCul- 
loch,  from  his  camp  near  Springfield, 
on  the  12th,  after  learning  that  the 
Union  army,  under  Sturgis  and 
Sigel,  had  retreated  from  that  city, 
issued  an  exulting  proclamation,  in 
which  he  said : 

"  We  have  gained  over  them  a  great  and 
signal  victory.  Their  general-in-chief  is 
slain,  and  many  of  their  other  general  offi- 
cers wounded ;  their  army  is  in  full  flight ; 
and  now,  if  the  true  men  of  Missouri  will 
rise  np  and  rally  around  our  standard,  the 
State  will  be  redeemed.    *  *  * 

"  Missouri  must  be  allowed  to  choose  her 
own  destiny — no  oaths  binding  your  con- 
Adjutant,  J.  C.  Kelton,  on  the  8th  of  August 
(the  day  before  the  battle),  was  5,368 ;  which  in- 
cluded his  sick  and  wounded  in  hospital,  all  who 
were  absent  on  special  duty,  and  his  guard  left 
in  Springfield.  It  is,  therefore,  certain  that  he 
fought  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek  with  less 
than  5,500,  and,  after  the  rout  of  Sigel,  with 
less  than  4,500.  We  have  seen  that  the  Rebels, 
by  their  own  account,  had  at  least  twice  this 
number  in  the  field,  beside  those  left  in  camp 
for  want  of  arms. 

8  Pollard,  in  his  "  Southern  History,"  says : 
"  The  death  of  Gen.  Lyon  was  a  serious  loss  to 
the  Federals  in  Missouri.    He  was  an  able  and 
dangerous  man — a  man  of  the  times,  who  ap- 


sciences.  I  have  driven  the  enemy  from 
among  you.  The  time  has  now  arrived  for 
the  people  of  the  State  to  act.  You  can  no 
longer  procrastinate.  Missouri  must  now 
take  her  position,  be  it  North  or  South." 

In  an  order  to  his  army,  issued  that 
day,  he  says : 

"  The  flag  of  the  Confederacy  now  floats 
near  Springfield,  the  stronghold  of  the 
enemy," — 

proving  that  he  did  not,  even  yet,- 
feel  strong  enough  to  attack  that 
city.  But  Springfield  was  neither 
fortified  nor  provisioned  for  a  siege ; 
while  the  immense  preponderance  of 
the  Rebels  in  cavalry  would  have 
enabled  them  to  cut  off  our  supplies 
from  every  quarter :  a  retreat  was, 
therefore,  wisely  determined  on,  and 
commenced  during  the  night  of  the 
14th.  On  the  19th,  our  little  army, 
with  a  baggage  train  five  miles  long, 
reached  Rolla  utterly  unmolested. 
Indeed,  it  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  even  pursued.9 

John  C.  Fremont  had,  on  the  9th 
of  July,  been  appointed  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Western  District,  in- 
cluding the  States  of  Illinois,  Ken- 
tucky, Missouri,  and  Kansas,  with  the 
Territories  stretching  westward  of 
these ;  but  was  still  in  New- York, 
endeavoring  to  obtain  necessary  arms, 
equipments,  and    munitions,  when 

preciated  the  force  of  audacity  and  quick  de- 
cision in  a  revolutionary  war.  To  military  edu- 
cation and  talents,  he  united  a  rare  energy  and 
promptitude.  No  doubts  or  scruples  unsettled 
his  mind.  A  Connecticut  Yankee,  without  a 
trace  of  chivalric  feeling  or  personal  sensibility 
— one  of  those  who  submit  to  insult  with  in- 
difference, yet  are  brave  on  the  field — he  was 
this  exception  to  the  politics  of  the  late  regular 
army  of  the  United  States,  that  he  was  an 
unmitigated,  undisguised,  and  fanatical  Abo- 
litionist." 

9 Pollard,  in  his  "Southern  History,"  savs  : 
"  Shortly  after  the  battle,  the  Confederate 
army  returned  to  the  frontier  of  Arkansas; 
Gens.  McCulloch  and  Price  having  failed  to 
agree  upon  the  plan  of  a  campaign  in  Missouri." 


GEN".  FREMONT 


IN  MISSOURI. 


583 


tidings  were  received  of  the  Union 
disaster  at  Bull  Run.  He  left  that 
city  on  the  evening  of  that  day 
(July  22d),  and  reached  St.  Louis 
on  the  25  th. 

The  bad  news  had,  of  course,  pre- 
ceded him ;  and  he  found  most  of 
the  Union  soldiers  in  his  department 
just  ready  to  be  mustered  out  of  ser- 
vice at  the  close  of  their  three  months' 
enlistment — disaffected,  because  un- 
paid ;  while  arms,  money,  and  nearly 
everything  else  required  by  the  public 
exigency,  were  wanting.  The  Union- 
ists were  temporarily  stunned  and 
almost  paralyzed  by  their  great  and 
unexpected  disaster  near  Washing- 
ton. The  energies  of  the  Govern- 
ment were  absorbed  in  hurrying  to 
the  Potomac  every  available  regiment 
and  battery  from  whatever  quarter  ; 
while  the  Secessionists,  exultant  and 
sanguine,  were  preparing  on  all  sides 
to  push  their  advantage  promptly 
and  to  the  utmost. 

Lieut.  Gov.  Reynolds,  in  a  procla- 
mation to  the  people  of  Missouri, 
dated  New  Madrid,  July  31st,  with 
good  reason  assured  them,  that  "  the 
sun  which  shone  in  its  full,  midday 
splendor  att  Manassas,  is  about  to 
rise  upon  Missouri."  Every  young 
slaveholder  instinctively  snatched  his 
rifle,  mounted  his  horse,  and  started 
for  the  nearest  Rebel  camp.  Each  old 
one  stayed  at  home,  professed  neu- 
trality, if  the  Union  sentiment  of 
his  neighborhood  were  decidedly  pre- 
dominant, but  sent  his  older  sons  to 
reenforce  Jackson  and  Price.  Wher- 
ever, as  in  north-eastern  Missouri, 
and  along  the  great  lines  of  railroad, 
Rebel  armies  could  not  be  main- 
tained, there  guerrilla  bands  were 
organized,  to  operate  with  vigor  by 


night,  hiding  in  the  forests,  or  dis- 
persing to  their  homes  and  pretend- 
ing to  be  peaceful  citizens,  by  day. 
The  bolder  traitors  were  ready  and 
eager  for  open  hostilities ;  the  more 
cowardly  would  follow  their  leaders 
in  a  midnight  raid  on  a  peaceful 
Union  settlement,  or  aid  them  in 
burning  railroad  bridges.  Kentucky, 
though  hitherto  closed  against  Union 
soldiers,  received  without  objection 
large  bodies  of  Rebels  from  Tennes- 
see and  below,  and,  from  her  thorough- 
ly disloyal  Western  district,  formi- 
dably threatened  Cairo.  Gen.  Fre- 
mont's position  and  its  difficulties  are 
very  forcibly  depicted  in  the  private 
letter  which  he  addressed,  five  days 
after  his  arrival,  to  the  President,  as 
follows : 

"  Head-Qttaetees  Westeen  Department, 
"St.  Louis,  July  30th,  1861. 

"  My  Deae  Sie  :  You  were  kind  enough 
to  say  that,  as  occasions  of  sufficient  gravity 
arose,  I  might  send  you  a  private  note. 

"  I  have  found  this  command  in  disorder ; 
nearly  every  county  in  an  insurrectionary 
condition,  and  the  enemy  advancing  in  force 
by  different  points  of  the  Southern  frontier. 
Within  a  circle  of  fifty  miles  around  Gen. 
Prentiss,  there  are  about  12,000  of  the  Con- 
federate forces ; 10  and  5,000  Tennessee  and 
Arkansas  men,  under  Hardee,  well  armed 
with  rifles,  are  advancing  upon  Ironton.  Of 
these,  2,000  are  cavalry,  which,  yesterday 
morning,  were  within  twenty-four  hours' 
march  of  Ironton.  Col.  Bland,  who  had 
been  seduced  from  this  post,  is  falling  back 
upon  it.  I  have  already  reinforced  it  with 
one  regiment;  sent  another  this  morning, 
and  fortified  it.  I  am  holding  the  railroad 
to  Ironton  and  that  to  Eolla,  so  securing 
our  connections  with  the  South.  Other 
measures,  which  I  am  taking,  I  will  not 
trust  to  a  letter ;  and  I  write  this  only  to  in- 
form you  as  to  our  true  condition,  and  to 
say  that,  if  I  can  obtain  the  material  aid  I 
am  expecting,  you  may  feel  secure  that  the 
enemy  will  be  driven  out,  and  the  State  re- 
duced to  order.  I  have  ordered  Gen.  Pope 
back  to  North  Missouri,  of  which  he  is  now 
in  command.  I  am  sorely  pressed  for  want 
of  arms.  I  have  arranged  with  Adams's 
Express  Company  to  bring  me  everything 


10  That  is,  in  Kentucky  and  south-eastern  Missouri,  threatening  Cairo,  where  Prentiss  commanded. 


584 


TEE  AMERICAN  COXFLICT. 


with  speed,  and  will  buy  arms  to-day  in 
New- York.  Our  troops  have  not  been  paid, 
and  some  regiments  are  in  a  state  of  mutiny  ; 
and  the  men  whose  term  of  service  is  ex- 
pired generally  refuse  to  reenlist.  I  lost  a  fine 
regiment  last  night,  from  inability  to  pay 
them  a  portion  of  the  money  due.  This 
regiment  had  been  intended  to  move  on  a 
critical  post  last  night.  The  Treasurer  of 
the  United  States  has  here  $300,000  en- 
tirely unappropriated.  I  applied  to  him' 
yesterday  for  $100,000  for  my  Paymaster, 
Gen.  Andrews,  but  was  refused.  We  have 
not  an  hour  for  delay.  There  are  three 
courses  open  to  me :  One,  to  let  the  enemy 
possess  himself  of  some  of  the  strongest 
points  in  the  State,  and  threaten  St.  Louis, 
which  is  insurrectionary.  Second :  to  force 
a  loan  from  Secession  banks  here.  Third  : 
to  use  the  money  belonging  to  the  Govern- 
ment, which  is  in  the  Treasury  here.  Of 
course,  I  will  neither  lose  the  State,  nor  per- 
mit the  enemy  a  foot  of  advantage.  I  have 
infused  energy  and  activity  into  the  depart- 
ment, and  there  is  a  thoroughly  good  spirit 
in  officers  and  men.  This  morning,  I  will 
order  the  Treasurer  to  deliver  the  money  in 
his  possession  to  Gen.  Andrews,  and  will 
send  a  force  to  the  Treasury  to  take  the 
money,  and  will  direct  such  payments  as 
the  exigency  requires.  I  will  hazard  every- 
thing for  the  defense  of  the  department  you 
have  confided  to  me,  and  I  trust  to  you  for 
support. 

"  With  respect  and  regard.  I  am  yours  truly, 
"J.  C.  Fkemont, 
"Major  General  Commanding. 
"To  the  Peesident  of  the  United  States." 

Gen.  Fremont,  in  his  testimony 
before  the  Committee  on  the  Con- 
duct of  the  War,  thus  explains  his 
action  in  the  premises  : 

"  A  glance  at  the  map  will  make  it  appa- 
rent that  Cairo  was  the  point  which  first 
demanded  immediate  attention.  The  force 
under  Gen.  Lyon  could  retreat,  but  the  po- 
sition at  Cairo  could  not  be  abandoned  ;  the 
question  of  holding  Cairo  was  one  wrhich 
involved  the  safety  of  the  whole  Northwest. 
Had  the  taking  of  St.  Louis  followed  the 
defeat  of  Manassas,  the  disaster  might  have 
been  irretrievable  ;  while  the  loss  of  Spring-* 
field,  should  our  army  be  compelled  to  fall 
back  upon  Rolla,  would  only  carry  with  it 
the  loss  of  a  part  of  Missouri — a  loss  greatly 
to  be  regretted,  but  not  irretrievable. 

"Having  reen forced  Cape  Girardeau  and 
Ironton,  by  the  utmost  exertions  I  succeeded 
in  getting  together  and  embarking  with  a 
force  of  3,800  men,  five  days  after  my  ar- 
rival in  St.  Louis. 


"  From  St.  Louis  to  Cairo  was  an  easy 
day's  journey  by  water,  and  transportation 
abundant.  To  Springfield,  was  a  week's 
march ;  and,  before  I  could  have  reached  it, 
Cairo  would  have  been  taken,  and  with  it, 
I  believe,  St.  Louis. 

"  On  my  arrival  at  Cairo,  I  found  the  force 
under  Gen.  Prentiss  reduced  to  1,200  men  ; 
consisting  mainly  of  a  regiment  which  had 
agreed  to  await  my  arrival.  A.  few  miles 
below,  at  New  Madrid,  Gen.  Pillow  had 
landed  a  force  estimated  at  20,000,  which 
subsequent  events  showed  was  not  exagger- 
ated. Our  force,  greatly  increased  to  the 
enemy  by  rumor,  drove  him  to  a  hasty  re- 
treat, and  permanently  secured  the  po- 
sition.   *  *  * 

"I  returned  to  St.  Louis  on  the  4th,  hav- 
ing, in  the  mean  time,  ordered  Col.  Stephen- 
son's regiment  from  Booneville,  and  Col. 
Montgomery  from  Kansas,  to  march  to  the 
relief  of  Gen.  Lyon. 

"  Immediately  upon  my  arrival  from 
Cairo,  I  set  myself  at  work,  amid  incessant 
demands  upon  my  time  from  every  quarter, 
principally  to  provide  reinforcements  for 
Gen.  Lyon. 

"I  do  not  accept  Springfield  as  a  disaster 
belonging  to  my  administration.  Causes, 
wholly  out  of  my  jurisdiction,  had  already 
prepared  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Lyon  before  my 
arrival  at  St.  Louis." 

Adj.  Gen.  Harding,  whom  Gen. 
Fremont  found,  by  appointment  of 
Gen.  Lyon,  in  practical  command  at 
St.  Louis,  says : 

"Gen.  Fremont  was  not  inattentive  to 
the  situation  of  Gen.  Lyon's  column,  and 
went  so  far  as  to  remove  the  garrison  of 
Booneville  in  order  to  send  him  aid.  Dur- 
ing the  first  days  of  August,  troops  arrived 
in  the  city  in  large  numbers.  Nearly  all  of 
them  were  unarmed;  all  were  without 
transportation.  Regiment  after  regiment 
lay  for  days  in  the  city  without  any  equip- 
ments, for  the  reason  that  the  Arsenal  was 
exhausted,  and  arms  and  accouterments  had 
to  be  brought  from  the  East.  From  these 
men,  Gen.  Lyon  would  have  had  reinforce- 
ments, although  they  were  wholly  un- 
practiced  in  the  use  of  the  musket  and  knew 
nothing  of  movements  in  the  field ;  but,  in 
the  mean  time,  the  battle  of  the  10th  of  Au- 
gust was  fought." 

News  of  Gen.  Lyon's  repulse  and 
death  reached  St.  Louis  on  the  13th. 
Gen.  Fremont  thereupon  decided  to 
fortify  that  city  with  all  possible 
dispatch,  as  a  permanent  and  central 


G-EN".  FREMONT'S   ORDER,  —  PRICE  ADVANCES.  535 


base  of  operations;  to  fortify  and 
garrison,  likewise,  Cape  Girardeau, 
Ironton,  Rolla,  and  Jefferson  City ; 
using  for  this  purpose  hired  labor  so 
far  as  possible,  so  that  his  raw  re- 
cruits, even  though  unarmed,  might 
be  drilled  and  fitted  for  service  so 
rapidly  as  might  be;  when,  on  the 
receipt  of  sufficient  arms,  he  would 
take  the  field  at  the  head  of  a  nu- 
merous and  effective  army,  and  speed- 
ily regain  all  that  should  have,  mean- 
time, been  lost.  He  now  issued  the 
following  stringent  and  stirring  gene- 
ral order : 

*'  Head-Quarters  of  tite  Western-  Dep't, 
uSt.  Louis,  August  31st. 
"Circumstances,  in  my  judgment,  of  suf- 
ficient urgency,  render  it  necessary  that  the 
Commanding  General  of  this  department 
should  assume  the  administrative  power  of 
the  State.  Its  disorganized  condition,  the 
helplessness  of  the  civil  authority,  the  total 
insecurity  of  life,  and  the  devastation  of 
property  "by  bands  of  murderers  and  ma- 
rauders, who  infest  nearly  every  county  in 
the  State,  and  avail  themselves  of  the  pub- 
lic misfortunes  and  the  vicinity  of  a  hostile 
force  to  gratify  private  and  neighborhood 
vengeance,  and  who  find  an  enemy  wherever 
they  find  plunder,  finally  demand  the  se- 
verest measures  to  repress  the  daily  increas- 
ing crimes  and  outrages  which  are  driving 
oft*  the  inhabitants  and  ruining  the  State. 
In  this  condition,  the  public  safety  and  the 
success  of  our  arms  require  unity  of  pur- 
pose, without  let  or  hindrance  to  the  prompt 
administration  of  affairs. 

"In  order,  therefore,  to  suppress  dis- 
orders, to  maintain,  as  far  as  now  practi- 
cable, the  public  peace,  and  to  give  security 
and  protection  to  the  persons  and  property 
of  loyal  citizens,  I  do  hereby  extend  and 
declare  established  martial  law  throughout 
the  State  of  Missouri.  The  lines  of  the 
army  of  occupation  in  this  State  are,  for  the 
present,  declared  to  extend  from  Leaven- 
worth, by  way  of  the  posts  of  Jefferson 
City,  Rolla,  and  Ironton,  to  Cape  Girardeau, 
on  the  Mississippi  river.  All  persons  who 
shall  be  taken  with  arms  in  their  hands, 
within  these  lines,  shall  be  tried  by  Court- 
Martial,  and,  if  found  guilty,  will  be  shot. 
The  property,  real  and  personal,  of  all  per- 
sons in  the  State  of  Missouri  who  shall  take 
up  arms  against  the  United  States,  or  shall 
be  directly  proven  to  have  taken  active  part 
with  their  enemies  in  the  field,  is  declared 


to  be  confiscated  to  the  public  use;  and 
their  slaves,  if  any  they  have,  are  hereby 
declared  free  men. 

"All  persons  who  shall  be  proven  to  have 
destroyed,  after  the  publication  of  this  order, 
railroad  tracks,  bridges,  or  telegraphs,  shall 
suffer  the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law. 

"All  persons  engaged  in  treasonable  cor- 
respondence, in  giving  or  procuring  aid  to 
the  enemies  of  the  United  States,  in  dis- 
turbing the  public  tranquillity  by  creating 
and  circulating  false  reports  or  incendiary 
documents,  are  in  their  own  interest  warned 
that  they  are  exposing  themselves. 

"All  persons  who  have  been  led  away 
from  their  allegiance  are  required  to  return 
to  their  homes  forthwith ;  any  such  absence, 
without  sufficient  cause,  will  be  held  to  be 
presumptive  evidence  against  them. 

"The  object  of  this  declaration  is  to 
place  in  the  hands  of  the  military  authorities 
the  power  to  give  instantaneous  effect  to 
existing  laws,  and  to  supply  such  deficiencies 
as  the  conditions  of  war  demand.  But  it  is 
not  intended  to  suspend  the  ordinary  tribu- 
nals of  the  country,  where  the  law  will  be 
administered  by  the  civil  officers  in  the  usual 
manner  and  with  their  customary  authority, 
while  the  same  can  be  peaceably  exercised. 

^Thc  Commanding  General  will  labor 
vigilantly  for  the  public  welfare,  and,  in  his 
efforts  for  their  safety,  hopes  to  obtain  not 
only  the  acquiescence,  but  the  active  sup- 
port, of  the  people  of  the  countrv." 

"J.  C.  Fremont,  Maj.-Gen.  Com." 

This  order,  so  far  as  it  declared  the 
slaves  of  Rebels  to  be  free,  was  sub- 
sequently overruled  and  annulled  by 
President  Lincoln,  as  will  hereafter 
be  seen. 

Gen.  Price,  very  naturally,  did  not 
see  lit  to  await  the  fulfillment  of 
Gen.  Fremont's  programme.  Though 
abandoned  by  McCulloch,  with  the 
bulk  of  the  Confederate  army,  he 
moved  northward  from  Springfield 
about  the  middle  of  August,  receiv- 
ing reinforcements  continually,  and, 
deflecting  to  the  west  as  he  advanced, 
pushed  back  a  far  inferior  force  of 
Unionists  under  Gen.  Lane,  after  a 
little  brush,  at  the  crossing  of  a 
stream  known  as  Dry  Wood,  and 
sent  a  detachment  to  and  occupied 
Fort  Scott,  on  the  edge  of  Kansas, 


586 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


which  was  found  evacuated.  Thence, 
advancing  north  by  east  unopposed, 
he  reached  Warrensburg  on  the  10th 
of  September,  and,  on  the  11th,  drew 
up  before  Lexington.11  Here  Col.  Mul- 
ligan, of  the  Irish  (Chicago)  Brigade, 
at  the  head  of  2,780  Union  soldiers, 
with  barely  forty  rounds  of  ammu- 
nition, and  eight  small  guns,  had 
taken  post  on  a  hill  northeast  of  the 


city,  and,  in  confident  expectation  of 
being  soon  relieved,  awaited  and  de- 
fied the  overwhelming  numbers  of 
the  Rebels,  who  were  rapidly  swelled 
by  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Harris  from 
the  north  side  of  the  river,  and  by 
reinforcements  and  volunteers  from 
all  quarters,  until  they  numbered  not 
less  than  25,000,  with  13  guns. 

Col.  Mulligan's  position,  naturally 


LEXINGTON. 


strong,  included  a  large  college  and 
its  grounds,  comprising  an  area  of  at 
least  fifteen  acres,  and  had  been 
hastily  but  effectively  fortified  by 
earthworks,  which  were  somewhat 
strengthened  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  siege.  An  industrious 
cannonade  was  opened  frOm  four 
different  points  on  the  beleaguered 
Unionists,  but  with  little  effect.  Some 
outer  works  were  taken,  and  some 
Rebel  sharpshooters  took  possession 
of  a  dwelling  which  overlooked 
our  intrenchments,  but  were  readily 
driven  out  by  an  intrepid  charge. 


No  general,  determined  assault  was 
made — Gen.  Price  not  caring  to  rush 
his  raw  levies  upon  substantial  breast- 
works, and  evidently  perceiving  that 
the  garrison  must  soon  be  forced  to 
surrender. 

Gen.  Fremont,  at  St.  Louis,  was 
apprised,  on  the  13th,  of  Mulligan's 
arrival  at  Lexington;  and  another 
dispatch  on  the  same  day  informed 
him  that  Price  was  reported  near 
Warrensburg  with  5,000  to  15,000 
men ;  also  that  Gen.  Jeff.  C.  Davis, 
commanding,  at  Jefferson  City,  a  dis- 
trict which  included  Lexington,  was 


11  A  young  city  of  five  or  six  thousand  inhabit- 
ants, the  capital  of  Lafayette  County,  situated 
on  the  south  bank  of  the  Missouri,  240  miles 
west  of  St.  Louis,  and  50  or  60  from  the  near- 


est point  on  the  North  Missouri  Railroad,  or  on 
that  portion  of  the  Pacific  Road  yet  completed. 
The  river  was  then  at  so  low  a  stage  as  to  b© 
navigable  only  by  boats  of  an  inferior  class. 


UNION"    ROUT    AT   BLUE    MILLS  LANDING. 


587 


giving  vigilant  attention  to  Price's 
movements.   That  same  day  brought, 
by  telegraph,  pressing  demands  for 
more  troops  from  Gen.  Grant,  com- 
manding at  Cairo;  and  the  next — 
the  14th — brought  peremptory  orders 
from  Gen.  Scott  to  "send  5,0*00  well- 
armed  infantry  to  Washington  with- 
out a  moment's  delay."    Gen.  Robert 
Anderson,  commanding  in  Kentucky, 
was  also  calling  urgently  on  Gen. 
Fremont,  his  immediate  superior,  for 
reinforcements   to  save  Louisville, 
then  threatened  by  the  Rebels,  who 
were  rapidly  '  annexing'  Kentucky. 
Gen.  Fremont  had  at  that  time  scat- 
tered over  his  entire  department,  and 
confronted  at  nearly  every  point  by 
formidable  and  often  superior  num- 
bers of  Eebels,  a  total  of  55,693  men  ; 
whereof  over  11,000  occupied  Fort 
Holt  and  Paducah,  Ky.,  warding  off 
the  menaced  advance  of  the  Rebels 
in  force  on  Cairo  and  St.  Louis  ;  some 
10,000  more  held  •  Cairo  and  import- 
ant points  in  its  vicinity ;  while  Gen. 
Pope,  in  North  Missouri,  had  5,500 ; 
Gen.  Davis,  at  Jefferson  City,  9,600, 
and  there  were  4,700  at  Rolla,  and 
3,000  at  Ironton ;  leaving  .less  than 
7,000  at  St.  Louis.    Gen.  Lane,  on 
the  frontier  of  Kansas,  had  2,200  ; 
and  these,  with  a  good  part  of  Pope's 
command  under  Gen.  Sturgis,  and  a 
large  proportion  of  Davis's  at  Jeffer- 
son City,  were  disposable  for  the  re- 
lief of  Lexington,  toward  which  point 
they  were  directed  and  expected  to 
move  so  rapidly  as  possible.    On  the 
13th,  two  regiments  were  ordered 
from  St.  Louis  to  Jefferson  Citv,  and 
two  others  from  that  point  to  Lexing- 
ton.   Fremont,  pressed  on  every  side, 
thus  responded  by  telegraph,  on  the 
15th,  to  the  requisition  upon  him  for 
five  regiments  for  Washington  City : 


"Reliable  information  from  the  vicinity 
of  Price's  column  shows  his  present  force  to 
be  11,000  at  Warren sburg  and  4,000  at 
Georgetown,  with  pickets  extending  toward 
Syracuse.  Green  is  making  for  Booneville, 
with  a  probable  force  of  3,000.  Withdrawal 
of  force  from  this  part  of  Missouri  risks 
the  State ;  from  Paducah,  loses  Western 
Kentucky.  As  the  best,  I  have  ordered  two 
regiments  from  this  city,  two  from  Ken- 
tucky, and  will  make  up  the  remainder  from 
the  new  force  being  raised  by  the  Governor 
of  Illinois." 

The  Rebels  of  north-eastern  Mis- 
souri— reported  at  4,500 — led  by  Cols. 
Boyd  and  Patton,  marched  from  St. 
Joseph,  on  the  12th,  toward  Lexing- 
ton, where  they  doubtless  had  been 
advised  that  they  would  find  Price 
on  their  arrival.  Two  parties  of 
Unionists  started  in  pursuit  from  dif- 
ferent points  on  the  ^orth  Missouri 
Railroad,  directed  to  form  a  junction 
at  Liberty,  Clay  county.  Lieut.  Col. 
Scott,  of  the  Iowa  3d,  reached  that 
point  at  7  A.  m.,  on  the  17th,  and,  not 
meeting  there  the  expected  coopera- 
ting force  from  Cameron,  under  Col. 
Smith,  pushed  on  to  Blue  Mills  Land- 
ing, on  the  Missouri,  where  he  at- 
tacked the  Rebels — now  commanded 
by  Gen.  David  R.  Atchison — and 
was  promptly  and  thoroughly  routed. 
Col.  Smith,  who  had  been  delayed  by 
rains  and  bad  roads,  reached  Liberty 
by  dark,  and  there  met  Scott's  beaten 
and  demoralized  regiment.  They 
now  moved  together  to  the  Landing 
(on  the  IS tli);  but  found  that  the  Re- 
bels had  all  crossed  the  river  and 
pushed  on  to  Lexington,  thirty  miles 
distant.  Smith  thereupon  returned 
to  St.  Joseph ;  and  Gen.  Sturgis, 
who  was  advancing  by  another  route 
to  the  relief  of  Lexington,  being  con- 
fronted by  a  superior  Rebel  force 
under  Gen.  Parsons,  likewise  retreat- 
ed northward,  with  the  loss  (Pollard 
says)  of  all  his  tents  and  camp  equip- 


5S8 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


age.  Gen.  Pope  had  telegraphed 
Gen.  Fremont,  on  the  16th,  from 
Palmyra,  as  follows : 

"  The  troops  I  sent  to  Lexington  will  be 
there  the  day  after  to-morrow  [18th],  and 
consist  of  two  full  regiments  of  infantry, 
four  pieces  of  artillery,  and  150  irregular 
horse.  These,  with  the  two  Ohio  regiments, 
which  will  reach  there  on  Thursday  [19th], 
will  make  a  reinforcement  of  4,000  men  and 
four  pieces  of  artillery." 

Unhappily,  all  these  calculations 
proved  futile.  No  part  of  Gen.  Pope's 
4,000  men  and  four  pieces  of  artillery 
reached  the  beleaguered  and  sorely 
pressed  Mulligan ;  nor  did  any  of  the 
reinforcements  ordered  to  his  support 
from  all  quarters.  On  the  17th,  he 
was  cut  off  from  the  river  by  the 
enemy,  and  thus  deprived  of  water — 
save  such  as  was  poured  upon  him 
from  the  skies,  which  his  unsheltered 
soldiers  caught  in  their  blankets,  and 
then  wrung  out  into  camp-dishes,  to 
assuage  their  thirst.  The  ferry-boats 
were  likewise  seized  by  the  Rebels, 
to  prevent  his  escaping,  as  well  as  to 

12  Col.  Mulligan,  in  his  official  account  of  the 
siege,  says: 

"  At  9  a.  M.,  of  the  18th,  the  drums  beat  to 
arras,  and  the  terrible  struggle  commenced.  The 
enemy's  force  had  been  increased  te  28,000  men 
and  13  pieces  of  artillery.  They  came  on  as  one 
dark,  moving  mass ;  men  armed  to  the  teeth,  as 
far  as  the  eye  could  reach — men,  men,  men  were 
visible.  They  planted  two  batteries  in  front, 
one  on  the  left,  one  on  the  right,  and  one  in  the 
rear,  and  opened  with  a  terrible  fire,  which  was 
answered  with  the  utmost  bravery  and  deter- 
mination. Our  spies  had  informed  us  that  the 
Rebels  intended  to  make  one  grand  rout,  and 
bury  us  in  the  trenches  of  Lexington.  The  bat- 
teries opened  at  9  o'clock ;  and  for  three  clays 
they  never  ceased  to  pour  deadly  shot  upon  us. 
About  noon,  the  hospital  was  taken.  It  was 
situated  on  the  left,  outside  of  the  intrenchments. 
I  had  taken  for  granted,  never  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  build  fortifications  around  the  sick  man's 
couch.  I  had  thought  that,  among  civilized 
nations,  the  soldier  sickened  and  wounded  in 
the  service  of  his  countr}'  would,  at  least,  bw 
sacred.  But  I  was  inexperienced,  and  had  y^ 
to  learn  that  such  was  not  the  case  with  Rebels. 
They  besieged  the  hospital,  took  it,  and  from 
the  balcony  and  roof  their  sharpshooters  poured 
a  deadly  fire  within  our  intrenchments.    It  con- 


preclude  the  receipt  of  reinforce- 
ments. Eations  became  short;  and 
the  Missouri  Home  Guard,  who  con- 
stituted a  good  part  of  our  forces, 
were  early  dispirited,  refused  to  fight, 
and  clamored  for  a  surrender.  Our 
artillery  had  very  little  and  very  bad 
ammunition ;  while  the  Illinois  cav- 
alry, composing  a  sixth  of  our  forces, 
had  only  their  pistols  to  fight  with. 
Great  numbers  of  the  horses  that  had 
been  brought  within  our  intrench- 
ments had  been  killed  by  the  Rebel 
cannon,  creating  a  stench  which  was 
scarcely  tolerable.  The  Rebels  made 
four  charges  without  success;  but 
finally,  at  2  p.  m.,  Friday,  the  20th, 
they  pushed  up  a  movable  breast- 
work of  hemp-bales,  two  deep,  along 
a  line  of  forty  yards  in  length,  to 
within  ten  rods  of  our  works.  Maj. 
Beckwith,  of  the  Home  Guards — 8  th 
Missouri,  whose  Colonel  (White)  had 
been  killed  during  that  day's  fighting 
— raised  a  white  flag,  and  the  defense 
was  over.12   The  Rebels  ceased  firing  • 

tained  our  chaplain  and  surgeon  and  1 20  wounded 
men.  It  could  not  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the 
possession  of  the  enemy.  A  company  of  the 
Missouri  13th  [Dutch]  was  ordered  forward  to  re- 
take the  hospital.  They  started  on  their  er- 
rand, but  stopped  at  the  breastworks.  '  going  not 
out,  because  it  was  bad  to  go  out.'  A  company 
of  the  Missouri  14th  was  sent  forward;  but  it 
also  shrank  from  the  task,  and  refused  to  move 
outside  the  intrenchments.  The  Montgomery 
Guard,  Capt,  Gleason,  of  the  Irish  brigade,  were 
then  brought  out.  The  Captain  admonished 
them  that  the  others  had  failed;  and,  with  a 
brief  exhortation  to  uphold  the  name  they  bore, 
gave  the  word  to  '  charge/  The  distance  was 
eight  hundred  yards.  They  started  out  from 
the  intrenchments,  first  quick,  then  double-quick, 
then  on  a  run,  then  faster.  The  enemy  poured 
a  deadly  shower  of  bullets  upon  them  ;  but  on 
they  went,  a  wild  line  of  steel,  and,  what  is  bet- 
ter than  steel,  human  will.  They  stormed  up 
the  slope  to  the  hospital  door,  and,  with  irre- 
sistible bravery,  drove  the  enemy  before  them, 
hurling  them  far  down  the  hill  beyond.  At  the 
head  of  those  brave  fellows,  pale  as  marble,  but 
not  pale  from  fear,  stood  that  gallant  officer, 
Capt.  Gleason.  He  said,  'Come  on,  my  brave 
boys!'  and  in  they  rushed.  But,  when  their 
brave  captain  returned,  it  was  with  a  shot 


FREMONT   STARTS  WEST 


WARD  — PRICE    RETREATS-  589 


the  Home  Guards  left  the  outer  de- 
fenses and  retired  within  the  line  of 
inner  intrenchments,  saying  they 
would  fight  no  longer,  and  raising 
the  white  flag  over  the  center  of  our 
works.  Col.  Mulligan,  who  had  been 
twice  wounded  this  day,  called  his 
officers  around  him,  and  they  decided 
that  nothing  remained  but  to  surren- 
der. Of  course,  no  terms  could  now 
be  made.  Price  agreed  that  the  pri- 
vates on  our  side  should  be  paroled — 
he  having  none  too  much  food  for  his 
own ;  but  the  officers  must  be  retained 
as  prisoners  of  war,  with  all  arms  and 
equipments. 

The  losses  during  this  fight  were 
probably  much  the  greater  on  the 
•side  of  the  Rebels;  Price,  indeed, 
makes  them  barely  25  killed  and  75 
wounded ;  but  this  probably  includes 
only  returns  from  such  portion  of  his 
forces  as  were  regularly  organized 
and  mustered ;  while  nearly  half  his 
men  were  irregulars,  of  whom  no  ac- 
count was  taken.  Our  loss  was  40 
killed  and  120  wounded. 

Gen.  Fremont,  who  had  good  rea- 
son to  believe  that  Sturgis  had  al- 
ready reenforced  Mulligan,  and  that 
Lane  and  Pope  had  done  or  would 
do  so  that  day,  enabling  him  to  hold 
his  position,  directed  Davis  by  tele- 
graph, on  the  18th,  to  push  forward 
5,000  men  to  the  crossing  of  Lamine 
Creek  by  the  Pacific  Railroad,  with  a 
view  to  intercept  Price's  retreat  at 
the  Osage.  Late  on  the  22d,  he  re- 
ceived from  Pope  the  sad  tidings  of 
Mulligan's  surrender ;  and,  on  the 
27th,  he  left  St.  Louis  for  Jefferson 
City,  expecting  that  Price  would  try 
to  maintain  himself  at  some  point  on 

through  the  cheek  and  another  through  the  arm, 
and  with  but  fifty  of  the  eighty  he  had  led 
forth.    The  hospital  was  in  their  possession. 


or  near  the  Missouri,  where  lay  his 
chief  strength. 

But  Price  was  too  crafty  for  this. 
By  good  luck,  as  well  as  good  gene- 
ralship, he  had  struck  us  a  damaging 
blow,  and  was  determined  to  evade 
its  return.  On  the  very  day  that 
Fremont  left  St.  Louis,  he  put  his 
force  in  motion  southward  and  south- 
westward.  He,  of  course,  made  feints 
of  resuming  the  offensive,  threatening 
the  forces  closing  upon  him  from 
three  sides,  as  if  about  to  precipitate 
his  full  strength  upon  this  or  that 
particular  foe,  which,  with  his  im- 
mense superiority  in  cavalry,  was  not 
a  difficult  feat.  Our  troops,  of  course, 
fell  back  or  advanced  cautiously ; 
and,  meantime,  his  infantry  and  ar- 
tillery were  making  the  best  possible 
time  southward.  Pollard  says  he 
in  two  days  crossed  the  Osage  with 
15,000  men  in  two  common  flat- 
boats,  and  that  Fremont  was  fifteen 
days  in  building  pontoon  bridges,  and 
crossing  after  him.  This  is  untrue  ; 
but  a  General  who  lived  from  hand 
to  mouth  on  the  country  he  traversed, 
moving  but  few  and  light  guns,  with 
very  little  ammunition,  and  who  was 
careful  to  destroy  whatever  means  of 
transit  he  no  longer  wished  to  use, 
breaking  down  bridges  and  burning 
boats,  could  easily  outstrip  his  more 
heavily  laden  pursuer. 

Price  continued  his  flight  to  Neo- 
sho, in  the  south-west  corner  of  the 
State,  where  he  found  McCulloch, 
with  5,000  Arkansas  Confederates; 
and  where  Jackson  assembled  the 
fag-end  of  his  old  Legislature,  and 
had  an  Ordinance  of  Secession  for- 
mally passed  by  it — a  most  super- 

This  charge  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  and 
reckless  in  all  history,  and  to  Capt.  Gleason  be- 
longs the  glory." 


590  THE  AMERICA 

fluous  ceremony,  since  Missouri  had 
already  been  admitted  into  the  Con- 
federacy, on  his  own  application,  and 
he  had  exactly  as  good  a  right  to  take 
her  out  of  the  Union  as  his  Legislative 
remnant13  had — that  is,  none  at  all. 
Price,  though  powder  was  none  too 
abundant  with  him,  wasted  one  hun- 
dred good  cannon-charges  in  honor 
of  this  ridiculous  performance.  After 
stopping  ten  days  at  Neosho,  Price, 
finding  that  Fremont  was  in  pursuit, 
retreated  to  Pineville,  in  the  extreme 
south-west  corner  of  the  State ;  and, 
dreading  to  be  pressed  further,  be- 
cause many  of  his  Missourians  had 
enlisted  expressly  for  the  defense  of 
their  own  State,  and  would  naturally 
object  to  following  him  into  another, 
had  decided  (says  Pollard)  not  to 
abandon  Missouri  without  a  battle. 

Gen.  Fremont  pushed  westward 
from  Jefferson  City,  some  thirty 
miles,  to  Tipton,  then  the  western 
terminus  of  the  Pacific  Railroad, 
nearly  due  south  of  Booneville,  where 
he  spent  some  time  in  organizing  and 
equipping  his  green  army,  preparatory 
to  a  pursuit  of  Jackson  and  Price, 
who,  it  was  reasonably  supposed, 
would  not  surrender  their  State  with- 
out a  battle ;  and  we  had,  by  this 
time,  had  quite  enough  of  fighting 
without  due  concentration  and  pre- 
paration on  our  side.  Here  he  was 
visited,  Oct.  13th,  by  Gen.  Cameron, 
Secretary  of  War,  accompanied  by 

13  Mr.  Isaac  N.  Shambaugh,  a  representative 
of  De  Kalb  county  in  this  Legislature,  and  a  fol- 
lower hitherto  of  Jackson,  in  an  address  to'his 
constituents  dated  January  21,  1862,  says: 

"  It  is  doubtless  known  to  most  of  you  that 
the  House  of  Representatives  of  our  State  con- 
sists of  133  members,  and  the  Senate  of  33  mem- 
bers, and  that,  in  order  to  constitute  a  quorum 
constitutionally  competent  to  the  transaction  of 
any  business,  there  must  be  present  at  least  67 
members  of  the  House  and  1 7  members  of  the 


N  CONFLICT. 

Adjt.  Gen.  Thomas  and  suite,  who 
came  away  discouraged  and  dissatis- 
fied. The  heavy  Autumn  rains  had 
set  in  some  days  before,  and  turned 
the  rich  soil  of  the  prairies  into  a  deep, 
adhesive  mire,  wherein  the  wheels  of 
artillery  and  other  heavily  laden  car- 
riages sunk  to  the  hubs,  rendering 
the  movement  of  cannon,  munitions, 
and  provisions,  exceedingly  slow  and 
difficult.  Fremont's  army — by  this 
time  swelled  to  30,000  men,  includ- 
ing 5,000  cavalry  and  86  guns — was 
still  very  inadequately  provided  with 
transportation  for  half  its  numbers. 
Meantime,  his  order  emancipating  the 
slaves  of  Rebels  had  excited  a  furi- 
ous and  powerful  opposition,  result- 
ing in  a  deafening  clamor  for  his  re- 
moval,  which  was  urgently  pressed 
on  the  President,  it  was  understood, 
by  the  two  members  of  his  Cabinet 
best  entitled  to  be  heard  with  regard 
to  affairs  in  Missouri.  Gen.  Cameron 
carried  an  order  relieving  him  from 
command,  which  he  was  instructed 
to  present  or  withhold,  at  his  discre- 
tion. He  did  not  present  it,  but 
brought  away  an  unfavorable  impres- 
sion, .which  was  embodied  and  em- 
phasized in  Adjt.  Gen.  Thomas's  re- 
port. Those  who  accompanied  Gens. 
Cameron  and  Thomas  on  this  visit, 
and  who  were  on  terms  of  intimacy 
with  them  throughout,  reported,  on 
their  return,  that  Fremont's  campaign 
was  a  failure — that  he  could  never 

Senate.  Instead  of  this,  there  were  present  at 
the  October  session  referred  to  [at  Neosho]  but 
35  members  of  the  House  of  Representatives  and 
10  members  of  the  Senate.  A  few  days  after- 
ward, when  we  had  adjourned  to  Cassville,  one 
additional  Senator  and  five  additional  Represent- 
atives made  their  appearance ;  and,  these  being 
all  that  were  at  any  time  present,  it  need  scarce- 
ly be  added  that  ail  the  pretended  legislation  at 
either  place  was  a  fraud,  not  only  upon  the  peo- 
ple of  the  State,  but  upon  the  Government  of  the 
Confederate  States,  as  well  as  the  United  States." 


ZAGONTI'S    CHARGE    AT  SPRINGFIELD. 


591 


get  his  army  across  the  Osage — cer- 
tainly not  to  Sjmngfield ;  and  that 
southern  Missouri  was  virtually  given 
over  to  Rebel  possession. 

These  gloomy  apprehensions  were 
destined  to  be  signally  dispelled. 
Gen.  Fremont  moved  southward  im- 
mediately thereafter,  reaching  War- 
saw on  the  17th.  Thither  Sigel  had 
preceded  him.  Five  days  thereafter, 
the  bridging  of  the  Osage  had  been 
completed,  and  the  army,  as  it  crossed, 
pressed  rapidly  forward. 

Meantime,  on  the  21st,  a  spirited 
fight  had  occurred  at  Fredericktown, 
in  the  south-east,  which  section  had 
hitherto  been  overrun  almost  at  will 
by  Rebel  bands  directed  by  Jeff. 
Thompson,  one  of  Jackson's  briga- 
diers, termed  the  "  Swamp  Fox"  by 
his  admirers.  Capt.  Hawkins,  of  the 
Missouri  (Union)  cavalry,  having  been 
ordered  thither  on  a  reconnoissance 
from  Pilot  Knob,  on  the  north-east, 
engaged  and  occupied  Thompson 
while  Gen.  Grant,  commanding  at 
Cape  Girardeau,  on  the  Mississippi, 
sent  a  superior  force,  under  Col. 
Plummer,  to  strike  him  from  the 
east.  Meantime,  Col.  Carlile,  with 
a  considerable  body  of  infantry, 
moved  up  from  Pilot  Knob  to  sup- 
port Hawkins.  When  all  these  ad- 
vanced, the  disparity  in  numbers 
was  so  great  as  to  preclude  a  serious 
contest ;  so  that  Thompson,  though 
strongly  posted,  was  overpowered, 
and,  after  two  hours'  fighting,  con- 
strained to  fly,  leaving  60  dead  be- 
hind him,  including  Col.  Lowe,  his 
second  in  command.  Thompson  was 
hotly  pursued  for  twenty  miles,  and 
his  banditti  thoroughly  demoralized 
and  broken  up. 

The  advance  of  Gen.  Fremont's 
army  was  preceded  by  a  squadron  of 


'Prairie  Scouts,'  led  by  Maj.  Frank 
J.  White,  who  had  recently  distin- 
guished himself  by  a  forced  march 
of  sixty  miles  on  Lexington,  which 
he  captured  without  loss  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  16th,  taking  60  or  70  pris- 
oners, considerable  property,  and  re- 
leasing a  number  of  Unionists  cap- 
tured with  Mulligan,  including  two 
colonels.  Lexington  and  its  vicinity 
being  strongly  Rebel,  Maj.  White 
abandoned  it  on  the  17th,  and  moved 
southerly  by  Warren sburg  and  War- 
saw to  the  front,  which  they  struck 
at  fomme  de  Terre  river,  fifty-one 
miles  north  of  Springfield.  Still 
pushing  ahead,  Maj.  White  was 
joined,  on  the  24th,  by  Maj.  Zago- 
nyi,  of  the  i  Fremont  Body-Guard,' 
who  assumed  command,  and,  march- 
ing all  night,  resolved  to  surprise  and 
capture  Springfield  next  day.  Maj. 
White,  being  very  ill,  was  left  at  a 
farm-house  to  recover ;  but  in  a  few 
hours  started  in  a  wagon,  with  a 
guard  of  six  men,  to  overtake  his 
command,  and  soon  found  himself  in 
a  Rebel  camp  a  prisoner,  and  in  im- 
minent danger  of  assassination.  He 
had  moved  on  the  direct  road  to 
Springfield,  while  Zagonyi  had  made 
a  detour  of  twelve  miles  to  the  right, 
hoping  thus  to  surprise  the  enemy  in 
Springfield,  who,  he  was  advised, 
were  fully  2,000  strong. 

The  two  commands  combined  num- 
bered hardly  300  sabers,  when,  on 
reaching  the  outskirts  of  Springfield, 
they  found  1,200  infantry  and  400 
cavalry  well  posted  on  the  crown  of 
a  hill,  prepared  for  and  awaiting 
them.  Zagonyi  did  not  quail.  To 
his  officers  he  said :  "  Follow  me,  and 
do  like  me !"  to  his  soldiers — 

"  Comrades,  the  hour  of  danger  has  come : 
your  first  battle  is  before  you.    The  enemy 


592 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


is  2,000  strong,  and  you  are  300.  If  any  of 
you  would  turn  back,  you  can  do  so  now." 

Not  a  man  stepped  from  the  ranks. 
He  then  added : 

"  I  will  lead  you.  Let  the  watchword  be, 
'  The  Union  and  Fremont  /'  Draw  sabers! 
By  the  right  flank — quick  trot — march  /" 

With  a  ringing  shout,  the  thin  bat- 
talion dashed  eagerly  forward. 

A  miry  brook,  a  stout  rail-fence,  a 
narrow  lane,  with  sharpshooters  judi- 
ciously posted  behind  fences  and  trees 
— such  were  the  obstacles  to  be  over- 
come before  getting  at  the  enemy. 
A  fence  must  be  taken  down,  the 
lane  traversed,  the  sharpshooters  de- 
fied, before  a  blow  could  be  struck. 
All  was  the  work  of  a  moment ;  but 
when  that  moment  had  passed,  seven- 
ty of  their  number  were  stretched 
dead  or  writhing  on  the  ground. 
Maj.  Dorsheimer,  an  Aid  to  Fre- 
mont, who  came  up  soon  after,  thus 
describes  the  close  of  the  fight : 

"  The  remnant  of  the  Guard  are  now  in  the 
field  under  the  hill;  and,  from  the  shape  of 
the  ground,  the  Rebel  fire  sweeps  with  the 
roar  of  a  whirlwind  over  their  heads.  A  line 
of  fire  upon  the  summit  marks  the  position 
of  the  Rebel  infantry;  while  nearer,  and  on 
the  top  of  a  lower  eminence  to  the  right, 
stand  their  horse.  Up  to  this  time,  no 
guardsman  has  struck  a  blow,  but  blue  coats 
and  bay  horses  lie  thick  along  the  bloody 
lane.  Their  time  has  come.  Lieut.  May- 
thenyi,  with  30  men,  is  ordered  to  attack 
the  cavalry.  With  sabers  flashing  over  their 
heads,  the  little  band  of  heroes  spring  to- 
ward their  tremendous  foe.  Right  upon  the 
center  they  charge.  The  dense  mass  opens, 
the  blue-coats  force  their  way  in,  and  the 
whole  Rebel  squadron  scatter  in  disgraceful 
flight  through  the  cornfields  in  the  rear.  The 
boys  follow  them,  sabering  the  fugitives. 
Days  afterward,  the  enemy's  horse  lay  thick 
among  the  uncut  corn. 

"  Zagonyi  holds  his  main  body  until  May- 
thenyi  disappears  in  the  cloud  of  Rebel  cav- 
alry ;  then  his  voice  rises  through  the  air. 
'In  open  order — charge!'  The  line  opens 
out  to  give  play  to  their  sword-arm.  Steeds 
respond  to  the  ardor  of  their  riders;  and, 


quick  as  thought,  with  thrilling  cheers,  the 
noble  hearts  rush  into  the  leaden  torrent 
which  pours  clown  the  incline.  With  una- 
bated fire,  the  gallant  fellows  press  through. 
The  fierce  onset  is  not  even  checked.  The 
foe  do  not  wait  for  them — they  waver,  break, 
and  fly.  The  guardsmen  spur  into  the  midst 
of  the  rout,  and  their  fast-falling  swords 
work  a  terrible  revenge.  Some  of  the  bold- 
est of  the  Southrons  retreat  into  the  woods, 
and  continue  a  murderous  fire  from  behind 
trees  and  thickets.  Seven  guard  horses  fall 
upon  a  space  not  more  than  twenty  feet 
square.  As  his  steed  sinks  under  him,  one 
of  the  officers  is  caught  around  the  shoulders 
by  a  grape-vine,  and  hangs  dangling  in  tho 
air  until  he  is  cut  down  by  his  friends.  Tho 
Rebel  foot  are  flying  in  furious  haste  from 
the  field.  Some  take  refuge  in  the  fair- 
ground ;  some  hurry  into  the  cornfields ;  but 
the  greater  part  run  along  the  edge  of  tho 
wood,  swarm  over  the  fence  into  tho  road, 
and  hasten  to  the  village.  The  guardsmen 
follow.  Zagonyi  leads  them.  Over  tho 
loudest  roar  of  battle  rings  his  clarion  voice 
— 'Come  on,  Old Kentuck!14  I'm  with  you!' 
and  the  flash  of  his  sword-blade  tells  his  men 
where  to  go.  As  he  approaches  a  barn,  a 
man  steps  from  behind  the  door  and  lowers 
his  rifle;  but,  before  it  has  reached  a  level, 
Zagonyi's  saber-point  descends  upon  his  head, 
and  his  life-blood  leaps  to  the  very  top  of 
the  huge  barn-door. 

"  The  conflict  now  rages  through  the  vil- 
lage— in  the  public  square,  and  along  tho 
streets.  Up  and  down,  the  Guards  ride  in 
squads  of  three  or  four,  and,  wherever  they 
see  a  group  of  the  enemy,  charge  upon  and 
scatter  them.  It  is  hand  to  hand.  No  one 
but  has  a  share  in  the  fray." 

Zagonyi  wisely  evacuated  the  town 
at  night-fall,  knowing  that  by  night 
he  was  at  the  mercy  of  the  Rebels, 
if  they  should  muster  courage  to  re- 
turn and  attack  him.  Of  his  300 
men,  84  were  dead  or  wounded. 

Maj.  White,  who  had  escaped  from 
his  captors,  taking  captive  in  turn 
their  leader,  arrived  next  morning, 
at  the  head  of  a  score  of  improvised 
Home  Guards,  to  find  himself 6  mon- 
arch of  all  he  surveyed.'  He  had  24 
men,  of  whom  he  stationed  22  as 
pickets  on  the  outskirts,  and  held  the 
balance  in  reserve.    At  noon,  he  re- 


14  Of  the  Guard,  100  were  Kentuckians. 


FEE  MONT    SUPERSEDED    BY  HUNTER. 


593 


ceived  a  Rebel  flag  of  truce,  asking 
permission  to  bury  their  dead ;  which, 
he  said,  must  be  referred  to  Gen.  Si- 
gel,  from  whom  he,  the  next  hour, 
forwarded  the  permission  required.15 
White  drew  in  a  part  of  his  pickets, 
stationed  them  between  the  village 
and  the  bloody  field  of  yesterday's 
conflict,  and  the  Rebels  quietly  buried 
their  dead.  He  did  not  venture  to 
remain  through  the  night,  but  fell 
back  upon  Sigel,  who  reached  Spring- 
field by  a  forced  march  of  thirty 
miles,  on  the  evening  of  the  27th. 
Asboth  came  up  with  another  divis- 
ion on  the  30th ;  and  Lane,  with  the 
Kansas  brigade,  was  not  long  behind 
him.  But  Hunter,  McKinstry,  and 
Pope,  with  their  respective  divisions, 
were  still  struggling  with  the  badness 
of  the  roads  from  thirty  to  forty  miles 
back.  Pope  arrived  November  1st, 
having  marched  seventy  miles  in  two 
days;  and  McKinstry  came  in  just 
behind  him. 

On  the  morning  of  Nov.  2d,  a 
messenger  brought  to  Springfield  an 
order  from  Gen.  Scott16  removing. 
Fremont  from  his  command,  and  di- 
recting him  to  turn  it  over  to  Gen. 
Hunter,  who  had  not  yet  arrived. 
This  was  sad  news  to  the  great  bulk 
of  the  army,  which  had  been  col- 
lected and  equipped  with  such  effort ; 
which  had  driven  the  Rebels  almost 
out  of  Missouri  without  loss ;  and 
which  confidently  expected  to  meet 
and  beat  them  within  the  State,  and 
to  chase  the  fragments  of  their  army 
through  Little  Rock,  and,  ultimately, 
to  New  Orleans.  Hunter  not  bavins; 
yet  arrived,  and  the  enemy  being  re- 
ported in  force  at  "Wilson's  Creek,  it 
was  determined  in  council  to  march 
out  and  give  him  battle  next  morn- 


ing ;  but  Hunter  came  up  that  night, 
and  the  command  was  turned  over 
to  him  by  Fremont. 

It  does  not  seem  that  their  advices 
of  the  Rebels'  proximity  were  well- 
founded.  Pollard  asserts  that  they 
were  then  at  Pineville,  some  fifty 
miles  from  Springfield ;  but  adds 
that  Gen.  Price  had  made  prepara- 
tions to  receive  Fremont,  determined 
not  to  abandon  Missouri  without  a 
battle.  It  must  therefore  be  regarded 
as  a  national  misfortune  that  the 
order,  superseding  Gen.  Fremont  ar- 
rived at  this  time  ;  for  it  is  not  pos- 
sible that  his  army — superior  in  num- 
bers and  in  equipment  to  the  Rebels, 
and  inspired  by  enthusiastic  devotion 
to  its  chief — could  have  been  beaten. 

Gen.  Fremont  departed  for  St. 
Louis  early  next  morning,  accom- 
panied by  his  Body-Guard  as  a  spe- 
cial escort.  That  Guard,  it  is  sad  to 
say,  though  enlisted  for  three  years, 
and  composed  of  the  very  best  ma- 
terial, were  mustered  out  of  service, 
by  order  of  Gen.  McClellan,  soon 
afterward. 

That  Gen.  Fremont — placed  in  so 
important  a  command,  and  frantic- 
ally entreated  for  reinforcements 
from  so  many  sides  at  once — commit- 
ted some  errors  of  judgment,  is  very 
probable.  It  may  be  he  should  have 
divined  earlier  than  he  did  that  Price 
would  not  strike  at  Jefferson  City 
or  Booneville,  which  he  seemed  to 
threaten,  but  would  take  the  safer 
course  of  swooping  down  on  Lexing- 
ton, so  much  further  west.  It  may 
be  that  he  should  have  foreseen  that 
the  ferry-boats  at  Lexington,  instead 
of  being  kept  out  of  the  reach  of  the 
Rebels,  would  be  allowed  to  fall  into 
their  hands  ;  and  that  neither  Davis, 


Sigel  was  then  forty  miles  distant. 

38 


16  Scott  was  himself  retired  the  day  before. 


594  THE  AMERICA 

nor  Pope,  nor  Sigel,  nor  Smith,  nor 
Lane,  would  be  enabled  to  reach  that 
point  in  season  to  save  Mulligan ; 
though  the  series  of  blunders  and 
fatalities  by  which  all  succor  was 
precluded,  could  not  happen  twice  in 
a  century.  Had  he  known  that  the 
Rebels  would  not  attack  Louisville, 
nor  Cairo,  nor  make  a  demonstration, 
by  way  of  Cape  Girardeau,  on  St. 
Louis,  backed  by  an  insurrection  in 
that  city,  he  might  have  stripped  that 
vital  point  of  troops,  and  rushed 
everything  to  the  relief  of  Mulligam 
He  certainly  had  reason  to  believe 
that  Pope's  promise  to  push  4,000 
men  to  Lexington  by  the  18th  or 
19th  would  be  fulfilled;  and  that 
these,  with  the  forces  of  Sturgis  and 
Smith,  and  those  that  Davis  might 
have  sent  at  any  time  after  he  had 
learned  that  the  Rebels  were  concen- 
trating on  Lexington,  would  be  suf- 
ficient. Had  even  the  imperative 
call  for  five  regiments  to  be  dis- 
patched to  Washington  been  for- 
borne,17 it  is  probable  that  Mulligan 
would  have  been  saved. 

But  none  of  his  errors,  if  errors 
they  were,  can  compare  in  magnitude 
with  that  which  dictated  a  second 
abandonment  of  Springfield  and  re- 
treat to  Rolla  by  our  army,  five  days 
after  Hunter  had  assumed  command. 
No  doubt,  this  was  ordered  from 
Washington ;  but  that  order  was 
most  mistaken  and  disastrous.  We 
had  already  once  abandoned  south- 
western Missouri;  and,  even  then, 
Lyon  had  wisely  and  nobly  decided 
that  it  were  better  to  risk  a  probable 
defeat  than  to  give  up  a  Union- 
loving  people  to  the  mercy  of  their 
enemies,  without  making  a  deter- 
mined effort  to  save  them.    But  now 


N  CONFLICT. 

there  was  no  such  exigency.  We 
were  too  strong  to  be  beaten ;  and 
might  have  routed  Price  near  Pine- 
ville,  chasing  the  wreck  of  his  army 
into  Arkansas,  thus  insuring  a  disper- 
sion of  large  numbers  of  the  defeat- 
ed Missourians  to  their  homes  ;  and 
then  5,000  men,  well  intrenched, 
could  have  held  Springfield  against 
all  gainsayers,  until  the  next  Spring. 
But  our  second  retreat,  so  clearly  wan- 
ton and  unnecessary,  disheartened  the 
Unionists  and  elated  the  Secessionists 
of  all  southern  Missouri.  It  made 
our  predominance  in  any  part  of  that 
State  appear  exotic  and  casual,  not 
natural  and  permanent.  It  revived 
all  the  elements  of  turbulence,  an- 
archy, and  rapine,  which  the  uncon- 
tested ascendency  of  our  cause,  under 
Fremont,  had  temporarily  stilled. 
The  Secession  strongholds  along  and 
even  above  the  Missouri  river  were 
galvanized  into  fresh  activity  in  guer- 
rilla outrages  and  murders,  by  the 
unexpected  tidings  that  we  had 
abandoned  southern  Missouri  without 
a  blow,  and  were  sneaking  back  to 
our  fastnesses  along  the  lines  of  com- 
pleted railroads,  and  within  striking 
distance  of  St.  Louis. 

Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck  succeeded 
to  the  command  of  the  Missouri  de- 
partment, November  1 2th.  But  mean- 
time, Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  in  com- 
mand at  Cairo,  had  made  a  spirited 
demonstration  on  the  little  steamboat 
landing  known  as  Belmont,  on  the 
Missouri  side  of  the  Mississippi,  op- 
posite Columbus,  Ky.  Columbus  was 
then  the  head-quarters  of  the  Seces- 
sion force  observing  and  threatening 
Cairo,  while  the  Rebellion,  protected 
by  similar  demonstrations  of  Con- 


"  This  order,  when  partially  executed,  was 


withdrawn,  but  too  late  for  the  emergency. 


GEN.    GRANT'S   FIGHT    AT  BELMONT. 


595 


federate  strength  at  different  points 
throughout  the  State,  was  greedily 
absorbing  and  annexing  Kentucky, 
without  encountering  any  forcible 
opposition  from  her  '  loyal '  authori- 
ties. Requesting  Gen.  Smith,  com- 
manding the  Union  garrison  at  Pa- 
ducah,  to  make  a  feint  of  attacking 
Columbus  from  the  north-east,  Gen. 
Grant,  sending  a  small  force  of  his 
own  down  the  Kentucky  side  of  the 
great  river  to  Ellicott's  Mills,  twelve 
miles  from  Columbus,  embarked  (Nov. 
6th)  2,850  men,  mainly  Illinoisans,  up- 
on four  steamboats,  convoyed  by  the 
gunboats  Tyler  and  Lexington,  and 
dropped  down  the  river  to  Island 
No.  1,  eleven  miles  above  Columbus, 
where  they  remained  until  7  a.  m.  of 
the  7th,  when  they  proceeded  to 
Hunter's  Point,  some  two  to  three 
miles  above  the  ferry  connecting 
Columbus  with  Belmont,  where  the 
whole  array  was  debarked  on  the 
Missouri  shore,  formed  in  line  of 
battle,  and  pushed  forward  as  rapidly 
as  possible,  to  overwhelm  the  some- 
what inferior  force  of  Rebels  en- 
camped at  Belmont.  This  move- 
ment was  rather  annoyed  than 
checked  by  a  small  Rebel  detach- 
ment promptly  thrown  forward  to 
impede  its  progress ;  but  by  11  o'clock 
our  little  army  was  formed  westward 
of  and  facing  the  Rebel  camp,  which 
was  found  well  protected  by  a  strong 
abatis  nearly  surrounding  it  on  every 
side  but  that  of  the  river.  Fighting 
their  way  through  this  with  great  gal- 
lantry, though  stoutly  resisted  by  the 
Rebels,  the  Unionists  reached  and  car- 

18  The  Chicago  Journal  has  a  letter  from  its 
Cairo  correspondent,  from  which  we  extract  the 
following  spirited  account  of  the  battle  : 

"  The  design  was  to  reach  Belmont  just  before 
daylight;  but,  owing  to  unavoidable  delays  in 
embarking,  it  was  8  o'clock  before  the  *  fleet 


ried  the  camp,  capturing  several  guns, 
and  driving  the  enemy  completely 
over  the  bluff  down  to  the  bank  of 
the  river.  The  tents  of  the  Rebels 
were  promptly  fired,  and  their  blan- 
kets and  camp  equipage  destroyed 
with  them.  Bu^,  by  this  time,  Maj. 
Gen.  Polk,  commanding  in  Colum- 
bus, had  been  thoroughly  waked  up, 
and,  perceiving  his  camp  across  the 
river  in  possession  of  our  forces,  had 
trained  some  of  his  heaviest  guns  to 
bear  from  the  hights  on  that  side  of 


the  river  upon  the  position  of  our  vic- 
torious regiments,  which  was  much 
lower,  and  thoroughly  exposed  to 
their  fire,  which  our  men  had  no 
means  of  effectively  returning.18 
Meantime,  he  had  sent  over  three  re- 
reached  Lucas  Bend,  the  point  fixed  upon  for 
debarkation.  This  is  about  three  miles  north  of 
Columbus,  Ky.,  on  the  Missouri  side. 

u  The  enemy  were  encamped  on  the  high 
ground  back  from  the  river,  and  about  two  and 
a  half  miles  from  the  landing.  From  their  posi- 
tion, they  could  easily  see  our  landing,  and  had 


BATTLE  OF  BELMONT. 


596 


THE    AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


giments,  under  Gen.  Pillow,  to  the 
immediate  relief  of  his  routed  and 
sorely  pressed  fugitives  ;  while  three 
others,  under  Gen.  Cheatham,  had 
been  landed  between  our  soldiers  and 
their  boats,  with  intent  to  cut  off  then- 
retreat  ;  and,  finally,  as  his  fears  of  a 
direct  attack  on  Columbus  were  dis- 
pelled, Polk  himself  crossed  over 
with  two  additional  regiments,  mak- 
ing eight  in  all,  or  not  less  than  5,000 
men,  who  were  sent  as  reinforce- 
ments to  the  three  regiments,  under 

ample  time  to  dispose  of  their  forces  to  receive 
us,  which  they  did  with  all  dispatch.  They  also 
sent  a  detachment  of  light  artillery  and  infantry 
out  to  retard  our  march,  and  annoy  us  as  much 
as  possible. 

"A  line  of  battle  was  formed  at  once  on  the 
levee,  Col.  Fouke  taking  command  of  the  center, 
Col.  Buford  of  the  right,  and  Col.  Logan  of  the 
left. 

"The  advance  from  the  river  bank  to  the 
Rebel  encampment  was  a  running  fight  the  en- 
tire distance,  the  Rebels  firing  and  falling  back 
all  the  way ;  while  our  troops  gallantly  received 
their  fire  without  flinching,  and  bravely  held  on 
their  course,  regardless  of  the  missiles  of  death 
that  were  flying  thick  and  fast  about  them.  The 
way  was  of  the  most  indifferent  character,  lying 
through  woods  with  thick  underbrush,  and  only 
here  and  there  a  path  or  a  rough  country  road. 

"  The  three  divisions  kept  within  close  dis- 
tance of  each  other,  pressing  over  all  obstacles 
and  overcoming  all  opposition;  each  striving  for 
the  honor  of  being  first  in  the  enemy's  camp. 
This  honor  fell  to  the  right  division,  led  by  Col. 
Buford.  It  was  the  gallant  27  th  Illinois,  who, 
with  deafening  cheers,  first  waved  the  Stars  and 
Stripes  in  the  midst  of  the  Rebels'  camping- 
ground. 

"  The  scene  was  a  terribly  exciting  one — mus- 
ketry and  cannon  dealing  death  and  destruction 
on  all  sides  ;  men  grappling  with  men  in  a  fear- 
ful death-struggle ;  column  after  column  rushing 
eagerly  up,  ambitious  to  obtain  a  post  of  danger ; 
officers  riding  hither  and  thither  in  the  thickest 
of  the  fight,  urging  their  men  on,  and  encouraging 
them  to  greater  exertions;  regiments  charging 
into  the  very  jaws  of  death  with  frightful  yells 
and  shouts,  more  effective,  as  they  fell  upon  the 
ears  of  the  enemy,  than  a  thousand  rifle-balls — 
and,  in  the  midst  of  all,  is  heard  one  long,  loud, 
continuous  round  of  cheering  as  the  Star-Spangled 
Banner  is  unfurled  in  the  face  of  the  foe,  and 
defiantly  supplants  the  mongrel  colors  that  had, 
but  a  moment  before,  designated  tto  spot  as 
Rebel  ground. 

"The  2 2d  boys,  have  the  honor  of  having  si- 
lenced and  captured  a  battery  of  twelve  pieces, 
which  had  been  dealing  destruction  with  marked 
success.    The  30th  had  been  badly  cut  up  by 


Col.  Tappan,  who  originally  held  tho 
place.  Of  course,  our  exhausted  and 
largely  outnumbered  soldiers  could 
do  nothing  better  than  to  cut  their 
way  through  the  fresh  troops  obstruct- 
ing their  return  to  their  boats,  which 
they  did  with  great  gallantry  and 
success,  bringing  oif  all  their  own 
guns,  with  the  two  best  of  those  they 
had  captured  from  the  Rebels,  and 
gaining  their  boats  about  5  p.m.,  with 
a  loss  of  two  caissons,  some  ammuni- 
tion and  baggage,  and  of  about  400 

this  battery,  and  were  straining  every  nerve  to 
capture  it.  They  express  considerable  disap- 
pointment that  the  prize  was  snatched  from 
them.  They  turned  away  in  search  of  new  lau- 
rels ;  and,  in  charging  into  the  very  midst  of  tho 
camp,  were  drawn  into  an  ambuscade,  where 
they  were  again  suffering  terribly,  though  main- 
taining their  ground  unflinchingly,  when  the  31st 
came  to  their  assistance. 

"An  impetuous  and  irresistible  charge  was 
then  made,  that  drove  the  Rebels  in  all  direc- 
tions, and  left  the  field  in  possession  of  the  Fede- 
ral forces.  The  Rebel  camps  were  fired,  and, 
with  all  their  supplies,  ammunition,  baggage, 
etc.,  were  totally  destroyed. 

"  The  discovery,  on  the  Kentucky  side,  that 
we  were  in  possession  of  their  camp,  led  to  an 
opening  of  the  Rebel  batteries  from  that  direc- 
tion upon  us.  Their  fire  was  very  annoying; 
the  more  so  as  we  were  not  in  a  position  to  re- 
turn it. 

"  Just  at  this  juncture,  the  report  was  brought 
to  Gen.  Grant,  by  Lieut.  Pittman,  of  the  30th 
Illinois,  who  had,  with  his  company  (F),  been  on 
scouting  duty,  that  heavy  reinforcements  were 
coming  up  to  the  Rebels  from  the  opposite  side 
of  the  river.  Indeed,  the  report  was  also  made 
that  the  enemy  were  pouring  over  the  river  in 
immense  numbers,  and  the  danger,  was  imminent 
that  our  retreat  would  be  cut  off.  The  order  to 
fall  back  to  the  boats  was  therefore  given,  but 
not  a  moment  too  soon. 

"  The  way  was  already  filled  with  Rebel 
troops ;  and,  as  we  had  fought  our  way  up  to  the 
encampment,  so  we  were  obliged  to  fight  back  to 
our  boats,  and  against  desperate  odds.  But  the 
men  were  not  lacking  in  courage,  and  fought  like 
veterans,  giving  ample  evidence  of  their  deter- 
mination. Every  regiment  of  Federal  troops 
suffered  more  or  less  severely  in  their  return 
march;  but  the  general  opinion  prevails  that  the 
Rebels  suffered  far  greater  losses  than  we. 

"  Wherever  they  made  a  stand,  we  put  them  to 
flight ;  and,  although  we  lost  many  brave  men, 
either  killed,  wounded,  or  taken  prisoners,  we 
made  at  least  two  of  their  men  bite  the  dust  for 
every  one  that  fell  from  our  ranks.  Our  regi- 
ments all  reached  their  boats,  though  with  con- 
siderably thinned  ranks." 


UNION    AND  REBEL 


LOSSES   AT  BELMONT. 


597 


Skilled,  wounded,  and  taken  prisoners.19 
Col.  Dougherty,  of  the  22d  Illinois, 
was  severely  wounded  and  taken  pris- 
oner. Col,  Lauman,  of  the  7th  Iowa, 
and  Maj.  McClurken,  of  the  30th  Il- 
linois, were  also  badly  wounded ; 
while  among  the  killed  were  Lieut. 
Col.  Wentz,  of  the  7th  Iowa,  Capts. 
Erolaski,  Markle,  and  Lieut.  Dough- 
erty. Gens.  Grant  and  McClernand, 
who  evinced  the  most  reckless  bra- 
very throughout,  each  had  his  horse 
shot  under  him.  The  2 2d  Illinois 
lost  23  killed  and  74  wounded,  in- 
cluding Capts.  Challenor  and  Abbott, 
who  were  taken  prisoners.  The  7th 
Iowa  lost  26  killed  and  80  wounded, 
including  nearly  all  its  field  officers.20 
The  entire  Rebel  loss21  was  from  600 
to  1,000  ;  among  them,  Col.  John  V. 

19  Gen.  Grant,  in  his  official  report,  dated  Cairo, 
Nov.  12th,  says: 

"  Our  loss  was  about  84  killed,  150  wounded — 
many  of  them  slightly — and  about  an  equal 
number  missing." 

A  letter  preserved  in  The  Rebellion  Record, 
dated  Camp  McClernand,  Cairo,  Nov.  8th,  says : 

"  The  Memphis  returned  at  midnight.  The 
expedition  that  went  down  upon  her  with  flags 
of  truce  report  the  whole  number  of  our  dead, 
found  and  buried  by  them  upon  the  battle-field, 
at  85.  This  includes  all.  The  Rebels  acknowl- 
edge their  loss  to  be  350  killed." 

A  private  in  Taylor's  battery  writes : 

"  After  we  got  out  into  the  river,  and  in  range, 
we  opened  with  three  of  our  guns,  together  with 
the  gunboats :  and  the  way  we  dropped  the 
shell  among  them  was  a  caution.  The  firing 
did  not  cease  till  sundown." 

This  private  sums  up  the  battle  as  follows  : 

"  To  recapitulate :  We  had  about  4,000  men ; 
attacked  about  3,000  at  Belmont,  and  drove  them 
from  the  field ;  when  they  were  reenforced  by 
4,000  from  above  and  3,000  below,  together 
with  cavalry  and  four  batteries  from  Columbus, 
and  their  heavy  guns  from  the  bluffs  opposite 
playing  down  upon  our  men  all  the  time ;  they 
could  look  right  down  on  the  battle  from  the 
shore,  where  Pillow  was  said  to  be  in  command." 

The  Memphis  Avalanclie's  (Rebel)  account  of 
the  battle  says : 

"  We  have  91  prisoners  and  over  100  of  their 
wounded  in  our  hands." 

20  Capt.  Foote's  official  report  of  the  participa- 
tion of  his  gunboats  in  this  affair,  states  the  loss 


Wright,22  of  the  13th  Tennessee,  and 
Maj.  Butler,  of  the  11th  Louisiana, 
killed. 

It  is  morally  certain  that  the  Rebel 
loss  in  this  action  was  the  greater ; 
yet,  for  lack  of  proper  combinations, 
and  because  of  the  fact  that,  of  the 
10,000  men  we  might  and  should 
have  had  in  the  action,  less  than 
4,000  were  actually  present,  the  pres- 
tige of  victory  inured  to  the  Rebels, 
who  chased  our  weary  men  to  their 
boats,  and  fired  at  them,  as  they, 
having  cut  their  cables  in  their  haste, 
steamed  up  the  river.  When  our 
gunboats,  gaining  a  proper  distance 
from  the  shore,  obtained  the  range 
of  the  exulting  Rebels  on  the  bank, 
the  latter  promptly  desisted  and  re- 
tired. 

of  those  gunboats  at  1  killed  and  2  wounded ; 
and,  with  regard  to  the  general  result,  says : 

"  My  opinion  is,  after  careful  inquiry,  as  strag- 
glers are  still  coming  in,  that  our  loss  of  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  will  amount  to  500  per- 
sons, together  with  25  baggage  wagons,  100 
horses,  1,000  overcoats,  and  1,000  blankets." 

21  Pollard,  with  unusual  candor,  says : 

"  The  list  of  our  [Rebel]  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  numbers  632." 

A  Rebel  account  of  the  battle  by  an  eye-wit- 
ness, printed  in  The  Memphis  Appeal,  gives  the 
official  loss  in  .four  regiments  at  364,  and  says 
the  loss  in  the  others  has  not  been  announced ; 
but  if  in  the  same  ratio,  it  must  have  been  over 
a  thousand.  And  yet  The  Memphis  Avalanche 
bulletin  says: 

"  Capt.  John  Morgan  estimates  the  loss  of  our 
entire  army  at  about  100  killed,  and  less  than 
200  wounded." 

22  CoL  Wright  had  for  some  years  been  a  Demo- 
cratic member  of  Congress,  and  an  intimate 
friend,  as  well  as  compatriot,  of  Hon.  Philip  B. 
Fouke,  a  Democratic  member  from  Tennessee. 
When  they  parted,  at  the  close  of  the  session  of 
1860-61,  Wright  said  to  his  friend:  "Phil.,  I 
expect  the  next  time  we  meet,  it  will  be  on  the 
battle-field."  Sure  enough,  their  next  meeting 
was  in  this  bloody  struggle,  where  Wright  fell 
mortally  wounded,  and  60  of  his  men  were  taken 
prisoners  by  Col.  Fouke's  regiment. 


598 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


XXXVI. 

ON  THE  SEABOARD  AND  OCEAN. 


On  Sunday,  June  2d,  i861,  while 
the  Minnesota,  then  blockading  the 
harbor  of  Charleston,  was  looking 
after  a  suspicious  vessel  that  was  ob- 
served to  the  southward,  a  little 
schooner  of  some  fifty  tuns,  carrying 
an  ugly-looking  18-pounder  mounted 
on  a  swivel  amidships,  and  manned 
by  twenty-two  men,  of  whom  not 
more  than  half  could  find  room  at 
once  under  the  shelter  of  her  deck, 
slipped  out  from  under  the  lee  of  Fort 
Sumter,  by  the  north  channel,  taking 
first  a  northward  course,  so  as  to  allay 
suspicion  on  board  the  blockader,  but 
intending  to  stretch  boldly  across  the 
Gulf  Stream  to  Great  Abaco,  and  lie 
in  wait  near  the  Hole-in-the-Wall  for 
unarmed  Yankee  merchantmen  traf- 
ficking between  Northern  ports  and 
Cuba. 

She  was  lucky  at  the  outset,  almost 
beyond  her  hopes;  falling  in,  when 
scarcely  a  day  at  sea,  with  the  brig 
Joseph,  of  Rockland,  Me.,  laden  with 
sugar  from  Cardenas,  Cuba,  for  Phil- 
adelphia. Setting  an  American  flag 
in  her  main  rigging,  to  indicate  her 
wish  to  speak  the  stranger,  the  priva- 
teer easily  decoyed  the  J oseph  within 
speaking  distance,  when  he  ordered 
her  captain  to  lower  his  boat  and 
come  on  board.  This  command  hav- 
ing been  readily  obeyed,  the  mer- 
chantman was  astounded  by  the  in- 
formation, fully  authenticated  by  the 
18-pounder  aforesaid,  that  he  was  a 
prize  to  the  nameless  wasp  on  whose 
deck  he  stood,  which  had  unquestion- 
able authority  from  Mr.  Jefferson 


Davis  to  capture  all  vessels  belonging 
to  loyal  citizens  of  the  United  States. 
There  was  plainly  nothing  to  be  said ; 
so  the  Yankee  skipper  said  nothing ; 
but  was  held  a  prisoner  on  board  his 
captor,  while  a  prize-crew  of  eight 
well-armed  men  was  sent  on  board 
the  Joseph,  directed  to  take  her  with 
her  men  into  Georgetown,  S.  C. 

At  5  p.  m.,  of  that  day,  a  brig  hove 
in  sight ;  and  the  Confederate  schoon- 
er at  once  made  all  sail  directly 
toward  her,  expecting,  by  the  easy 
capture  of  a  second  richly  laden  mer- 
chantman, to  complete  a  good  day's 
work,  even  for  June.  On  nearing 
her,  however,  he  was  astonished  in 
turn  by  a  show  of  teeth — quite  too 
many  of  them  for  his  one  heavy 
grinder.  Putting  his  craft  instantly 
about,  he  attempted,  by  sharp  sail- 
ing, to  escape ;  but  it  was  too  late. 
He  was  under  the  guns  of  the  U.  S. 
brig  Perry,  Lieut.  E.  G.  Parrott  com- 
manding, which  at  once  set  all  sail  for 
a  chase,  firing  at  intervals,  as  signals 
that  her  new  acquaintance  was  ex- 
pected to  stop.  The  Savannah. — for 
that  word,  displayed  in  raised  letters 
on  the  front  part  of  her  trunk  cabin, 
seemed  to  be,  or  at  least  to  have  been, 
her  name — did  not  appear  to  compre- 
hend; for  she -sent  four  shots  at  the 
Perry,  one  of  which  passed  through 
her  rigging.  So  the  chase  continued 
till  8  o'clock  p.  m.,  when  the  Perry 
had  hauled  so  close  to  the  puzzling 
little  craft  as  to  order  her  by  trum- 
pet to  heave  to,  when  the  schooner 
lowered  all  her  sails,  and  her  officers 


GEN.    BUTLER'S    EXPEDITION"    TO    HAT  TEEAS. 


599 


ran  below.  In  a  few  moments,  the 
two  quarter-boats  of  the  Perry  were 
alongside,  and  their  crews  leaped  upon 
the  flyaway's  deck ;  when  all  remain- 
ing mystery  as  to  her  character  was 
thoroughly  dispelled.  Her  men  at 
once  stepped  forward  and  surrendered 
their  side-arms ;  and,  perceiving  there 
was  no  bloodshed,  the  leaders  soon 
emerged  from  the  cabin,  and  did 
likewise.  All  were  promptly  trans- 
ferred to  the  Perry,  and  returned  in 
her  to  Charleston  bar;  whence  they 
were  dispatched,  on  the  7th,  as  pris- 
oners, in  what  had  been  their  own 
vessel,  to  New  York,  where  they 
arrived,  in  charge  of  Midshipman 
McCook  and  a  prize  crew,  on  the 
loth.  They  were  arraigned  and  some 
of  them  tried  as  pirates,  but  not  con- 
victed— Mr.  Jefferson  Davis,  by  a 
letter  to  President  Lincoln,  dated 
Richmond,  July  6th,  declaring  that 
he  would  retaliate  on  our  prisoners 
in  his  hands  any  treatment  that  might 
be  inflicted  on  them.  ~No  answer 
was  returned  to  this  letter ;  but 
the  privateer's  crew  were  ultimately 
exchanged,  like  other  prisoners  of 
war. 

The  Savannah's  rough  experience 


was  repeated,  two  months  later,  by 
the  Petrel,  formerly  the  U.  S.  revenue 
cutter  Aiken,  but  turned  over  to 
South  Carolina  by  her  officers  in  the 
infancy  of  Secession.  Running  out 
of  Charleston  on  a  cruise,  the  Petrel 
soon  encountered  the  St.  Lawrence, 
gunboat,  and,  mistaking  her  for  a 
merchantman,  fired  at  her  as  a  sum- 
mons to  surrender.  The  St.  Law- 
rence at  once  returned  the  compli- 
ment with  a  broadside,  sinking  the 
Rebel  craft  off-hand,  with  five  of 
her  crew.  The  residue,  thirty-six  in 
number,  were  sent  to  Fort  Mifflin, 
on  the  Delaware,  as  prisoners. 

Gen.  Benj.  F.  Butler  sailed,  Au- 
gust 26, 1861,  from  Fortress  Monroe, 
as  commander  of  a  military  and  na- 
val force  whose  destination  was  secret. 
It  consisted  of  the  fifty-gun  frigates 
Minnesota,  Wabash,  and  Cumber- 
land, with  four  smaller  national  ves- 
sels and  two  steam  transports,  carry- 
ing 800  soldiers,  with  two  tugs  laden 
with  supplies ;  the  Naval  force  under 
the  command  of  Com.  Stringham. 
Arriving  the  second  night  off  the 
entrance  through  Hatteras  Inlet  to 
Pamlico  Sound,  it  was  found  defend- 


PAMLICO  SOUND 


HATTERAS. 

Explanation*  to  the  plan  of  the  Bombardment  of  Forts  Hatteras  and  Clark. 

A.  United  States  troops  and  marines.  3.  Minnesota, 

B.  Masked  Batteries. 

C.  Scouting  parties  awaiting  the  bombardment 


D.  Small  Boats. 
1.  Cumberland. 


4  and  5.  Susquehanna  and  Monticello,  during  the 

afternoon  of  the  bombardment. 
6,  T.  and  8.  Steamers  Paivnee,  Harriet  Lane,  and 
Monticello,  protecting  the  landing  of  troops. 


600  THE  AMERICA 

ed  by  the  new  Forts  Hatteras  and 
Clark,  mounting  five  and  ten  guns 
respectively,  with  five  more  ready  for 
mounting  on  the  more  important 
work;  the  whole  defended  by  700 
Confederates,  under  Com.  S.  Barron, 
late  of  the  Federal  Navy ;  the  infan- 
try consisting  of  the  7th  North  Car- 
olina, Col.  Martin. 

The  forts  were  found  far  less  for- 
midable than  they  doubtless  would 
have  been  a  few  weeks  later.  The 
bombardment  was  commenced  at  10 
A.  m.,  of  the  28th ;  Fort  Hatteras  re- 
plying, with  signal  industry,  to  little 
purpose ;  its  gunners  being  evidently 
inexperienced  and  unskilled.  Fort 
Clark  had  little  or  nothing  to  say; 
and  was  next  morning  found  to  have 
been  already  abandoned. 

The  Sound  being  still  open,  a  heav- 
ily laden  transport  reenforced  Fort 
Hatteras  during  the  night ;  but  this 
did  no  good.  The  bombardment  hav- 
ing been  reopened  by  our  ships  on 
the  morning  of  the  29th,  and  it  being 
evident  that  to  continue  the  contest 
was  simply  to  condemn  his  men  to 
useless  slaughter,  Com.  Barron,  at 
11  a.  m.,  raised  the  white  flag,  and, 
on  consultation,  offered  to  surrender 
the  fort  with  its  contents,  on  condi- 
tion that  the  garrison  should  be 
allowed  to  retire.  G-en.  Butler  de- 
clined the  proffer;  but  proposed,  in 
his  turn,  to  guarantee  to  officers  and 
men,  on  capitulation,  the  treatment 
of  prisoners  of  war ;  and  this  was  ul- 
timately accepted.  The  spoils  were 
715  prisoners,  25  cannon,  1,000  stand 
of  arms,  and  a  considerable  quantity 
of  provisions  and  stores.  Our  loss 
was  next  to  nothing.  And  the  se- 
cret of  the  expedition  had  been  so 
well  kept  that,  for  several  days  there- 
after, blockade-runners  from  various 


N  CONFLICT. 

quarters  ran  into  the  inlet  as  a  Con^ 
federate  shelter,  and  fell  an  easy  prey 
to  our  arms. 

No  effort  being  made  by  the  Con- 
federates to  retake  this  important  po- 
sition, Gen.  Butler,  with  most  of  our 
vessels,  had  departed  on  other  ser- 
vice ;  when  Col.  Hawkins,  command- 
ing at  Hatteras,  dispatched,  late  in 
September,  the  20th  Indiana,  Col. 
Brown,  to  the  petty  hamlet  on  the 
Hatteras  Bank,  known  as  Chicamico- 
mico,  near  Cape  Hatteras,  and  some 
fifteen  or  twenty  miles  north-east  of 
the  Inlet.  The  excuse  for  this  peril- 
ous division  of  his  forces  was  the  pro- 
tection of  the  native  residents,  who 
claimed  to  be  Unionists.  A  few  clays 
thereafter  (Sept.  29th),  the  propeller 
Fanny,  which  had  transported  the 
regiment  to  Chicamicomico,  and  was 
now  proceeding  through  the  Sound, 
carrying  thither  a  full  cargo  of  stores 
and  40  men,  was  pounced  upon  by 
three  armed  steamers  from  the  main 
land,  and  easily  captured;  and,  six 
days  thereafter,  Col.  Brown  discov- 
ered five  Rebel  steamers  emerging 
from  Croatan  Sound,  with  evident 
intent  to  attack  him.  To  this  end, 
they  landed  a  superior  force  above 
his  position,  and  then  proceeded  to 
land  a  detachment  further  down,  in- 
tending to  cut  off  his  retreat  and 
compel  his  surrender.  Col.  Brown, 
however,  destroyed  his  tents  and 
stores,  and  made  a  rapid  inarch  to 
the  Hatteras  Lighthouse,  with  a  loss 
of  about  50  stragglers  taken  prison- 
ers. Col.  Hawkins,  by  this  time  ful- 
ly apprised  of  the  Rebel  movement, 
soon  started,  with  six  companies,  to 
the  rescue ;  while  the  Susquehanna 
and  Monticello,  our  only  two  fighting 
vessels  at  the  Inlet,  moved  up  to  the 
vicinity  of  the  Lighthouse,  to  take  a 


PENSACOLA   HARBOR  — CAPTURE    OF   THE    JUD  AH.  601 


hand  in  the  business.  Doubling  Cape 
Hatteras  next  morning,  the  Monti- 
cello,  Lieut.  Braine,  came  upon  the 
main  Rebel  force  at  1%  p.  m.,  and 
opened  upon  them  with  shells,  put- 
ting them  instantly  to  flight,  with 
great  slaughter.  The  bank  or  beach 
between  the  ocean  and  the  Sound, 
being  less  than  a  mile  wide,  afforded 
little  protection  to  the  fugitives,  who 
sustained  an  incessant  fire  from  the 
Monticello  for  two  hours ;  and  two  of 
oar  shells  are  said  to  have  penetrated 
two  Eebel  sloops  laden  with  men, 


i 


of  Sumter,  and  its  defense  confided  to 
Col.  Harvey  Brown.  A  formidable 
Rebel  force,  ultimately  commanded 
by  Gen.  Braxton  Bragg,  was  assem- 
bled, early  in  the  war,  at  Pensacola, 
and  long  threatened  an  attack  or 


tearing  them  to  pieces  and  destroying 
all  on  board.  Had  our  land  forces 
efficiently  cooperated,  most  of  the 
Rebels  might  have. been  taken  ;  as  it 
was,  Col.  Brown  returned  unmolested 
to  the  fort. 

Fort  Pickens,  on  the  western  ex- 
tremity of  Santa  Rosa  Island,  com- 
manding the  main  entrance  to  Pen- 
sacola harbor,  was  saved  to  the  Union, 
as  we  have  seen,1  by  the  fidelity  and 
prompt  energy  of  Lieut.  Slemmer. 
It  was  reenforced  soon  after  the  fall 


bombardment,  which,  on  our  side, 
was  eagerly  awaited. 

Com.  William  Mervine,  command- 
ing the  Gulf  Blockading  Squadron, 
having  observed  that  a  schooner 
named  the  Judah  was  being  fitted 


MAP  OF  FOKT  PICKENS,  PENSACOLA,  ETC. 


1  Page  412. 


602 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


out  in  the  harbor  of  Pensacola  as  a 
privateer,  with  intent  to  slip  out  some 
dark  night,  prepared  to  cruise  against 
our  commerce,  planned  an  expedition 
to  destroy  her.  During  the  night  of 
Sept.  13th,  four  boats,  carrying  -100 
men,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Russell, 
put  off  from  Com.  Mervine's  flag-ship 
Colorado,  approaching  the  schooner 
at  3|  a.  m.,  of  the  14th.  The  pri- 
vateer's crew,  duly  warned,  opened  a 
fire  of  musketry  as  the  boats  neared 
her;  but  were  speedily  driven  from 
her  deck  by  our  boarders,  and  she  set 
on  fire  and  burned  to  the  water's 
edge,  when  she  sunk.  Her  gun,  a 
10-inch  columbiad,  was  spiked,  and 
sunk  with  her.  All  was  the  work  of 
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  during  which 
our  side  had  3  killed  and  12  wounded. 
As  the  Judah  lay  directly  off  the 
Navy  Yard,  where  a  thousand  Reb- 
els were  quartered,  this  was  one  of 
the  most  daring  and  well-executed 
achievements  of  the  year. 

Finally,  during  the  intensely  dark 
night  of  Oct.  9th,  a  Confederate  force 
crossed  silently  from  Pensacola  to 
Santa  Rosa  Island,  with  intent  to  sur- 
prise and  destroy  the  camp  of  the  6th 
New  York  (Wilson's  Zouaves),  some 
two  miles  distant  from  Fort  Pickens. 
The  attack  was  well  planned  and 
well  made.  The  surprise  seems  to 
have  been  complete.  The  Zouaves 
were  instancy  driven  from  their 
camp,  which  was  thoroughly  de- 
stroyed ;  but  the  darkness,  which  had 
favored  the  surprise,  invested  every 
step  beyond  the  camp  with  unknown 
perils;  and,  when  day  broke,  the 
Rebels  had  no  choice  but  to  retreat 
as  swiftly  as  possible  to  their  boats, 
eight  miles  distant.  O^course,  they 
were  followed,  and  harassed,  and  fired 
upon   after  they  had  reembarked ; 


and  it  was  claimed,  on  our  side,  that 
their  loss  exceeded  300  ;  but,  as  they 
left  but  21  dead  on  the  island,  and 
30  prisoners,  the  claim  is  simply  ab- 
surd. Our  loss  was  60,  and  theirs 
probably  a  little  more.  But  several 
thousand  Rebels  were  kept  at  Pen- 
sacola throughout  the  campaign  by 
less  than  1,000  on  our  side ;  and, 
when  they  finally  decamped,  they  had 
no  choice  but  to  surrender  the  Naval 
Floating  Dock  and  Railway,  witn 
much  other  public  property,  to  the 
flames,  to  prevent  their  easy  recovery 
to  the  Union. 

The  blockade  of  the  mouths  of  the 
Mississippi,  naturally  difficult,  because 
of  their  number  and  distances,  was 
successfully  evaded  on  the  1st  of  July 
by  the  steam  privateer  Sumter,  Capt. 
Raphael  Semmes,  who,  darting  swiftly 
from  point  to  point  throughout  those 
portions  of  the  West  India  waters 
known  to  be  most  thickly  studded 
with  our  merchantmen,  made  some 
twelve  or  fifteen  captures  in  hardly 
so  many  days,  and  then  ran  into  the 
friendly  British  port  of  Nassau,  where 
he  was  promptly  supplied  with  every- 
thing necessary  to  a  vigorous  prose- 
cution of  his  devastating  career. 
Having  continued  it  some  time  longer 
with  great  success,  he  finally  ran  into 
the  British  harbor  of  Gibraltar,  where 
the  Federal  gunboat  Tuscarora  soon 
found  him  and  his  vessel,  and,  an- 
choring in  the  Spanish  port  of  Alge- 
siras,  just  opposite,  where  no  law 
would  compel  her  to  remain  twenty- 
four  hours  after  the  Sumter  had  de- 
parted, she  held  the  privateer  fast 
until  relieved  by  the  Kearsarge,  by 
which  the  blockade  was  persistently 
maintained  until  the  Confederate 
officers  abandoned  their  vessel — pro- 


HOLLI^S'S    RAID  —  DU 


FONT'S  EXPEDITION. 


603 


fessing  to  sell  her — and  betook  them- 
selves to  Liverpool,  where  a  faster 
and  better  steamer,  the  Alabama, 
had  meantime  been  constructed,  and 
fitted  out  for  their  service.  So  the 
Nashville,  which  ran  out  of  Charles- 
ton during  the  Summer,  and,  in  due 
time,  appeared  in  British  waters, 
after  burning  (Nov.  19th)  the  Harvey 
Birch  merchantman  within  sight  of 
the  English  coast,  ran  into  South- 
ampton, where  lay  the  Tuscarora; 
which,  if  permitted  to  pursue,  would 
have  made  short  work  of  her  soon 
after  she  left,  but  was  compelled  to 
remain  twenty-four  hours  to  insure 
her  escape.  This  detention  is  author- 
ized by  the  law  of  nations,  though  it 
has  not  always  been  respected  by 
Great  Britain :  Witness  her  capture 
of  the  Essex  and  Essex  Junior  in  the 
harbor  of  Valparaiso,  and  her  de- 
struction of  the  Gen.  Armstrong  pri- 
vateer in  the  port  of  Fayal,  during 
the  war  of  1812.  But  the  concession 
of  such  belligerent  rights  and  immu- 
nities  to  a  power  which  has  neither 
recognized  national  existence  nor 
maritime  strength  will  yet  be  regret- 
ted by  Great  Britain,  as  affording  an 
unfortunate  and  damaging  precedent. 

In  October — the  communications 
between  our  blockading  forces  in  the 
Gulf  and  the  loyal  States  being  fitful 
and  tedious — the  North  was  startled 
by  the  following  bulletin,  which  ap- 
peared as  a  telegram  from  New  Or- 
leans to  the  Richmond  papers : 

"  Foet  Jackson,  Oct.  12,  1861. 

"Last  night,  I  attacked  the  blockaders 
with  my  little  fleet.  I  succeeded,  after  a 
very  short  struggle,  iu  driving  them  all 
aground  on  the  Southwest  Pass  bar,  except 
the  Preble,  which  I  sunk. 

"  I  captured  a  prize  from  them ;  and, 
after  they  were  fast  in  sand,  I  peppered 
them  well. 

"  There  were  no  casualties  on  our  side. 
It  was  a  complete  success.  Hollins." 


Commander  Hollins,  formerly  of 
our  Navy,  and  more  notorious  than 
famous  for  his  bombardment  of  Grey- 
town,  Nicaragua,  had  drawn  rather 
liberally  on  his  imagination  in  the 
above.  His  prize  was  a  deserted 
coal-boat ;  he  had  not  sunk  the 
Preble ;  and  his  6  peppering'  was 
done  at  a  prudent  distance,  and  with 
little  or  no  effect.  But  he  had  burst 
upon  our  squadron  blockading  the 
mouths  of  the  Mississippi,  at  3.15 
a.  m.  of  that  day,  with  a  flotilla  com- 
posed of  his  ram  Manassas,  three  fire- 
rafts,  and  five  armed  steamers.  The 
ram  struck  our  flag  steamship  Rich- 
mond, Capt.  Pope,  staving  in  her  side 
below  the  water-line,  and,  for  the 
moment,  threatening  her  destruction. 
Our  squadron,  consisting  of  the  Rich- 
mond, Preble,  Yincennes,  and  Water 
Witch,  instantly  slipped  their  cables, 
and  ran  down  the  South-west  Pass, 
very  much  as  they  would  have  done 
had  all  on  board  been  considerably 
frightened.  Commander  Robert  Han- 
dy, of  the  Yincennes,  ran  his  vessel 
aground  in  the  flight,  and  deserted 
her,  with  all  his  men ;  setting  a  slow- 
match  to  destroy  her,  which  happily 
failed.  His  vessel  was  recovered  un- 
harmed. The  fire-rafts  were  entirely 
avoided ;  the  Rebel  steamboats  not 
venturing  within  range  of  the  Rich- 
mond's guns ;  while  Hollins's  haste 
to  telegraph  his  victory  seems  to  have 
cost  him  all  its  legitimate  fruits.  Be- 
yond the  destruction  of  the  fire-ships, 
the  losses  on  either  side  were  of  no 
account. 

On  the  29th  of  October,  another 
and  far  stronger  naval  and  military 
expedition  set  forth  from  Hampton 
Roads,  and,  clearing  the  capes  of  Yirr 
ginia,  moved  majestically  southward* 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


604 

Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman  commanded  the 
land  forces,  consisting  of  thirteen  vol- 
unteer regiments,  forming  three  brig- 
ades, and  numbering  not  less  than 
10,000  men ;  while  the  fleet — com- 
manded by  Com.  Samnel  F.  Du  Pont 
—  embraced  the  steam-frigate  Wa- 
bash, 14  gunboats,  22  first-class  and  12 
smaller  steamers,  with  26  sailing  ves- 
sels. After  a  stormy  passage,  in  which 
several  transports  were  disabled,  and 
four  absolutely  lost,  Com.  Du  Pont, 
in  his  flag-ship,  came  to  off  Port 
Eoyal,  S.  C,  during  the  night  of  No- 


F 


exchanging  like  compliments  with 
the  stronger  fort  on  Hilton  Head  as 
they  came  down.  Thus  no  vessel 
remained  stationary  under  fire;  so 
that  the  enemy  were  at  no  time  ena- 
bled to  gain,  by  experiment  and  ob- 
servation, a  perfect  aim.    The  day 


vember  3d  and  4th ;  and,  after  proper 
soundings  and  reconnoissances,  which 
developed  the  existence  of  a  new  fort 
on  either  side  of  the  entrance,  the 
Commodore  brought  his  most  effec- 
tive vessels  into  action  at  9  a.  m.,  on 
Thursday,  November  7th,  taking  the 
lead  in  his  flag-ship,  the  Wabash — 
the  gunboats  to  follow  at  intervals 
in  due  order.  Thus  the  fighting  por- 
tion of  the  fleet  steamed  slowly  up 
the  bay  by  the  J:rts,  receiving  and 
returning  the  fire  of  the  batteries 
on  Bay  Point  as  they  passed  up,  and 


was  lovely ;  the  spectacle  magnifi- 
cent ;  the  fight  spirited,  but  most  un- 
equal. Despite  the  general  presump- 
tion that  batteries,  well  manned  and 
served,  are  superior  to  ships  when  not 
iron-clad,  the  terrible  rain  of  shot  and 
shell  upon  the  gunners  in  the  Eebel 


REBEIfcFLEET  WHILE  U.S.  FLEET  $  i 
WA3*BETWECN  THE  BATTERIES.     j  *  J 
— """7"  R  i  F 


J1  J?  M 
10,'  ^J4 


WHEN  U.S.F 
WAS  TURNING. 


'•>  ■■$  ^BIENVILLE 

VV  SUSQUGMlWANjya CURLEW 
^\         MOH 1 6*^4X13  PENS  JIW 

\  \  ^  seminoyeNgM+aususta 


DTTA 
P£MI 

VAN1JALIA 


\3  ^ 


R.B.E0RES  \ 
PQCAHMIIAS 


COMING  UP  Al 
12  O'CLOCK 


TRANSPORTS  A  T  ANCHOR 


PORT  ROYAL  AND  HILTON  HEAD. 

Explanation. — Nos.  10, 11, 12, 13,  and  14,  in  the  back-ground,  are  the  positions  of  the  smaller  Federal  gunboats. 


CAPTURE    OF  HILTON 


HEAD  — THE   SLATES.  605 


forts  soon  proved  beyond  human  en- 
durance. The  smaller  gunboats  at 
length  took  positions  whence  their 
fire  was  most  annoying,  yet  could  not 
be  effectively  returned ;  while  the 
Bienville,  on  her  second  promenade, 
steamed  close  in  to  the  main  Eebel 
fort,  and  fired  her  great  guns  with 
such  effect  as  almost  to  silence  the 
enemy.  The  Wabash,  on  her  third 
round,  came  within  six  hundred 
yards  of  the  fort,  firing  as  calmly 
and  heavily  as  at  the  outset.  The 
battle  had  thus  raged  nearly  five 
hours,  with  fearful  carnage  and  de- 
vastation on  the  part  of  the  Rebels 
and  very  little  loss  on  ours,  when 
the  overmatched  Confederates,  find- 
ing themselves  slaughtered  to  no  pur- 
pose, suddenly  and  unanimously  took 
to  flight ;  their  commander,  Gen.  T. 
F.  Drayton,2  making  as  good  time  as 
the  best  of  them.3  The  Rebel  forts 
were  fully  manned  by  1,700  South 
Carolinians,  with  a  field  battery  of 
500  more  stationed  not  far  distant. 
The  negroes,  save  those  who  had 
been  driven  off  by  their  masters,  or 
shot  while  attempting  to  evade  them, 
had  stubbornly  remained  on  the  isles; 
and  there  was  genuine  pathos  in  the 
prompt  appearance  of  scores  of  them, 
rushing  down  to  the  water-side,  with 
their  scanty  stock  of  valuables  tied  up 
in  a  handkerchief,  and  begging  to  be 
taken  on  board  our  ships.  The  idea 
that  our  occupation  might  be  perma- 
nent seems  not  to  have  occurred  to 
them ;  they  only  thought  of  escaping 

2  He  was  brother  to  Commander  E.  Drayton, 
of  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Pocahontas,  who  was  in  the 
thickest  of  the  fight  on  the  side  of  his  whole 
country.  Capt.  Steadman,  of  the  Bienville,  was 
likewise  a  South  Carolinian. 

3  This  flight,  however  hurried  and  reckless, 
was  fully  justifiable.  They  had  to  run  six  miles 
across  the  island  to  Seabrook,  where  they  took 


at  all  hazards  from  their  life-long, 
bitter  bondage. 

Had  this  blow  been  followed  up 
as  it  might  have  been,  Charleston,  or 
Savannah,  or  both,  could  have  been 
easily  and  promptly  captured.  The 
Confederate  defeat  was  so  unexpect- 
ed, so  crushing,  and  the  terror  in- 
spired by  our  gunboats  so  general 
and  profound,  that  nothing  could 
have  withstood  the  progress  of  our 
arms.  But  Gen.  Sherman  had  not 
been  instructed  to  press  his  advanta- 
ges, nor  had  he  been  provided  with 
the  light-draft  steamers,  row-boats, 
and  other  facilities,  really  needed  for 
the  improvement  of  his  signal  victo- 
ry. He  did  not  even  occupy  Beaufort 
until  December  6th,  nor  Tybee  Isl- 
and, commanding  the  approach  to 
Savannah,  until  December  20th ;  on 
which  day,  a  number  of  old  hulks  of 
vessels  were  sunk  in  the  main  ship 
channel  leading  up  to  Charleston  be- 
tween Morris  and  Sullivan's  islands 
— as  others  were,  a  few  days  after- 
ward, in  the  passage  known  as  Maf- 
.fit's  channel — with  intent  to  impede 
the  midnight  flitting  of  blockade- 
runners.  These  obstructions  were 
denounced  in  Europe  as  barbarous, 
but  proved  simply  inefficient. 

Meantime,  the  slaveholders  of  all 
the  remaining*  Sea  Islands  stripped 
them  of  slaves  and  domestic  animals, 
burned  their  cotton,  and  other  crops 
which  they  were  unable  to  remove, 
and  fled  to  Charleston  and  the  inte- 
rior.   Not  a  slaveholder  on  all  that 

boat  for  Savannah,  and  where  any  one  of  our  idle 
armed  vessels  might  easily  have  intercepted  and 
captured  them  all.  All  their  works  on  Hilton 
Head  and  the  adjacent  islands,  with  about  40 
guns,  most  of  them  new  and  large,  were  utterly 
abandoned;  and,  when  our  forces  took  posses- 
sion, soon  after,  of  Beaufort,  they  found  but  on© 
white  person  remaining,  and  he  drunk. 


606  THE  AMERICA 

coast  remained  himself,  or  left  his 
family  to  live  once  more,  under  the 
flag  of  the  Union.  Gen.  Sherman  is- 
sued a  pleading,  beseeching  proclama- 
tion to  induce  them  to  do  so ;  bnt 
none  who  could  read  would  receive  a 
copy  of  it,  and  it  fell  a  dead  letter. 
Soon,  the  negroes  who  remained  on 
the  islands  under  our  control  were 
set  to  work  at  preparing  the  cotton 
for  market ;  and,  though  assured  by 
the  master  caste  that,  if  they  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  Yankees,  they  would 
certainly  be  sent  to  Cuba  and  sold, 
they  could  not  be  made  to  believe 
that  any  worse  fortune  than  they  had 
hitherto  experienced  was  in  store  for 
them  ;  and  their  number  was  steadily 
augmented  by  emigrants  from  the 
mainland ;  especially  after  schools 
began  to  be  established  among  them. 

The  steamship  Theodora  ran  out 
of  Charleston  harbor  during  the  night 
of  Oct.  12th,  conveying  James  M. 
Mason,  of  Ya.,  Confederate  Envoy  to 
Great  Britain,  and  John  Slidell,  of 
La.,  likewise  accredited  to  France. 
The  Theodora  duly  reached  Cardenas, 
Cuba ;  whence  her  official  passengers 
repaired  to  Havana,  and,  on  the  7th 
of  November,  left  that  port,  in  the 
British  mail  steamer  Trent,  for  St. 
Thomas,  on  their  way  to  England. 
The  U.  S.  steamship  San  Jacinto, 
Capt.  Wilkes,  had  left  Havana  on  the 
2d,  and  was  watching  for  them  in  the 
Bahama  Channel,  240  miles  from 
Havana,  when,  at  11:40  A.  m.,  of  the 
8th,  he  sighted  the  Trent ;  and,  after 
a  civil  request  to  heave  to  had  been 
declined  by  her,  a  shell  was  fired 
across  her  bow,  which  brought  her  to 
reason.  Lieut.  Fairfax,  with  a  boat's 
crew,  immediately  boarded  her  in 


X  CONFLICT. 

quest  of  the  Embassadors;  .when 
Messrs.  Mason  and  Slidell,  with  their 
Secretaries,  Eustis  and  McFarland, 
were  compelled  to  change  their  ves- 
sel and  their  destination.  Their 
families  were  left  undisturbed,  and 
no  effort  made  to  obtain  their  papers. 
But  the  Embassadors  and  their  Secre- 
taries were  brought  to  the  United 
States,  and  confined,  by  order  of  the 
Government,  in  Fort  Warren,  near 
Boston. 

Secretary  Welles,  in  his  Annual 
Report  of  naval  proceedings  for  the 
year  ending  Dec.  2d,  1861,  thus  fully 
and  frankly  adopted  and  justified  the 
capture: 

"  The  prompt  and  decisive  action  of  Capt. 
"Wilkes  on  this  occasion  merited  and  received 
the  emphatic  approval  of  the  Department ; 
and,  if  a  too  generous  forbearance  was  ex- 
hibited by  him  in  not  capturing  the  vessels 
which  had  these  Rebel  enemies  on  board, 
it  may,  in  view  of  the  special  circumstances, 
and  of  its  patriotic  motives,  be  excused  ;  but 
it  must  by  no  means  be  permitted  to  consti- 
tute a  precedent  hereafter  for  the  treatment 
of  any  case  of  similar  infraction  of  neutral 
obligations  by  foreign  vessels  engaged  in 
commerce  or  the  carrying-trade." 

By  a  decided  majority  of  the  pub- 
licists of  the  United  States,  as  well 
as  by  the  great  mass  of  our  people, 
this  seizure  was  deemed  abundantly 
justified  by  the  doctrines  and  prac- 
tices of  Great  Britain,  but  especially 
by  her  long  continued  and  never  dis- 
avowed habit  of  impressing  seamen 
from  our  merchant  vessels,  on  the  as- 
sumption that  they  were  natives  of 
Great  Britain,  and  therefore  liable  at 
all  times  and  indefeasibly  to  be  re- 
manded into  her  service,  wherever 
found.  In  the  able  and  carefully 
prepared  manifesto 7  whereby  George 
IV.,  then  Prince  Regent,  explained 
and  justified  the  conduct  of  his  Gov- 
ernment touching  the  matters  in  con- 


7  Dated  Westminster  Jan.  9th,  1813. 


THE    TRENT  CASE 


—  BRITISH  DOCTRINE. 


607 


troversy  between  it  and  our  own,  this 
doctrine  is  set  forth  as  follows  : 

"  The  Order  in  Council  of  the  23d  of  June 
being  officially  communicated  in  America, 
the  Government  of  the  United  States  saw 
nothing  in  the  repeal  of  the  Orders  which 
should,  of  itself,  restore  peace,  unless  Great 
Britain  were  prepared,  in  the  first  instance, 
substantially  to  relinquish  the  right  of  im- 
pressing her  own  seamen,  when  found  on 
board  American  merchant  ships.  *  *  * 

"  If  America,  by  demanding  this  prelimi- 
nary concession,  intends  to  deny  the  validity 
of  that  right,  in  that  denial  Great  Britain 
cannot  acquiesce  ;  nor  will  she  give  counte- 
nance to  such  a  pretension,  by  acceding  to 
its  suspension,  much  less  to  its  abandon- 
ment, as  a  basis  on  which  to  treat.  *  *  * 
The  British  Government  has  never  asserted 
any  exclusive  right,  as  to  the  impressment 
of  British  seamen  from  American  vessels, 
which  it  was  not  prepared  to  acknowledge 
as  pertaining  equally  to  the  Government  of 
the  United  States,  with  respect  to  American 
seamen  when  found  on  board  British  mer- 
chant ships.    *    *  * 

"His  Royal  Highness  can  never  admit 
that,  ki  the  exercise  of  the  undoubted,  and, 
hitherto,  undisputed,  right  of  searching  neu- 
tral vessels,  in  time  of  war,  the  impressment 
of  British  seamen,  when  found  therein,  can 
be  deemed  any  violation  of  a  neutral  flag. 
Neither  can  he  admit  that  the  taking  such 
seamen  from  on  board  such  vessels  can  be 
considered,  by  any  neutral  State,  as  a  hostile 
measure,  or  a  justifiable  cause  of  war. 

"  There  is  no  right  more  clearly  established 
than  the  right  which  a  sovereign  has  to  the 
allegiance  of  his  subjects,  more  especially  in 
time  of  war.  Their  allegiance  is  no  optional 
duty,  which  they  can  decline  at  pleasure. 
It  is  a  call  which  they  are  bound  to  obey. 
It  began  with  their  birth,  and  can  only  ter- 
minate with  their  existence." 

In  the  Queen's  Proclamation  of 
Neutrality  between  the  United  States 
and  the  Confederates,  dated  May  13th, 
1861,  there  occurs  this  express  and 
proper  inhibition : 

"  And  we  do  hereby  further  warn  all  our 
loving  subjects,  and  all  persons  whatsoever 
entitled  to  our  protection,  that,  if  any  of 
them  shall  presume,  in  contempt  of  this 
Royal  Proclamation,  and  of  our  high  dis- 
pleasure, to  do  any  acts  in  derogation  of 
their  duty  as  subjects  of  a  neutral  sovereign, 
in  the  said  contest,  or  in  violation  or  con- 
travention of  the  law  of  nations  in  that  be- 
half— as,  for  example  and  more  especially, 
by  entering  into  the  military  service  of  either 


of  the  said  contending  parties  as  commis- 
sioned or  non-commissioned  officers  or  sol- 
diers; or  by  serving  as  officers,  sailors,  or 
marines,  on  board  any  ship,  or  vessel  of  war, 
or  transport  of  or  in  the  service  of  either  of 
the  said  contending  parties;  or  by  serving 
as  officers,  sailors,  or  marines,  on  board  any 
privateer  bearing  letters  of  marque  of  or 
from  either  of  the  said  contending  parties ; 
or  by  engaging  to  go,  or  going,  to  any  place 
beyond  the  seas  with  intent  to  enlist  or  en- 
gage in  any  such  service ;  or  by  procuring, 
or  attempting  to  procure,  within  Her  Ma- 
jesty's dominions,  at  home  or  abroad,  others 
to  do  so ;  or  by  fitting  out,  arming,  or  equip- 
ping, any  ship  or  vessel,  to  be  employed  as 
a  ship  of  war,  or  privateer,  or  transport,  by 
either  of  the  said  contending  parties ;  or  by 
breaking,  or  endeavoring  to  break,  any 
blockade  lawfully  and  actually  established 
by  or  on  behalf  of  either  of  the  said  con- 
tending parties;  or  by  carrying  officers,  sol- 
diers, dispatches,  arms,  military  stores  or 
materials,  or  any  article  or  articles  consid- 
ered and  deemed  to  be  contraband  of  war, 
according  to  the  law  or  modern  usage  of 
nations,  for  the  use  or  service  of  either  of 
the  said  contending  parties,  all  persons  so 
offending  will  incur  and  be  liable  to  the 
several  penalties  and  penal  consequences  by 
the  said  statute,  or  by  the  law  of  nations,  in 
that  behalf  imposed  or  denounced. 

"And  we  do  hereby  declare  that  all  our 
subjects  and  persons  entitled  to  our  protec- 
tion, who  may  misconduct  themselves  in  the 
premises,  will  do  so  at  their  peril  and  of 
their  own  wrong,  and  that  they  will  in  no- 
wise obtain  any  protection  from  us  against 
any  liability  or  penal  consequences ;  but  will, 
on  the  contrary,  incur  our  high  displeasure 
by  such  misconduct." 

Now,  there  was  no  shadow  of  doubt 
that  the  Trent  was  consciously,  will- 
ingly, employed  in  carrying  very  im- 
portant officers  and  dispatches  for  the 
Confederates;  rendering  them  the 
greatest  possible  service,  and  one 
which  could  not  safely  be  effected  in 
vessels  bearing  their  own  flag.  It 
was  not  at  all  the  case  of  dispatches 
carried  unconsciously,  innocently,  in 
the  public  mails  of  mail  steamers; 
but  just  such  an  interference  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  one  and  the  advan- 
tage of  the  other  belligerent  as  Brit- 
ish Courts  of  Admiralty  had  been 
accustomed  to*  condemn;  forfeiting 


608  THE  AMERICA 

the  vessel  and  cargo  of  the  offender. 
Great  Britain,  however,  would  not  see 
it  in  this  light.  Com.  Wilkes's  act 
was  an  outrage — an  insult — which 
must  be  promptly  atoned  for  at  the 
peril  of  war.  Such  was  the  purport  of 
the  language  held  by  a  large  majority 
of  her  publicists  and  journals ;  and 
a  peremptory  demand  was  promptly 
made,  through  her  Embassador,  Lord 
Lyons,  for  the  unconditional  surren- 
der of  Messrs.  Mason  and  Slidell  and 
their  secretaries.  France  seconded 
and  supported  the  requirement  of 
Great  Britain,  in  a  considerate  and 
courteous  dispatch,-  wherein  she  justly 
claimed  to  have  hitherto  uniformly 
accorded  with  the  United  States  in 
a  liberal  interpretation  and  generous 
assertion  of  the  rights  of  neutrals  in 
war.  This  demand  of  Great  Bri- 
tain— to  the  great  disappointment 
and  chagrin  of  the  Confederates,  who 
confidently  expected  that  war  between 


$  CONFLICT. 

the  United  States  and  England  must 
speedily  and  certainly  ensue — was 
complied  with  by  our  Government — 
Gov.  Seward,  in  an  able  dispatch, 
basing  that  compliance  more  imme- 
diately on  the  failure  of  Capt.  Wilkes 
to  bring  the  Trent  into  port  for  ad- 
judication on  the  legality  of  his  act, 
whereby  her  voyage  had  been  tem- 
porarily arrested  and  two  of  her 
passengers  forcibly  abstracted. 

And  thus,  at  the  close  of  the  year 
1861,  the  imminent  peril  of  war  with 
that  European  Power  most  able  to 
injure  us,  because  of  her  immense 
naval  strength,  as  well  as  of  the  prox- 
imity of  her  American  possessions, 
was  wisely  averted;  though  it  was 
bitterly  felt  that  her  demand  would 
at  least  have  been  more  courteously 
and  considerately  made  but  for  the 
gigantic  war  in  which  we  were  al- 
ready inextricably  involved  by  the 
Slaveholders'  Rebellion. 


XXXVII. 
KENTUCKY. 


We  have  seen 1  that  Kentucky  em- 
phatically, persistently,  repeatedly,  by 
overwhelming  popular  majorities,  re- 
fused— alike  before  and  after  the  for- 
mal inauguration  of  war  by  the  Con- 
federate attack  on  Fort  Sumter — to 
ally  herself  with  the  Rebellion,  or  to 
stand  committed  to  any  scheme  look- 
ing to  Disunion  in  whatever  contin- 
gency. Her  Democratic  Governor 
and  Legislature  of  1860-61,  with 
most  of  her  leading  Democratic,  and 
many  of  her  Whig,  politicians,  were, 
indeed,  more  or  less  cognizant  of  the 


Disunion  conspiracy,  and  were  more 
or  less  intimate  and  confidential  with 
its  master-spirits.  But  they  looked 
to  very  different  ends.  The  South- 
rons proper,  of  the  school  of  Calhoun, 
Rhett,  Yancey,  and  Ruffin,  regard- 
ing Disunion  as  a  chief  good  under 
any  and  all  circumstances,  made  its 
achievement  the  great  object  of  their 
life-long  endeavor,  and  regarded  Sla- 
very in  the  territories,  fugitive  slaves 
and  their  recovery,  compromises,  John 
Brown  raids,  etc.,  only  as  conducive  to 
or  impeding  its  consummation ;  while 


1  P.  492-7. 


KENTUCKY    FOR  THE 

the  ( State-Eights'  apostles  of  the  Bor- 
der-State school  contemplated  Seces- 
sion, and  everything  pertaining  there- 
to, primarily,  as  means  of  perfecting 
and  perpetuating  the  slaveholding 
ascendency  in  the  Union  as  it  was. 
Hence,  we  have  seen  Gov.  Magoffin2 
protest  against  the  secession  of  South 
Carolina  and  the  Cotton  States,  not 
as  a  treasonable  repudiation  of  their 
constitutional  duties,  but  as  a  chi- 
merical futility,  and  as  a  betrayal  of 
the  slaveholding  Border  States  into 
the  power  of  the '  Black  Republicans.' 

Kentucky,  as  we  have  shown,3  nine 
weeks  after  the  reduction  of  Fort 
Sumter,  gave  an  aggregate  of  92,365 
votes  for  Union  to  36,995  for  Seces- 
sion candidates,  in  choosing,  at  a  spe- 
cial election,  her  representatives  in 
the  XXXVIIth  Congress,  while,  as 
yet,  no  Federal  soldier  stood  armed 
on  her  soil,  and  while  her  Legislature, 
Governor,  and  most  of  his  associate 
State  officers,  were  the  Democratic 
compatriots  of  Breckinridge,  Burnett, 
and  Buckner.  Only  a  single  district 
elected  a  Secessionist,  by  four-sev- 
enths of  its  total  vote ;  and  he  its  old 
member,  who  had  hitherto  received 
far  larger  majorities,  running  as  a 

2  See  pp.  340-41.  3  P.  496. 

4  Pollard,  in  his  "  Southern  History,"  fully  ad- 
mits, while  he  denounces  and  deplores,  the  hos- 
tility of  Kentucky  to  the  Rebel  cause — saying : 

"  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  for  a  moment  that, 
while  the  position  of  Kentucky,  like  that  of  Ma- 
ryland, was  one  of  reproach,  it  is  to  mar  the 
credit  due  to  that  portion  of  the  people  of  each, 
who,  in  the  face  of  instant  difficulties,  and  at  the 
expense  of  extraordinary  sacrifices,  repudiated 
the  decision  of  their  States  to  remain  under  the 
Federal  Government,  and  expatriated  them- 
selves that  they  might  espouse  the  cause  of  lib- 
erty in  the  South.  The  honor  due  such  men 
is,  in  fact,  increased  by  the  consideration  that 
their  States  remained  in  the  Union,  and  com- 
pelled them  to  fly  their  homes,  that  they  might 
certify  their  devotion  to  the  South  and  her  cause 
of  independence.  Still,  the  justice  of.  history 
must  be  maintained.  The  demonstrations  of 
sympathy  with  the  South  on  the  part  of  the 

39 


UNION  — HENRY    CLAY.  609 

Democrat,  in  a  district  where  the 
Democratic  party  had,  since  1826, 
uniformly  commanded  overwhelm- 
ing majorities.  That  district,  at  the 
western  extremity  of  the  State,  hem- 
med in  between  West  Tennessee, 
Southern  Missouri,  and  that  portion 
of  Illinois  widely  known  as  i  Egypt,' 
and  traversed  by  the  great  Southern 
rivers  Tennessee  and  Cumberland, 
had,  in  fact,  for  more  than  a  quarter 
of  a  century,  been  alien  from  Ken- 
tucky in  character  and  sympathies, 
as  it  proved  itself  in  this  case.  The 
residue  of  the  State  elected  only 
Unionists  to  Congress,  by  a  popular 
majority  of  almost  three  to  one. 

This  majority  was  very  nearly 
maintained  at  her  regular  State  elec- 
tion (August  5th),  when — Magoffin 
being  still  Governor,  Buckner  com- 
mander of  the  State  Guard,  and  the 
local  offices  mainly  held  by  6  State- 
Rights'  Democrats,  with  the  recent 
Union  rout  and  disaster  at  Bull  Bun 
tending  still  further  to  unmask  and 
develop  all  the  latent  treason  in  the 
State — a  new  Legislature  was  cho- 
sen, wherein  Unionism  of  a  very  de- 
cided type  predominated  in  the  pro- 
portion of  nearly  three  to  one.* 

States  referred  to — Maryland  and  Kentucky — 
considered  either  in  proportion  to  what  was 
offered  the  Lincoln  Government  by  these  States, 
or  with  respect  to  the  numbers  of  their  popula- 
tion, were  sparing  and  exceptional;  and  although 
these  demonstrations  on  the  part  of  Kentucky, 
from  the  great  and  brilliant  names  associated 
with  them,  were  perhaps  even  more  honorable 
and  more  useful  than  the  examples  of  South- 
ern spirit  offered  by  Maryland,  it  is  unques- 
tionably though  painfully  true,  that  the  great 
body  of  the  people  of  Kentucky  were  the  active 
allies  of  Lincoln,  and  the  unnatural  enemies  of 
those  united  to  them  by  lineage,  blood,  and  com- 
mon institutions." 

Those  who  love  and  honor  the  name  of  Henry 
Clay  will  thank  the  author  of  the  "  Southern 
History"  for  the  following  undesigned  but  richly 
merited  homage  to  the  character  and  influence 
of  that  great  man : 

"  It  is  certainly  defective  logic,  or,  at  best,  an 


610 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


A  determined  Union  Legislature 
having  thus  been  elected  but  not  yet 
assembled,  Gov.  Magoffin,  feeling  that 
his  time  was  short,  and  that  any  fur- 
ther mischief  to  the  Union  cause  at 
his  hands  must  be  done  quickly,'ad- 
dressed  to  the  President  of  the  Uni- 
ted States,  by  the  hands  of  two 
'  Commissioners,'  the  following  cool 
epistle : 

u  Commonwealth  of  Kentucky, 
"Executive  Department,  Frankfort, 
"August  19,  1861. 
"To  His  Excellency,  Abraham  Lincoln, 

"President  of  the  United  States: 
"Sir:  From  the  commencement  of  the 
unhappy  hostilities  now  pending  in  this 
country,  the  people  of  Kentucky  have  indi- 
cated an  earnest  desire  and  purpose,  as  far 
as  lay  in  their  power,  while  maintaining 
their  original  political  status,  to  do  nothing 
by  which  to  involve  themselves  in  the  war. 
Up  to  this  time,  they  have  succeeded  in  se- 
curing to  themselves  and  to  the  State,  peace 
and  tranquillity  as  the  fruits  of  the  policy 
they  adopted.  My  single  object  now  is  to 
promote  the  continuance  of  these  blessings 
to  the  people  of  this  State. 

"  Until  within  a  brief  period,  the  people 
of  Kentucky  were  quiet  and  tranquil,  free 
from  domestic  strife,  and  undisturbed  by  in- 
ternal commotion.  They  have  resisted  no 
law,  rebelled  against  no  authority,  engaged 
in  no  revolution ;  but  constantly  proclaimed 
their  firm  determination  to  pursue  their 
peaceful  avocations,  earnestly  hoping  that 
their  own  soil  would  be  spared  the  presence 
of  armed  troops,  and  that  the  scene  of  con- 
flict would  be  kept  removed  beyond  the  bor- 
der of  their  State.  By  thus  avoiding  all 
occasions  for  the  introduction  of  bodies  of 
armed  soldiers,  and  offering  no  provocation 
for  the  presence  of  military  force,  the  people 
of  Kentucky  have  sincerely  striven  to  pre- 
serve in  their  State  domestic  peace,  and 
avert  the  calamities  of  sanguinary  engage- 
ments. 

"  Recently,  a  large  body  of  soldiers  have 
been  enlisted  in  the  United  States  Army,  and 
collected  in  military  camps  in  the  central 


inadequate  explanation,  which  attributes  the  sub- 
serviency of  a  large  portion  of  the  people  of  Ken- 
tucky to  the  views  of  the  Lincoln  Government 
to  the  perfidy  of  a  party  or  the  adroitness  of  its 
management.  However  powerful  may  be  the 
machinery  of  party,  it  certainly  has  not  the  power 
of  belying  public  sentiment  for  any  considerable 
length  of  time.    The  persistent  adhesion  of  a 


portion  of  Kentucky.  This  movement  was 
preceded  by  the  active  organization  of  com- 
panies, regiments,  etc.,  consisting  of  men 
sworn  into  the  United  States  service,  under 
officers  holding  commissions  from  yourself. 
Ordnance,  arms,  munitions,  and  supplies  of 
war,  are  being  transported  into  the  State,  and 
placed  in  large  quantities  in  these  camps.  In 
a  word,  an  army  is  now  being  organized  and 
quartered  within  the  State,  supplied  with  all 
the  appliances  of  war,  without  the  consent 
or  advice  of  the  authorities  of  the  State,  and 
without  consultation  with  those  most  promi- 
nently known  and  recognized  as  loyal  citi- 
zens. This  movement  now  imperils  that 
peace  and  tranquillity  which,  from  the  be- 
ginning of  our  present  difficulties,  have  been 
the  paramount  desire  of  this  people,  and 
which,  up  to  this  time,  they  have  secured  to 
the  State. 

"Within  Kentucky,  there  has  been,  and 
is  likely  to  be,  no  occasion  for  the  presence 
of  military  force.  The  people  are  quiet  and 
tranquil,  feeling  no  apprehension  of  any  oc- 
casion arising  to  invoke  protection  from  the 
Federal  arm.  They  have  asked  that  their 
territory  be  left  free  from  military  occupa- 
tion, and  the  present  tranquillity  of  their 
communications  left  uninvaded  by  soldiers. 
They  do  not  desire  that  Kentucky  shall  be 
required  to  supply  the  battle-field  for  the 
contending  armies,  or  become  the  theater  of 
the  war. 

"Now,  therefore,  as  Governor  of  the 
State  of  Kentucky,  and  in  the  name  of 
the  people  I  have  the  honor  to  represent, 
and  with  the  single  and  earnest  desire  to 
avert  from  their  peaceful  homes  the  horrors 
of  war,  I  urge  the  removal  from  the  limits 
of  Kentucky  of  the  military  force  now  or- 
ganized and  in  camp  within  the  State.  If 
such  action  as  is  hereby  urged  be  promptly 
taken,  I  firmly  believe  the  peace  of  the  peo- 
ple of  Kentucky  will  be  preserved,  and  the 
horrors  of  a  bloody  war  will  be  averted  from 
a  people  now  peaceful  and  tranquil. 

"B.  Magoffin." 

The  President,  declining  to  receive 
Magoffin's  Commissioners  otherwise 
than  as  private  citizens,  returned  this 
terse  and  pungent  reply  to  their  mas- 
ter's request : 

large  portion  of  the  Kentucky  people  to  the 
Xorthern  cause  must  be  attributed  to  permanent 
causes ;  and  among  these  were,  first,  an  essential 
unsoundness  on  the  Slavery  question,  under  the 
influences  of  the  peculiar  philosophy  of  Henry 
Clay,  who,  like  every  great  man,  left  an  impress 
upon  his  State,  which  it  remained  for  future  even 
more  than  contemporary  generations  to  attest." 


LINCOLN  —  MAGOFFIN  —  KENTUCKY. 


611 


"Washington,  D.  C.,  Aug.  24,  1861. 
"To  his  Excellency,  B.  Magoffin, 

"  Governor  of  the  State  of  Kentucky  : 
"Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  19th  inst.,  in 
which  you  '  urge  the  removal  from  the  lim- 
its of  Kentucky  of  the  military  force  now 
organized  and  in  camp  within  that  State,'  is 
received. 

"I  may  not  possess  full  and  precisely  ac- 
curate knowledge  upon  this  subject ;  but  I 
believe  it  is  true  that  there  is  a  military 
force  in  camp  within  Kentucky,  acting  by 
authority  of  the  United  States ;  which  force 
is  not  very  large,  and  is  not  now  being  aug- 
mented. 

"  I  also  believe  that  some  arms  have  been 
furnished  to  this  force  by  the  United  States. 

"  I  also  believe  that  this  force  consists  ex- 
clusively of  Kentuckians,  having  their  camp 
in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  their  own  homes, 
and  not  assailing  or  menacing  any  of  the 
good  people  of  Kentucky. 

"In  all  I  have  done  in  the  premises,  I 
have  acted  upon  the  urgent  solicitation  of 
many  Kentuckians,  and  in  accordance  with 
what  I  believed,  and  still  believe,  to  be  the 
wish  of  a  majority  of  all  the  Union-loving 
people  of  Kentucky. 

"  While  I  have  conversed  on  the  subject 
with  many  eminent  men  of  Kentucky,  in- 
cluding a  large  majority  of  her  members  of 
Congress,  I  do  not  remember  that  any  one 
of  them,  or  any  other  person,  except  your 
Excellency  and  the  bearers  of  your  Excel- 
lency's letter,  has  urged  me  to  remove  the 
military  force  from  Kentucky  or  to  disband 
it.  One  other  very  worthy  citizen  of  Ken- 
tucky did  solicit  me  to  have  the  augmenting 
of  the  force  suspended  for  a  time. 

"  Taking  all  the  means  within  my  reach 
to  form  a  judgment,  I  do  not  believe  it  is  the 
popular  wish  of  Kentucky  that  the  force 
shall  be  removed  beyond  her  limits;  and, 
with  this  impression,  I  must  respectfully  de- 
cline to  remove  it.  ^ 

"I  most  cordially  sympathize  with  your 
Excellency  in  the  wish  to  preserve  the  peace 
of  my  own  native  State,  Kentucky ;  but  it  is 
with  regret  I  search  for  and  cannot  find,  in 
your  not  very  short  letter,  any  declaration  or 
intimation  that  you  entertain  any  desire  for 
the  preservation  of  the  Federal  Union. 

"Abbaham  Lincoln." 

The  Legislature  convened  Septem- 
ber 3d,  but  was  not  fully  organized 
till  the  5th,  when  Magoffin  submit- 
ted a  Message  based  on  the  assump- 
tion of  Kentucky's  proper  and  per- 
fect neutrality  between  the  belliger- 
ents North  and  South  of  her ;  com- 


plaining that  she  had  suffered  in  her 
commerce  and  property  from  the  act3 
of  either;  but  more  especially  that  a 
Federal  force  had  recently  been  or- 
ganized and  encamped  in  the  heart 
of  that  State  without  the  permission 
of  her  lawful  authorities  —  (Beriah 
Magoffin,  to  wit ;)  whereupon  he  pro- 
posed to  so  amend  an  act  of  the  late 
Legislature  as  to  enable  the  Military 
Board  to  borrow  money  for  the  pur- 
chase of  arms  and  munitions  for  the 
defense  of  the  State,  etc.,  etc.  He 
desired  the  Legislature  authorita- 
tively to  request  all  Military  organi- 
zations within  the  State,  not  under 
her  authority,  to  be  disbanded  forth- 
with ;  and  complained  of  the  intro- 
duction of  arms  by  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment and  their  distribution  among 
private  citizens,  which — considering 
that  the  incipient  Rebels  obtained  a 
large  proportion  thereof,  and  in  due 
time  carried  them  off  to  the  camps  of 
the  Secession  forces — was  unreasona- 
ble. On  the  main  question  at  issue, 
he  said  : 

"Kentucky  has  meant  to  await  the  ex- 
hausting of  all  civil  remedies  before  she  will 
reconsider  the  question  of  assuming  new  ex- 
ternal relations;  but  I  have  never  under- 
stood that  they  will  tamely  submit  uncon- 
ditionally to  the  aggressions  of  the  North ; 
that  they  renounce  their  sympathy  with  the 
people  of  her  aggrieved  sister  States ;  nor 
that  they  will  approve  of  a  war  to  subjugate 
the  South.  Still  can  I  not  construe  any  of 
their  votes  as  meaning  that  they  will  prose- 
cute a  coercive  war  against  their  Southern 
brethren.  They  meant  only  that  they  have 
still  some  hope  of  the  restoration  and  per- 
petuation of  the  Union ;  and,  until  that  hope 
is  blasted,  they  will  not  alter  their  existing 
relations.  Their  final  decision  will  be  law 
to  me;  and  I^will  execute  every  constitu- 
tional act  of  their  representatives  as  vigi- 
lantly and  faithfully  as  though  it  originated 

with  myself." 

•  ,  .       *  *' 

These  few  words  elicited  no  sympa- 
thetic response  from  the  Legislature, 
fresh  from  the  people,  and  imbued  with 


612 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT 


their  sentiments.  On  the  contrary, 
the  House,  six  days  thereafter,  re- 
solved— 71  to  26 — that  the  Governor 
be  directed  to  order  by  proclamation 
the  Confederate  troops  encamped  on 
the  soil  of  that  State  to  <&camp  im- 
mediately. An  attempt  so  to  amend 
the  resolution  as  to  require  all  Union 
as  well  as  Disunion  forces  to  quit  the 
State,  was  decidedly  voted  down ;  and 
the  two  Houses  united  in  passing,  by 
overwhelming  votes,  the  following  : 

"  Resolved,  That  Kentucky's  peace  and 
neutrality  have  been  wantonly  violated,  her 
soil  has  been  invaded,  and  the  rights  of  her 
citizens  have  been  grossly  infringed,  by  the 
so-called  Southern  Confederate  forces.  This 
has  been  done  without  cause:  therefore, 

"  Be  it  enacted  by  the  General  Assembly 
of  the  Commonwealth  of  Kentucky,  That  the 
Governor  be  requested  to  call  out  the  mili- 
tary force  of  the  State  to  expel  and  drive  out 
the  invaders. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  United  States  be  in- 
voked to  give  that  aid  and  assistance,  that 
protection  against  invasion,  which  is  guar- 
anteed to  each  one  of  the  States  by  the  4th 
section  of  the  4th  article  of  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States. 

"Resolved,  That  Gen.  Robert  Anderson 
be,  and  he  is  hereby,  requested  to  enter  im- 
mediately upon  the  active  discharge  of  his 
duties  in  this  military  district. 

"  Resolved,  That  we  appeal  to  the  people 
of  Kentucky,  by  the  ties  of  patriotism  and 
honor,  by  the  ties  of  common  interest  and 
common  defense,  by  the  remembrances  of 
the  past,  and  by  the  hopes  of  future  National 
existence,  to  assist  in  expelling  and  driving 
out  the  wanton  invaders  of  our  peace  and 
neutrality,  the  lawless  invaders  of  our  soil." 

These  resolves  were  adopted — in 


the  House  by  68  to  26,  and  in  the 
Senate  by  26  to  8. 

Magoffin  promptly  vetoed  them. 
The  Legislature  as  promptly  passed 
them  over  his  veto  by  overwhelming 
majorities.  Gen.  Grant,  commanding 
at  Cairo,  had  already  telegraphed  to 
the  Legislature,  Sept.  5th,  that  West- 
ern Kentucky  had  been  invaded 
by  a  large  Rebel  force,  who  were  then 
holding  and  fortifying  strong  posi- 
tions on  the  east  bank  of  the  Missis- 
sippi at  Hickman  and  Chalk  Bluffs. 
The  Legislature  referred  this  dispatch 
to  a  Special  Committee,  which  tele- 
graphed thereupon  to  Gov.  Harris,  of 
Tennessee,  who  thus  responded  : 

"  The  Confederate  troops  that  landed  at 
Hickman  last  night  did  so  without  my 
knowledge  or  consent ;  and,  I  am  confident, 
also  without  the  consent  of  the  President. 
I  have  telegraphed  President  Davis,  request- 
ing their  immediate  withdrawal."  5 

Gen.  Grant  did  not  see  fit  to  de- 
pend on  the  fair  promises  of  Gov. 
Harris,  nor  the  amenity  of  Gen. 
Bishop  Leonidas  Polk,  nor  yet  of 
President  Davis,  for  the  safety  of  his 
department,  but  occupied,  next  morn- 
ing, Paducah,  on  the  south  bank  of 
the  Ohio,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Ten- 
nessee, with  two  regiments  and  a  bat- 
tery, finding  Rebel  flags  flying  over 
many  of  the  buildings  in  that  little 
city,  in  anticipation  of  the  speedy  ap- 
pearance of  a  Confederate  force,  re- 


*  Gov  Magoffin  communicated  to  the  Legisla- 
ture, Sept.  9th,  a  message  to  him  from  the  four 
Commissioners  of  the  Governor  of  Tennessee,  in 
explanation  of  the  reason  why  the  Confederates 
had  not  been  withdrawn  from  Kentucky,  from 
which  the  following  is  an  extract : 

"The  undersigned  yesterday  received  a  verbal 
message,  through  a  messenger,  from  Gov.  Harris. 
The  message  was,  that  Gov.  Harris  had,  by  tele- 
graphic dispatch,  requested  Gen.  Polk  to  with- 
draw the  Confederate  troops  from  Kentucky,  and 
that  Gen.  Polk  had  declined  to  do  so ;  that  Gov. 
Harris  then  telegraphed  to  Secretary  Walker,  at 


Richmond,  requesting  that  Gen.  Polk  be  ordered 
to  withdraw  his  troops  from  Kentucky ;  and  that 
such  order  was  issued  from  the  War  Department 
of  the  Confederacy;  that  Gen.  Polk  replied  to 
the  War  Department  that  the  retention  of  the 
post  was  a  military  necessity,  and  that  the  re- 
tiring from  it  would  be  attended  by  the  loss  of 
many  lives.  This  embraces  the  message  re- 
ceived. 

"  The  messenger,  it  is  true,  in  conversation, 
said  that  he  had  heard  in  Nashville  that  Secre- 
tary Walker  had  sent  a  dispatch  to  Gen.  Buck- 
ner,  giving  Gen.  Polk  a  discretion  to  hold  to  or 
withraw  from  the  occupation  of  the  post  in  Ken- 
tucky." 


GRANT   AT   PADUCAU— ZOL 


LICOFFER   IN   KENTUCKY.  613 


ported  3,800  strong,  and  but  sixteen 
miles  distant.  He  found  there  large 
quantities  of  prepared  rations  and  of 
leather  for  the  expected  Kebel  army, 
and  put  them  to  a  better  use.  In  his 
proclamation,  thereupon  issued,  he 
said : 

"  I  have  come  among  you  not  as  an  enemy, 
but  as  your  fellow-citizen ;  not  to  maltreat 
or  annoy  you,  but  to  respect  and  enforce  the 
rights  of  all  loyal  citizens.  An  enemy,  in 
rebellion  against  our  common  Government, 
has  taken  possession  of  and  planted  his  guns 
on  the  soil  of  Kentucky,  and  fired  upon  you. 
Columbus  and  Hickman  are  in  his  hands. 
He  is  moving  upon  your  city.  I  am  here  to 
defend  you  against  this  enemy ;  to  assist  the 
authority  and  sovereignty  of  your  Govern- 
ment. I  have  nothing  to  do  with  opinions, 
and  shall  deal  only  with  armed  Eebellion 
and  its  aiders  and  abettors.  You  can  pur- 
sue your  usual  avocations  without  fear.  The 
strong  arm  of  the  Government  is  here,  to 
protect  its  friends  and  punish  its  enemies. 
"Whenever  it  is  manifest  that  you  are  able  to 
defend  yourselves,  maintain  the  authority  of 
the  Government,  and  protect  the  rights  of 
loyal  citizens,  I  shall  withdraw  the  forces 
under  my  command.       U.  S.  Geant, 

"Brig.  General  Commanding.1' 

Bishop  Polk  had  not  then  occupied 
Columbus,  as  Gen.  Grant  supposed; 
but  he  did  so  next  day,  with  a  force 
of  ten  regiments,  six  batteries,  and 
three  battalions  of  cavalry.  Of  course, 
the  promise  of  Gov.  Harris  that  he 
should  be  withdrawn  was  not  fulfilled, 
and  the  fact  that  Grant  had  now 

6Zollicoffer  telegraphed,  Sept.  14th,  to  Ma- 
goffin as  follows : 

"  The  safety  of  Tennessee  requiring,  I  occupy 
the  mountain  passes  at  Cumberland,  and  the 
three  long  mountains  in  Kentucky.  For  weeks, 
I  have  known  that  the  Federal  commander  at 
Hoskins's  Cross-Roads  was  threatening  the  in- 
vasion of  East  Tennessee,  and  ruthlessly  urging 
our  people  to  destroy  our  own  road  and  bridges. 
I  postponed  this  precautionary  movement  until 
the  despotic  Government  at  Washington,  refus- 
ing to  recognize  the  neutrality  of  Kentucky,  had 
established  formidable  camps  in  the  center  and 
other  parts  of  the  State,  with  the  view,  'first,  to 
subjugate  your  gallant  State,  and  then  ourselves. 
Tennessee  feels,  and  has  ever  felt,  toward  Ken- 
tucky as  a  twin-sister ;  their  people  are  as  one 
people  in  kindred,  sympathy,  valor,  and  patriot- 


crossed  the  Ohio  was  made  an  excuse 
for  this  invasion.  In  other  words: 
the  people  of  Kentucky,  through 
their  then  freshly  chosen  Legislature, 
having  decided  to  remain  in  and  be 
loyal  to  the  Union,  the  Confederates 
regarded  this  as  justifying  them  in 
seizing  any  portion  of  that  State  of 
which  they  should  deem  the  occu- 
pancy advantageous  to  their  cause; 
and,  in  fact,  Gen.  Zollicoffer,6  com- 
manding their  forces  in  East  Tennes- 
see, had  already  occupied  Cumber- 
land Gap,  and  advanced  through  that 
pass  into  Kentucky,  at  least  so  early 
as  the  5th ;  though  no  pretense  of 
Federal  invasion,  accomplished  or 
meditated,  was,  in  that  quarter,  justi- 
fied. But  East  Tennessee  was  earn- 
estly and  unchangeably  loyal  to  the 
Union — had  so  voted  by  more  than 
two  to  one  at  the  recent  State  Elec- 
tion ;  and  it  had  become  necessary 
to  surround  her  with  Confederate 
camps,  and  cut  her  off  from  all  com- 
munication with  the  loyal  States,  to 
prevent  a  general  uprising  of  her 
hardy  mountaineers  in  defense  of  the 
cause  they  loved. 

Gen.  Robert  Anderson  assumed 
command,  at  Louisville,  of  the  De- 
partment of  Kentucky,  Sept.  20th ; 
and  the  organization  of  Union  volun- 

ism.  We  have  felt,  and  still  feel,  a  religious 
respect  for  Kentucky's  neutrality.  We  will  re- 
spect it  as  long  as  our  safety  will  permit.  If  the 
Federal  force  will  now  withdraw  from  their 
menacing  position,  the  force  under  my  command 
shall  immediately  be  withdrawn." 

"  The  despotic  Government  at  Washington" 
could  hardly,  with  reason,  be  blamed  for  refusing 
to  recognize  the  neutrality  of  Kentucky,  when 
Kentucky  herself  did  that  very  thing  with  a  de- 
cision and  emphasis  quite  equal  to  those  evinced 
in  President  Lincoln's  reply  to  Magoffin.  Zolli- 
coffer's  "religious  respect,"  therefore,  was  paid 
to  something  exceedingly  convenient  to  his 
cause,  but  which,  if  it  ever  had  been,  no  longer 
existed. 


614  THE  AMERICA 

teers  was  thenceforth  actively  pro- 
moted. On  the  25th,  a  bill  calling 
out  40,000  volunteers  for  the  defense 
of  the  State  and  Union  passed  the 
House  by  a  vote  of  67  to  13 ;  the 
Senate  concurring  by  a  vote  of  21  to 
5.  On  that  day,  the  Senate,  by  16 
to  10,  passed  a  bill  providing  that 
any  and  every  Kentuckian  who  shall 
have  voluntarily  joined  the  Rebel 
force  invading  the  State,  shall  be  in- 
capable of  inheriting  any  property  in 
Kentucky,  unless  he  shall  return  to 
his  allegiance  within  sixty  days  ;  and, 
on  the  next  day,  the  House  Judiciary 
Committee,  having  reported  that,  in 
its  judgment,  Congress  had  not  tran- 
scended its  powers  in  imposing  taxes 
for  the  preservation  of  the  Union, 
was  discharged  from  further  consider- 
ation of  the  subject  by  a  vote  of  67 
to  13 ;  and  the  Senate  concurred 
without  a  division. 

On  the  16th,  Zollicoffer  advanced 
to  Barboursville,  Ky.,  capturing  the 
camp  of  a  regiment  of  Kentucky 
Unionists,  who  fled  at  his  approach. 

The  changed  attitude  and  deter- 
mined purpose  of  Kentucky  encour- 
aged the  Federal  Government  to 
take  some  decided  steps  in  defense 
of  its  own  existence.  Ex-Gov.  More- 
head,7  a  most  inveterate  traitor,  was 
arrested  at  his  residence  near  Louis- 
ville, and  taken  thence  to  Fort  La- 
fayette, in  New  York  harbor,  where- 
in he  was  long  confined,  and  whence 
he  should  not  have  been  released. 
Warned  by  this  blow,  ex- Vice-Presi- 
dent John  C.  Breckinridge,  Hon. 
"Wm.  Preston,  late  Minister  to  Spain, 

7  Charles  S.  Morehead,  formerly  a  Whig  rep- 
resentative in  Congress  from  the  Lexington  dis- 
trict, afterward  '  American'  Governor  of  the  State 
from  1855  to  1859,  was  originally  a  Unionist  of 
the  Henry  Clay  school;  but,  having  become 
largely  interested  in  slaves  and  cotton-growing 


X  CONFLICT. 

Thomas  B.  Monroe,  sr.,  U.  S.  Dis- 
trict Judge,  Thomas  B.  Monroe,  jr., 
Secretary  of  State,  Col.  Humphrey 
Marshall,  late  £ American'  member  of 
Congress,  Col.  George  "W.  Johnson, 
Capt.  John  Morgan,  and  several 
other  prominent  traitors,  escaped 
about  this  time  to  the  Rebel  camps 
in  Southern  Kentucky,  and  passed 
thence  into  Tennessee  or  Yirginia, 
where  they  openly  gave  in  their  ad- 
hesion to  the  Southern  Confederacy. 
Judge  Monroe  formally  renounced 
his  office  and  his  allegiance,  and  was 
adopted  a  citizen  of  the  Confederacy 
in  open  court  at  Nashville,  October 
3d.  Breckinridge  and  Humphrey 
Marshall  were  promptly  made  Con- 
federate Brigadier-Generals. 

Zollicoffer,  on  entering  Kentucky, 
issued  an  order  promising  that  no 
citizen  of  that  State  should  be  mo- 
lested in  person  or  property  unless 
found  in  arms  for  the  Union,  or 
somehow  giving  aid  and  comfort  to 
the  National  cause.  Of  course,  this 
did  not  save  active  Unionists  from 
seizure,  abuse,  and  confinement,  nor 
the  pigs,  fowls,  cattle,  etc.,  whether 
of  Unionists  or  Confederates,  from 
wholesale  confiscation  by  his  loosely 
organized  and  undisciplined  banditti, 
who  swept  over  *the  poor  and  thinly 
settled  mountainous  region  wherein 
the  Cumberland  and  Kentucky  riv- 
ers have  their  sources,  devouring  and 
destroying  all  before  them. 

Mr.  Breckinridge,  on  finding  him- 
self safely  within  the  Confederate 
lines,  issued  an  elaborate  and  bitter 
Address,  announcing  his  resignation 

in  Mississippi,  was  now  and  evermore  a  devotee 
of  the  Slave  Power — hence  a  Disunionist.  He 
bore  an  active  and  baleful  part  in  the  Peace  Con- 
ference of  February,  1861 ;  and  was  thenceforth, 
though  professing  moderation,  fully  in  the  coun- 
sels of  the  Secessionists. 


SHERMAN   IN    COM MAN 


D  — 


REBEL  STRATEGY. 


615 


of  his  seat  in  the  Senate,  and  the  disso- 
lution of  the  Union ;  demonstrating, 
after  his  fashion,  the  unconstitution- 
ality of  struggling  to  uphold  the  Con- 
stitution ;  the  atrocity  of  the  despo- 
tism which  had  ventured  to  arrest  a 
few  of  the  many  traitors  actively  at 
work  to  subvert  the  National  Gov- 
ernment ;  and  charging  the  Legisla- 
ture of  his  State  with  "  woeful  sub- 
serviency to  every  demand  of  Fede- 
ral despotism  and  woeful  neglect  of 
every  right  of  the  Kentucky  citizen," 
etc.,  etc.  Here  is  a  specimen  of  his 
rhetoric : 

"I  would  speak  of  these  things  with  the 
simple  solemnity  which  their  magnitude  de- 
mands ;  yet  it  is  difficult  to  restrain  the  ex- 
pression of  ajust  indignation  while  we  smart 
under  such  enormities.  Mr.  Lincoln  has 
thousands  of  soldiers  on  our  soil,  nearly  all 
from  the  North,  and  most  of  them  foreign- 
ers, whom  he  employs  as  his  instruments  to 
do  these  things.  But  few  Kentuckians  have 
enlisted  under  his  standard  ;  for  we  are  not 
yet  accustomed  to  his  peculiar  form  of  lib- 
erty. 

"I  will  not  pursue  the  disgraceful  subject. 
Has  Kentucky  passed  out  of  the  control  of 
her  own  people  ?  Shall  hirelings  of  the  pen, 
recently  imported  from  the  North,  sitting  in 
grand  security  at  the  Capital,  force  public 
opinion  to  approve  these  usurpations  and 
point  out  victims?  Shall  Mr.  Lincoln, 
through  his  German  mercenaries,  imprison 
or  exile  the  children  of  the  men  who  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  Commonwealth,  and 
compel  our  noble  people  to  exhaust  them- 
selves in  furnishing  the  money  to  destroy 
their  own  freedom?  Never,  while  Ken- 
tucky remains  the  Kentucky  of  old ! — never, 
while  thousands  of  her  gallant  sons  have  the 
will  and  the  nerve  to  make  the  State  sing  to 
the  music  of  their  rifles  |" 

It  is  clear  that  Mr.  Breckinridge, 
in  his  exodus  from  Kentucky,  had  per- 
petrated a  serious  blunder.  As  a  de- 
claimer  in  the  Senate,  in  chorus  with 
Yallandigham,  Voorhees,  and  May, 
he  was  worth  far  more  to  the  Con- 
federacy than  as  a  Brigadier  in  its 
military  service ;  and  even  the  elec- 
tion of  Garret  Davis  in  his  stead  did 


not  fully  compensate  the  Rebellion 
for  the  loss  of  its  boldest  and  most 
unscrupulous  champion  in  the  Fed- 
eral Congress. 

Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  early  in  Oc- 
tober, succeeded  Gen.  Anderson  in 
command  of  the  district  of  Kentucky. 
The  Rebels,  with  an  art  which  they 
had  already  brought  to  perfection, 
imposed  on  him,  with  success,  as  on 
Gen.  McClellan  and  other  of  our 
commanders,  a  most  exaggerated  no- 
tion of  the  amount  of  their  forces  ;  so 
that,  when  Kentucky  might  easily 
have  been  cleared  of  armed  foes  by  a 
concerted  and  resolute  advance,  Sher- 
man was  telegraphing  furiously  to 
the  War  Department  for  large  rein- 
forcements ;  and,  when  visited  at 
Louisville,  on  the  18th,  by  Secretary 
Cameron  and  Adjt.-Gen.  Thomas,  he 
gravely  informed  them  that  he  should 
need  200,000  men  to  recover  and  hold 
Kentucky ;  when,  in  fact,  there  were 
not  40,000  Rebels  in  arms  within  the 
limits  of  that  State. 

Pollard,  writing  of  the  early  part 
of  November,  says : 

"  Despite  the  victory  of  Belmont,  our  sit- 
uation in  Kentucky  was  one  of  extreme 
weakness,  and  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the 
enemy,  if  he  had  not  been  imposed  upon 
by  false  representations  of  the  number  of 
our  forces  at  Bowling  Green. 

*  *  *  "  About  the  middle  of  September, 
Gen.  Buckner  advanced,  with  a  small  force 
of  about  4,000  men,  which  was  increased,  by 
the  15th  of  October,  to  12,000 ;  and,  though 
other  accessions  of  force  were  received,  it 
continued  at  about  the  same  strength  until 
the  end  of  November,  measles  and  other  dis- 
eases keeping  down  the  effective  force.  The 
enemy's  force  then  was  reported  to  the  War 
Department  at  50,000  ;  and  an  advance  was 
impossible." 

The  Unionists  of  south-eastern  Ken- 
tucky were  mustering  and  organizing 
under  Col.  Garrard  at  a  point  known 
as  Camp  Wild-Cat,  when  Zollicoffer 
advanced  (Oct.  20th)  with  seven  re- 


616  THE  AMERICA 

giments  and  a  light  battery,  to  attack 
and  disperse  them.  Gen.  Schoepf, 
who  had  just  reached  the  camp,  as- 
sumed command  of  the  Union  forces 
prior  to  the  attack,  which  was  made 
on  the  morning  of  the  21st.  The 
Rebels  were  superior  in  numbers; 
but  the  Unionists  had  a  strong  posi- 
tion, and  very  easily  beat  off  their 
assailants,  who  made  two  attacks  to 
no  purpose,  and  were  repulsed  and 
driven  away  without  serious  loss  on 
either  side. 

A  considerable  Rebel  force,  under 
Col.  John  S.  Williams,  having  been 
collected  at  Piketon,  the  capital  of 
Pike,  the  easternmost  county  of  Ken- 
tucky, at  the  head  of  the  Big  Sandy, 
Gen.  Wm.  Nelson,  commanding  the 
Union  forces  in  Eastern  Kentucky, 
started  from  Prestonburg,  Nov.  8th, 
in  quest  of  them.  Having  not  less 
than  3,000  men,  while  Williams  re- 
ports his  full  strength  at  1,010,  Nel- 
son had,  at  11  o'clock,  a.  m.,  of  the 
7th,  dispatched  Col.  Apperson,  of  the 
33d  Ohio,  with  nearly  half  his  force, 
to  gain  the  rear  of  Piketon  by  a  cir- 
cuitous route  through  that  rugged, 
almost  roadless  region,  so  as  to  inclose 
the  Rebels  between  two  fires,  and 
compel  their  surrender.  It  was  first 
telegraphed  that  this  movement  had 
proved  a  perfect  success ;  but  Wil- 
liams, who  seems  to  have  been  thor- 
oughly posted  throughout,  retarded 
Nelson's  direct  advance  by  smart, 
judicious  skirmishing  in  the  positions 
assuring  him  the  greatest  advantage, 
while  he  hurried  off  the  cattle  and 
other  spoils  industriously  collected 
from  that  poor,  thinly-settled  region, 
on  the  road  to  Pound  Gap,  whither 
he  retreated  on  the  9th — his  rear- 
guard of  400  leaving  Piketon  just  as 
Nelson  was  entering  it.    The  loss  of. 


N  CONFLICT. 

either  party  in  this  affair  was  incon- 
siderable— not  over  100 — but  the 
conduct  of  our  soldiers  was  faultless, 
and  their  patient  endurance  of  fa- 
tigue, exposure,  and  privation,  most 
commendable.  Williams — who  ap- 
pears to  have  admirably  timed  and 
managed  his  retreat — reported  his 
force  stronger  at  Pound  Gap  on  the 
13th  than  it  was  at  Piketon  on  the  8th. 

The  heroic  Unionists  of  East  Ten- 
nessee, who  had  anxiously  expected 
and  awaited  the  arrival  of  a  Union 
force  since  the  opening  of  the  strug- 
gle, were  led  to  believe,  after  our 
successes  at  Camp  Wild-Cat  and  other 
points,  that  its  appearance  would  not 
much  longer  be  delayed.  Many  of 
them  stole  through  the  woods  and 
over  the  mountains  to  join  it  and 
hasten  its  march;  while  many  of 
those  who  remained  at  home  con- 
spired to  burn  the  more  important 
railroad  bridges  throughout  their  sec- 
tion, in  order  to  preclude  the  arrival 
of  reinforcements  to  their  Rebel  op- 
pressors during  the  struggle  supposed 
to  be  just  at  hand.  They  succeeded 
in  burning  three  or  four,  but  failed 
with  regard  to  others ;  and  all  of 
them  who  were  captured  by  the  Reb- 
els while  engaged  in  or  escaping  from 
these  attempts  were  promptly  con- 
signed to  an  ignominious  death. 

The  hopes  of  the  loyal  Tennesseans 
were  strangely  and  utterly  blasted. 
Gen.  Schoepf,  in  command  of  our 
army  which,  after  the  repulse  of  the 
Rebel  attack  on  Camp  Wild-Cat,  con- 
fronted Zollicoffer,  after  advancing 
two  or  three  days  in  the  direction  of 
Cumberland  Gap,  was  induced,  by  a 
favorite  stratagem  of  the  Rebels,  to 
believe  that  an  overwhelming  Con- 
federate force  was  advancing  on  his 


KENTUCKY   TAKEN   IN   BY   THE  CONFEDERACY. 


617 


right  flank  from  Bowling  Green,  and 
abont  to  pounce  upon  and  annihilate 
him.  There  was  not  a  shadow  of 
foundation  for  this  story :  the  Bebels 
at  Bowling  Green  were  glad  enough 
to  keep  still,  and  not  expose  their 
weakness,  knowing  well  that  Sher- 
man might  and  would  have  crushed 
them,  had  he  been  aware  of  it ;  yet, 
without  waiting  to  verify  this  absurd 
report,  Gen.  Schoepf  faced  about  and 
raced  two  days  toward  the  Ohio,  as 
if  for  dear  life,  strewing  the  road 
with  wrecked  wagons,  dead  horses, 
baggage,  etc.,  and  leaving  East  Ten- 
nessee to  her  fate.  The  bitter  disap- 
pointment and  agony  of  her  gallant 
sons  in  his  army,  who  but  now  con- 
fidently supposed  themselves  about 
to  see  the  old  flag  floating  in  triumph 
from  the  spires  of  Knoxville  and 
Jonesville,  can  but  faintly  be  realized. 

On  the  18th  of  November,  the 
Kentucky  Secessionists  held  a  Con- 
vention at  Russellville,  in  the  south- 
ernmost of  her  counties,  behind  their 
principal  camp  at  Bowling  Green, 
and  organized  what  they  termed  a 
i  Provisional'  Government — perhaps 
from  their  inability  to  make  any  pro- 
vision for  its  support.  Geo.  W.  John- 
son, of  Scott  county,  was  here  chosen 
Governor  ;8  the  party  having  had 
enough  of  popular  elections,  in  which 
they  never  had  any  success  or  made 
a  respectable  figure.  They  chose, 
likewise,  a  "  Legislative  Council," 
which  they  clothed  with,  ample  pow- 

8  Johnson  being  killed  in  the  battle  at  Shiloh 
next  Spring,  he  was  somehow  succeeded  in  his 
shadowy  Governorship  by  Kichard  Hawes — a 
weak  old  man  who,  some  quarter  of  a  century 
before,  had  twice  represented,  as  a  "Whig,  the 
Lexington  district  in  Congress. 

9  So  announced  next  morning  in  The  Norfolk 
Day-Book. 


ers;  and  this  Council  proceeded  to 
appoint  Commissioners  to  negotiate 
for  the  admission  of  Kentucky  into 
the  Southern  Confederacy !  No  cav- 
ils as  to  the  authority  of  these  gen- 
tlemen to  speak  for  Kentucky  were 
raised  at  Richmond ;  and,  on  the 
16th  of  December,  The  Louisville 
Courier  (now  issued  at  Nashville) 
gravely  announced  that  said  Council 
had  this  day  chosen  a  full  delegation 
to  the  Confederate  Congress,  com- 
posed as  follows : 

Henry  C.  Burnett,  George  W.  Ewing, 

John  Thomas,  Dr.  D.  V.  White, 

Thomas  L.  Burnett,  John  M.  Elliott, 

S.  H.  Ford,  Thomas  B.  Monroe, 

Thomas  B.  Johnson,  George  B.  Hodge. 

How  it  happened  that  two  of  these 
persons — Messrs.  Henry  C.  Burnett 
and  Thomas  B.  Monroe — were,  that 
same  day,  sworn  in  as  Senators9  from 
Kentucky  at  Richmond,  it  is  not  easy 
to  understand  ;  but  it  is  of  no  conse- 
quence. They  had  probably  been 
appointed,  several  days  before,  by 
*  Governor'  Johnson.  Suffice  it  that, 
since  then,  Kentucky  has  been  regu- 
larly represented  in  the  Confederate 
Congress,  though  no  popular  election 
thereto  was  ever  held  on  her  soil,  and 
no  shadow  of  consent  ever  given  by 
her  to  such  delegation  of  power.  Of 
late,  her  representatives  in  that  Con- 
gress have  been  chosen  by  the  Ken- 
tuckians  serving  in  the  Rebel  armies ; 
which,  though  not  very  regular, 
seems  straightforward  and  business- 
like. They  represent  bayonets;  let 
them  be  chosen  accordingly.10 

10  The  Louisville  Journal  of  Oct.  ]  2th  sharply 
said: 

"  Hundreds  of  those  exceedingly  sensitive 
Kentuckians,  who  so  eloquently  proclaimed  that 
they  could  never  take  up  arms  against  the  South- 
ern States,  inasmuch  as  those  States  were  Ken- 
tucky's sisters,  have  now  taken  up  arms  for  the 
conquest  of  Kentucky  herself  I  Is  n't  that  enough 
to  make  the  devil  laugh?" 


618 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


XXXVIII. 
—BALL'S  BLUFF — DRANES  VILLE. 


THE  POTOMAC 

The  disaster  at  Bull  Run,  and  the 
amazing  imbecility  betrayed  in  al- 
lowing several  of  the  regiments  there 
routed  to  continue  their  panic-stricken, 
disorderly  flight  over  the  bridges  into 
"Washington,  whence  many  soldiers, 
and  even  officers,  dispersed  to  their 
respective  homes,  had  dispelled  all 
lingering  illusions  as  to  the  capacity 
of  Gen.  Scott  for  the  conduct  of 
a  great  war.  Though  it  was  still 
deemed  a  military  necessity  to  con- 
ceal the  failure  of  his  faculties,  to  ex- 
cuse his  blunders,  and  even,  in  some 
instances,  to  eulogize  his  abilities  as 
well  as  magnify  his  services,  the  ur- 
gent, imperative  need  of  replacing 
him  by  a  younger  and  more  vigorous 
commander  was  felt  by  every  intel- 
ligent Unionist.  It  was  he,  Winfield 
Scott,  and  none  other,  who  had  pre- 
cipitated a  third  of  our  forces,  on  or 
near  the  line  of  the  Potomac,  into  a 
decisive  conflict  with  seven-eighths  of 
the  Rebel  strength  in  Virginia,  in 
defiance  of  every  dictate  of  prudence 
and  of  common  sense.  Neither  the 
President,  nor  the  Secretary  of  War, 
nor  Gen.  McDowell,  nor  the  maligned 
and  detested  Radicals — who  were  nat- 
urally anxious  that  our  75,000  three- 

1  Gen.  Scott,  in  commenting  on  Gen.  Patter- 
son's testimony  in  a  deliberately  written  state- 
ment, made  to  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of 
the  War,  says : 

"As  connected  with  this  subject,  I  hope  I 
may  be  permitted  to  notice  the  charge  made 
against  me,  on  the  floor  of  Congress,  that  I  did 
not  stop  Brig.  Gen.  McDowell's  movement  upon 
Manassas  Junction  after  I  had  been  informed  of 


months'  men  should  not  be  disbanded 
and  sent  home  without  having  been 
of  the  least  positive  service — had  ever 
desired  or  expected  any  such  conflict 
as  this.  It  was  Gen.  Scott  who  had 
given  the  orders  under  which  Gen. 
McDowell  advanced  and  fought  on 
Sunday,  the  21st  of  July.  Gen. 
Cameron,  the  Secretary  of  War,  who 
was  at  Centerville  during  the  pre- 
ceding day,  saw  plainly  that  our  re- 
giments at  the  front  were  not  so  many 
as  they  should  be,  and  returned  has- 
tily that  evening  to  Washington  to 
procure  a  countermand  of  the  order 
for  battle  ;  but  arrived  too  late  to  see 
Gen.  Scott  and  obtain  it.  Badly  as 
Patterson  had  behaved,  he  had  re- 
ported, on  the  18th,  by  telegraph  to 
Scott,  his  flank  movement  to  Charles- 
town  ;  which,  any  one  could  see,  left 
Gen.  Johnston  at  perfect  liberty  to 
hasten,  with  all  his  available  force, 
to  the  aid  of  Beauregard  at  Manassas. 
And,  on  the  20th — the  day  before 
Bull  Run — he  had  telegraphed  to 
Scott  that  J ohnston  had  actually  de- 
parted on  that  errand.1  Though  Gen. 
Scott  remained  nominally  in  chief 
command  until  the  last  day  of  Octo- 
ber, he  was  practically  superseded 

the  reenforcement  sent  thither  from  Winchester, 
though  urged  to  do  so  by  one  or  more  members 
of  the  Cabinet.  Now,  it  was,  at  the  reception  of 
that  news,  too  late  to  call  off  the  troops  from  the 
attack ;  and,  beside,  though  opposed  to  the  move- 
ment at  first,  we  had  all  become  animated  and 
sanguine  of  success ;  and  it  is  not  true  that  I  was 
urged  by  anybody  in  authority  to  stop  the  at- 
tack; which  was  commenced  as  early,  I  think, 
as  the  18th  of  July." 


GEN.    McCLELLAN   IN  COM 

forthwith  by  the  formation  of  a  new 
military  department  of  Washington 
and  of  north-eastern  Virginia,  which 
Gen.  George  B.  McClellan  was  sum- 
moned, by  telegraph,  from  that  of 
Western  Virginia  to  preside  over. 
This  change  was  officially  announced 
on  the  25th  of  July ;  on  which  day 
Gen.  McClellan  arrived  at  Philadel- 
phia, and  there  received  a  most  en- 
thusiastic ovation.  He  proceeded  next 
morning  to  Washington. 

Gen.  McClellan  found  the  army 
intrusted  with  the  defense  of  the 
capital  reduced,  by  defeat,  desertions, 
and  the  mustering  out  of  most  of  the 
three-months'  men,  to  50,000  infantry, 
1,000  cavalry,  and  650  artillery,  with 
30  field-guns.  The  city  was  pro- 
tected, on  the  Virginia  side  of  the 
Potomac,  by  hastily-constructed  but 
substantial  earthworks,  on  which 
some  heavy  guns  w^ere  mounted. 
But,  if  the  Kebels  had  chosen  to  ford 
the  Potomac  a  few  miles  above,  either 
Washington  or  Baltimore  lay  at  their 
mercy,  provided  they  could  defeat 
this  army  in  the  open  field.  They 
did  not,  however,  see  fit  to  risk  so 
bold  a  movement ;  though  military 
critics  believe  that,  for  the  two  weeks 
succeeding  their  victory  at  Bull  Run, ' 
it  might  have  been  attempted  with 
reasonable  prospect  of  success.  They 
could  probably  have  thrown  across 
the  river  a  force  nearly  or  quite  equal 
in  numbers  to  that  which  defended 
Washington,  whereof  at  least  5,000 
would  necessarily  have  been  retained 
in  the  earthworks  on  the  Virginia 
side ;  while  the  prestige  of  their  re- 
cent victory,  and  the  consequent  de- 
moralization of  our  troops,  secured  to 
the  Rebels  decided  advantages,  which 


M  AND   AT   WASHINGTON.  619 

each  succeeding  week  was  morally  cer- 
tain to  diminish.  They  did  not,  how- 
ever, attempt  to  cross  the  Potomac  in 
force,  nor  even  to  provoke  another 
battle  on  its  south  bank  ;  but,  having 
advanced  their  lines,  soon  after  their 
victory,  to  Munson's  Hill,  a  few  miles 
from  Alexandria,  they  only  remained 
there  until  a  night  attack  had  been 
planned  on  our  side ;  when,  promptly 
forewarned  by  traitors,  they  hastily 
withdrew  to  Fairfax.  It  does  not 
appear  that  the  main  body  of  their 
army  ever  deliberately  took  position 
this  side  of  Centerville. 

Gen.  McClellan  commenced3  by 
ordering  the  officers  and  men  of  his 
army  out  of  Washington,  where  too 
many,  especially  of  the  former,  had 
hitherto  been  indulged  in  idling  away 
their  time,  to  the  neglect  of  their  du- 
ties and  the  damage  of  their  morals. 
Col.  Andrew  Porter,  of  the  16th  re- 
gulars, was  appointed  Provost  Mar- 
shal to  carry  this  order  into  effect. 
The  organization  of  the  Army  into 
brigades  was  soon  afterward3  effected ; 
and  these  brigades  were  ultimately 4 
formed  into  divisions.  But  the  form- 
ation of  army  corps  was,  for  some  rea- 
son, postponed  and  delayed,  until 
finally 5  it  was  peremptorily  directed 
by  the  President. 

Meantime,  the  patient,  loyal,  earn- 
est North,  soon  recovering  from  the 
shock  of  its  astounding  discomfiture, 
had  been  soberly  but  resolutely  rais- 
ing new  regiments  and  new  batteries 
for  a  more  determined  and  more  en- 
ergetic prosecution  of  the  struggle 
forced  upon  it  by  slaveholding  treason. 
Every  State,  county,  and  township, 
addressed  itself  zealously  to  the  work 
of  recruiting  and  equipping ;  so  that, 


2  July  30ih,  1861.  3 Aug.  4th. 


4  Oct.  15th.  5  March  8th,  1862. 


620  THE  AMERICA 

by  the  middle 6  of  October,  Gen.  Mc- 
Clellan  found  himself  at  the  head  of 
fully  150,000  men — an  army  superior 
in  numbers,  in  intelligence,  and  in 
the  essential  quality  of  its  material, 
to  any  ever  led  into  battle  by  JSTapo- 
leon,  and  by  far  the  largest  and  most 
effective  which  had  ever  been  seen 
on  this  continent.  It  was  not  only 
far  better  drilled  and  fitted  for  ser- 
vice than  that  with  which  Gen.  Mc- 
Dowell had  advanced  to  Centerville 
and  Bull  Run,  but  it  was  better  con- 
stituted, in  that  its  members — not 
one  of  them  a  conscript — had  enlisted 
for  a  term  of  years,  after  all  sixty-day 
hallucinations  had  been  dispelled;  and 
with  a  full  knowledge  that  they  were 
to  encounter  the  hardships,  the  perils 
and  the  privations  of  protracted  and 
inexorable  war. 

Gen.  McClellan  held  his  first  grand 
parade  at  the  close  of  September, 
when  70,000  men  of  all  arms  were 
assembled,  maneuvered,  and  review- 
ed ;  a  larger  army  than  had  ever  be- 
fore been  concentrated  on  any  field 
in  America.  Apprehensions  were  ex- 
pressed that  the  Rebels  would  im- 
prove this  opportunity  to  attack  some 
portion  of  our  lines ;  but  they  were 
not  strong  enough  to  warrant  such  a 
venture.  Still,  regiment  after  regi- 
ment, battery  after  battery,  was  poured 
from  the  !N"orth  into  Washington,  and 
thence  distributed  to  the  several  camps 
assigned  them  on  either  side  of  the 
Potomac,  until  the  mere  bulk  of  our 
quiescent  forces,  the  necessity  for 
ground  whereon  to  station  them,  com- 

6  Gen.  McClellan,  in  his  carefully  elaborated 
"Report,"  says: 

"  By  the  15th  of  October,  the  number  of 
troops  in  and  about  Washington,  inclusive  of  the 
garrison  of  the  city  and  Alexandria,  the  city 
guard,  and  the  forces  on  the  Maryland  shore  of 
the  Potomac  below  Washington,  and  as  far  as 
Cumberland  above,  the  troops  under  the  com- 


N  CONFLICT. 

pelled  an  advance  of  our  lines — the 
light  troops  covering  the  Rebel  front 
retiring  whenever  pressed.  Lewins- 
ville  was  reoccupied  by  our  army  on 
the  9th,  Yienna  on  the  16th,  and 
Fairfax  Court  House  on  the  17th  of 
October ;  the  Confederates  recoiling 
without  firing  a  shot  to  Centerville  and 
Manassas.  On  the  16th,  Gen.  Geary, 
under  orders  from  Gen.  Banks,  in 
Maryland,  advanced  to  and  captured 
Bolivar  Hights,  overlooking  Harper's 
Ferry.  Leesburg,  the  capital  of  Lou- 
doun county,  Va.,  was  mistakenly  re- 
ported evacuated  by  the  Confederates 
on  the  17th;  Gen.  McCall,  with  a 
considerable  Union  force,  moving  up 
the  right  bank  of  the  Potomac  to 
Dranesville,  whence  his  scouts  were 
pushed  forward  to  Goose  Creek,  four 
miles  from  Leesburg.  On  the  19th 
and  20th,  McCall  made  two  recon- 
noissances  in  the  direction  of  Lees- 
burg, encountering  no  enemy,  and 
being  assured  by  those  he  met  that 
the  Rebels  had  abandoned  that  town 
some  days  before.  Thus  advised,  Gen. 
McClellan,  on  the  20th,  directed  the 
following  dispatch  to  be  sent  to  Gen. 
Stone,  at  Poolesville,  Md.,  where  he 
was  watching  and  guarding  the  line 
of  the  Potomac  from  the  Maryland 
side  of  the  river : 

"Received  October  20,  lS61,from  Camp  Griffin. 

"  Gen.  McClellan  desires  me  to  inform  you 
that  Gen.  McCall  occupied  Dranesville  yes- 
terday, and  is  still  there ;  will  send  out  heavy 
reconnoissances  to-day  in  all  directions  from 
that  point.  The  General  desires  that  you 
keep  a  good  lookout  on  Leesburg,  to  see  if 
this  movement  has  the  effect  to  drive  them 
away.    Perhaps  a  slight  demonstration  on 

mand  of  Gen.  Dix  at  Baltimore  and  its  depend- 


encies, were  as  follows: 

Total  present  for  duty  133,201 

»    sick   9,290 

"    in  confinement   1,156 

Aggregate  present  143,647 

u       absent   8,404 

Total  152,051" 


DEVENS  CROSSES 


AT   BALL'S  BLUFF. 


621 


your  part  would  have  the  effect  to  move 
them.  A.  V.  Colbttrx, 

"  Ass't  Adjt.  General. 
"Brig.-Gen.  Stone:,  PoolesvilUy 

Gen.  Stone  at  once  ordered  Col. 
Devens,  of  the  15th  Massachusetts,  to 
transfer  two  flat-boats  from  the  Ches- 
apeake and  Ohio  canal,  opposite  Har- 
rison's Island,  to  the  river  at  that 
point,  and  therewith  to  ferry  over  his 
regiment  to  the  island;  which  was 
promptly  done.  Abont  dark,  in  obe- 
dience to  a  verbal  order,  Devens  sent 
Capt.  Philbrick,  with  fifteen  or  twenty 
men,  across  to  the  Virginia  shore, 
which  he  ascertained  was  not  pick- 
eted by  the  enemy,  and  ascended  the 
steep  bank  known  as  Ball's  Bluff, 
which  here  rises  about  one  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  to  the  level  of  the  adja- 
cent country.  Pushing  out  a  small 
distance  from  the  Bluff',  Philbrick  re- 
turned and  reported  that  he  had  dis- 
covered a  small  camp  of  the  enemy, 
which  did  not  appear  to  be  well 
guarded.  This  report  was  sent  by 
Col.  Devens  to  Gen.  Stone,  who  there- 
upon issued  the  following  order : 

u  Head-Quarters  Corps  op  Observation, 

"  POOLESVILLE,  Oct.  20,  18G1— 10£ P.M. 

"  Special  Order  No.  — . 

"  Col.  Devens  will  land  opposite  Harri- 
son's Island,  with  five  companies  of  his  regi- 
ment, and  proceed  to  surprise  the  camp  of 
the  enemy  discovered  by  Capt.  Philbrick  in 
the  direction  of  Leesburg.  The  landing  and 
march  will  be  effected  with  silence  and 
rapidity. 

"  Col.  Lee,  20th  Massachusetts  volunteers, 
will,  immediately  after  Col.  Devens's  depart- 
ure, occupy  Harrison's  Island  with  four  com- 
panies of  his  regiment,  and  will  cause  the 
four-oared  boat  to  be  taken  across  the  island 
to  the  point  of  departure  of  Col.  Devens. 
One  company  will  be  thrown  across  to  oc- 
cupy the  bights  on  the  Virginia  shore,  after 
Col.  Devens's  departure,  to  cover  his  return. 

"  Two  mountain  howitzers  will  be  taken 
silently  up  the  tow-path,  and  carried  to  the 
opposite  side  of  the  island,  under  the  orders 
of  Col.  Lee. 

"  Col.  Devens  will  attack  the  camp  of  the 
enemy  at  daybreak,  and,  having  routed,  will 


pursue  them  as  far  as  he  deems  prudent,  and 
.will  destroy  the  camp,  if  practicable,  before 
returning.  He  will  make  all  the  observa- 
tions possible  on  the  country ;  will,  under 
all  circumstances,  keep  his  command  well  in 
hand,  and  not  sacrifice  them  to  any  supposed 
advantage  of  rapid  pursuit. 

"  Having  accomplished  this  duty,  Col. 
Devens  will  return  to  his  present  position, 
unless  he  shall  see  one  on  the  Virginia  side, 
near  the  river,  which  he  can  undoubtedly 
hold  until  reenforced,  and  one  which  can  be 
successfully  held  against  largely  superior 
numbers.  In  such  case,  he  will  hold  on 
and  report. 

"  Chas.  P.  Stone,  Brig.-General." 

"  Great  care  will  be  used  by  Col.  Devens 
to  prevent  any  unnecessary  injury  of  private 
property;  and  any  officer  or  soldier  strag- 
gling from  the  command,  for  curiosity  or 
plunder,  will  be  instantly  shot. 

u  Chas.  P.  Stone,  Brig.-General." 

Col.  Devens  accordingly  com- 
menced crossing  his  force  a  little 
after  midnight,  and  had  his  five  com- 
panies formed  on  the  top  of  the  bluff 
so  soon  as  it  was  light  enough  to  find 
his  way  thither.  Col.  Lee  likewise 
crossed  about  a  hundred  men,  and 
took  position  this  side  of  him.  Scouts, 
dispatched  right  and  left,  returned 
and  reported  that  they  could  find  no 
enemy.  Advancing,  so  soon  as  it 
was  light,  to  the  supposed  Eebel 
camp  reported  to  him  the  night  be- 
fore, Col.  D.  found  it  no  camp  at  all, 
but  an  optical  illusion,  created  by 
moonlight  glimmering  through  a  row 
of  trees  and  presenting  the  appear- 
ance of  a  row  of  tents.  Having  ad- 
vanced to  within  a  mile  of  Leesburg 
without  discovering  a  trace  of  an  en- 
emy, Col.  D.  halted  in  a  wood,  un- 
perceived,  as  he  supposed,  by  any  foe, 
sent  a  messenger  to  Gen.  Stone,  and 
awaited  further  orders. 

At  7  a.  m.,  a  body  of  riflemen  ap- 
peared on  his  right,  but  fell  back 
when  approached;  when  Eebel  cav- 
alry became  visible  on  the  road  to 
Leesburg.     Col.  Devens  hereupon, 


622 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


about  8  A.  m.,  fell  back  to  the  bluff, 
in  perfect  order  and  unmolested,  and 
there  soon  received  a  message  from 
Gen.  Stone  to  remain,  and  he  would 
be  supported.  He  now  counted  his 
force,  and  ascertained  that  it  num- 
bered 28  officers  and  625  men. 


At  noon,  or  a  little  after,  he  was 
attacked  by  musketry  from  the  woods 
surrounding  on  three  sides  the  field 
of  barely  six  acres,  in  which  his  men 
were  formed,  and  at  once  fell  back 
some  sixty  yards  to  obtain  a  better 
position.    An  hour  later,  being  still 


BATTLE  OP  BALL  8  BLUFF. 


A.  Path  by  which  the  Rebels  tried  to  enter  the  open  field.    B.  Flank  movement  attempted  by  the  Eebels;  defeated 

by  the  California  Eegiment. 


unsupported,  he  fell  back  again  near- 
ly to  the  edge  of  the  bluff,  where 
he  was  soon  after  reenforced,  as  he 
had  been  promised,  by  the  California 
regiment,  Col.  E.  D.  Baker,7  who, 
being  the  ranking  officer,  assumed 


command  —  having  received  from 
Gen.  Stone  an  order  to  support 
Col.  Devens,  or  withdraw  his  force 
to  the  Maryland  shore,  at  his  discre- 
tion. It  seems  that  Col.  Baker  had 
doubts,  on  reaching  the  river,  whether 


7  TJ.  S.  Senator  from  Oregon ;  formerly  in  Congress  from  Illinois,  and  a  Colonel  in  the  Mexican  War. 


RESULTS   OP  OUR 


DISCOMFITURE. 


623 


to  reenforce  or  withdraw  Col.  Dev- 
ens's  men ;  but,  hearing  that  the  ene- 
my were  already  upon  Col.  D.,  he 
decided  that  he  had  no  choice  but  to 
reenforce. 

The  main  current  of  the  Potomac 
passes  Harrison's  Island  on  the  Ma- 
ryland side,  where  three  flat-boats  or 
scows,  with  a  joint  capacity  of  125 
persons,  were  used  by  our  men ;  while 
only  a  life-boat  and  two  small  skiffs, 
together  carrying  from  25  to  30  men, 
were  employed  on  the  Virginia  side 
of  the  island.  Finally,  one  of  the  scows 
or  flat-boats  was  taken  around  to  that 
side.  But  the  crossing  of  the  river, 
here  quite  rapid,  was  still  difficult 
and  tedious ;  while  it  does  not  seem 
that  competent  persons  had  been  de- 
tailed to  supervise  and  effect  it.  A 
narrow,  winding  path  led  up  from 
the  immediate  brink  of  the  river  to 
the  open  field  on  which  our  troops 
were  formed,  with  the  enemy  swarm- 
ing in  the  woods  belting  that  field  on 
three  sides,  within  musket-shot.  Col. 
Baker  reached  it  between  1  and  2 
o'clock,  p.  m.  His  entire  force  consist- 
ed of  the  New  York  Tammany  regi- 
ment, Col.  Milton  Cogswell,  the  Cal- 
ifornia regiment,  Lieut.-Col.  Wistar, 
and  portions  of  the  15th  Massachu- 
setts, Col.  Devens,  and  20th,  Col.  Lee 
—in  all,  1,900  men.8  The  Eebels  by 
whom  they  were  assailed  comprised 
the  8th  Virginia,  13th,  17th,  and  18th 
Mississippi,  forming  the  brigade  of 
Gen.  Evans.9  Col.  Baker  had  barely 
completed  the  formation  of  his  men, 
when  his  right  was  heavily  assailed 
by  the  enemy  ;  the  attack  gradually 
proceeding  to  the  center  and  left,  and 

8  California  regiment,  570;  Tammany,  360; 
15th  Massachusetts,  653 ;  20th  Massachusetts, 
318:  total,  1,901. 

9  Gen.  E vans' s  official  report  states  his  forces 


the  struggle  thus  continuing  for  two 
hours  with  desperate  energy  on  both 
sides,  but  with  far  greater  loss  on 
ours,  because  of  the  uncovered  posi- 
tion of  our  men.  Col.  Baker  insisted 
on  exposing  himself  with  the  most 
reckless  bravery,  and  fell,  shot 
through  the  head,  a  little  before  5 
o'clock.  As  our  men,  falling  fast, 
began  to  waver,  and  some  portions 
of  the  line  to  give  way,  in  view  of 
this  calamity,  Col.  Cogswell,  who  suc- 

.  ceeded  to  the  command,  resolved  to 
charge  the  enemy  on  his  left,  and  cut 
his  way  through  to  Edwards's  Ferry, 
two  or  three  miles,  where  Gen.  Stone 
was  known  to  be  in  force ;  but,  upon 
attempting  this  movement,  it  was 
met  by  a  fresh  Mississippi  regiment 
advancing  from  the  direction  of  the 
Ferry,  under  whose  destructive  fire 

•  our  decimated,  discouraged  troops 
gave  way,  and  retreated  in  disorder 
down  the  bluff,  just  as  darkness  was 
drawing  on.  The  triumphant  Rebels 
now  advanced  from  all  sides  to  the 
bluff,  and. fired  with  impunity  on  the 
disorderly,  straggling  mass  below. 
Meantime,  the  flat-boat  on  that  side 
of  the  island,  being  overloaded,  was 
soon  riddled  and  sunk ;  the  life-boat 
and  skiffs  were  upset  and  lost ;  and. 
the  work  of  unresisted  slaughter 
went  on.  Some  were  shot  on  the 
bank ;  others  while  attempting  to 
swim  to  the  island ;  while  a  number 
were  carried  down  by .  the  current 
and  drowned.  A  few  escaped  in  the 
darkness,  by  stealing  along  the  bank 
of  the  river  unobserved,  and  finally 
reached  our  lines  in  safety.  But  our 
actual  loss  by  that  bloody  disaster 

in  the  engagement  at  1,709;  which  evidently 
does  not  include  the  13th  Mississippi,  with  six 
guns,  held  in  reserve,  and  so  posted  as  to  repel 
aid  to  our  side  from  Edwards's  Ferry. 


624: 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


was  not  less  than  1,000  men ;  of 
whom  nearly  300  were  killed  out- 
right, and  more  than  500,  including 
the  wounded,  taken  prisoners.10 

Meantime,  Gen.  Stone  had  directed 
Gen.  Gorman  to  throw  across  the 
river  at  Edwards's  Ferry  a  small  force, 
which  made  a  cautious  reconnois- 
sance  for  about  three  miles  on  the 
road  to  Leesburg,  when,  coming  sud- 
denly upon  a  Mississippi  regiment, 
it  exchanged  volleys  and  returned. 
Gen.  Gorman's  entire  brigade  was 
thrown  over  at  this  point  during  the 
day ;  but,  as  it  did  not  advance,  its 
mere  presence  on  the  Yirginia  side 
of  the  Potomac,  so  far  from  the  scene 
of  actual  combat,  subserved  no  pur- 
pose. After  the  disaster  was  com- 
plete, Gen.  Stone,  about  10  p.  m.,  ar- 
rived on  the  ground  from  which  our 
ill-starred  advance  was  made ;  as  did 
Gen.  Banks  at  3  next  morning,  and 
Gen.  McClellan  on  the  evening  of 
that  day.  But  it  was  now  too  late. 
No  relief  was  sent  while  relief  could 
have  availed.  Even  McCall  retired 
from  Dranesville  southward  on  the 
day  of  the  fatal  fight. 

Col.  Baker  has  been  widely  blamed 
for  rashness  in  this  conflict,  and  even 
for  disregard  of  orders — it  would  seem 
most  unjustly.  The  following  or- 
ders, found  in  his  hat  after  his  death, 
deeply  stained  with  his  life-blood,  are 
all  the  foundation  for  this  charge  : 

"Edwaeds's  Feret,  Oct.  21st,  1861. 
"  Col.  E.  D.  Bakee,  Commander  of  brigade : 
"Colonel:  In  case  of  heavy  firing  in 
front  of  Harrison's  Island,  you  will  advance 
the  California  regiment  of  yonr  brigade,  or 
retire  the  regiments  under  Cols.  Lee  and 
Devens,  now  on  the  [almost  rendered  il- 

10  Gen.  Evans,  in  liis  report,  claims  710  pris- 
oners, including  wounded,  and  guesses  that  we 
had  "  1,300  killed,  wounded,  and  drowned."  He 
thus  makes  our  loss  exceed  by  over  100  all  our 
force  engaged  in  the  battle  1    He  reports  his 


legible  with  blood]  Yirginia  side  of  the 
river,  at  your  discretion — assuming  command 
on  arrival. 

"Very  respectfully,  Colonel,  your  most 
obedient  servant,        Chaeles  P.  Stone, 

"  Brig.-General  Commanding." 

The  second  order  was  received  on 

the  battle-field,  by  the  hand  of  Col. 

Cogswell,  an  hour  before  the  death 

of  Col.  Baker,  who  had  put  it  in  his 

hat  without  reading  it.    It  is  as 

follows : 

"  Head-Qttaetees  Coeps  of  Obseevation-, 
"Edwaeds's  Feeet,  Oct.  22d,  11.50. 
"E.  D.  Bakee,. Commanding  brigade: 

"Colonel:  I  am  informed  that  the  force 
of  the  enemy  is  about  4,000,  all  told.  If 
you  can  push  them,  you  may  do  so  as  far  as 
to  have  a  strong  position  near  Leesburg,  if 
you  can  keep  them  before  you,  avoiding 
their  batteries.  If  they  pass  Leesburg  and 
take  the  Gum  Spring  road,  you  will  not  fol- 
low far,  but  seize  the  first  good  position  to 
cover  that  road. 

"Their  desire  is  to  draw  us  on,  if  they 
are  obliged  to  retreat,  as  far  as  Goose  Creek, 
where  they  can  be  reiinforced  from  Manas- 
sas, and  have  a  strong  position. 

"  Report  frequently,  so  that,  when  they 
are  pushed,  Gorman  can  come  up  on  their 
flank.       Yours,  respectfully  and  truly, 
"  Chaeles  P.  Stone, 
44  Brig.-General  Commanding." 

How  Stone  expected  Baker  to 
<  push  '  4,000  men  with  1,900,  in  an 
advanced  and  unsupported  position, 
where  the  4,000  might  at  any  mo- 
ment be  increased  to  10,000  or  to 
20,000,  is  not  obvious.  And  why 
was  not  Gorman  sent  forward  to 
come  up  on  their  flank,  at  any  rate  ; 
without  waiting  for  1,900  men  to 
'  push '  4,000  beyond  Leesburg  to  a 
good  point  for  covering  that  place  ? 

As  to  Col.  Baker's  reading  or  not 
reading  this  dispatch,  it  must  be  con- 
sidered that  he  was  at  that  moment 
engaged  with  a  superior  force,  and 

own  loss  at  155  only,  including  Col.  E.  R.  Burt, 
18th  Mississippi,  killed.  Gen.  Evans  says  he  had 
no  cannon  in  the  fight — which  is  true ;  for  his 
artillery  was  where  it  could  serve  him  best — by 
blocking  the  road  from  Edwards's  Eerry. 


B  ALL*  S    BLUFF  —  FIG-H 

tliat  retreat  on  his  part  was  simple 
ruin.  He  must  repulse  the  enemy 
assailing  him  then  and  there,  or  be 
destroyed;  for  no  force  that  Stone 
might  now  send  to  his  relief  could  be 
brought  up  in  time  to  save  him. 

The  Ball's  Bluff  tragedy,  grossly 
misrepresented  as  it  was  in  Rebel 
bulletins  and  exulting  narratives, 
tended  to  confirm  and  extend  the 
vain-glorious  delusion  which  was  al- 
ready sapping  the  foundations,  if  not 
of  Eebel  strength,  at  least  of  Rebel 
energy.  Gen.  Evans  officially  re- 
ported that  he  had  fought  and  beaten 
8,000  men,commanded  by  Gen.  Stone 
— his  troops  using  the  musket  alone  ; 
while  the  Unionists  employed  artil- 
lery, and  fired  on  him  with  long- 
range  guns  from  the  Maryland  shore  ! 
and  that  his  brigade  had  driven  "  an 
enemy  four  times  their  number  from 
the  soil  of  Virginia,  killing  and  tak- 
ing prisoners  a  greater  number  than 
our  whole  force  engaged."  These 
fables  were  repeated  in  general  or- 
ders, with  the  necessary  effect  of  in- 
flating the  whole  Confederate  people 
with  an  inordinate  conceit  of  their 
own  prowess,  and  misleading  them 
into  an  intense  contempt  for  Yankee 
cowardice  and  inefficiency.  The 
natural  consequences  of  this  delu- 
sive swagger  were  evinced  in  the  en- 
counters of  the  ensuing  Spring. 

On  the  other  hand,  Ball's  Bluff 
dispelled,  though  at  a  terrible  cost, 
some  of  the  aspersions  which  had 
been  sedulously  propagated  with  re- 
gard to  the  spirit  and  morale  of  the 
IJnion  rank  and  file.  Whoever  asked 
of  any  champion  of  the  prevailing 
strategy  why  our  armies  stood  idle, 
and  as  if  paralyzed,  in  the  presence 
of  inferior  forces  of  Rebels,  were  as- 
40 


T   AT   DRANESTILLE.  625 

sured,  in  a  confidential  whisper,  that 
our  men  had  been  so  demoralized 
and  spirit-broken  by  their  rout  at 
Bull  Run,  that  there  was  no  fight  in 
them — that  a  whole  brigade  would 
take  to  their  heels  at  the  sight  of  a 
Rebel  regiment  advancing  to  the 
charge.  Ball's  Bluff  repelled  and 
dissipated  this  unworthy  calumny — 
by  showing  that  our  soldiers,  though 
most  unskillfully  handled,  precipita- 
ted into  needless  perils,  entrapped, 
surrounded,  hopeless,  had  still  the 
courage  to  fight  and  the  manhood 
to  die. 


D2ANESYILLB. 


At  6  a.  m.,  of  Dec.  20th,  Gen.  E. 
O.  C.  Ord,  commanding  the  3d 
Pennsylvania  brigade,  in  pursuance 
of  orders  from  Gen.  George  A. 
McCall,  commanding  the  division 
holding  the  right  of  Gen.  McClel- 
lan's  army,  moved  forward  from 
Camp  Pierpont  toward  Dranesville, 
Loudoun  County,  Ya.,  instructed  to 
drive  back  the  enemy's  pickets,  pro- 
cure a  supply  of  forage,  and  capture, 


626 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


if  possible,  a  small  cavalry  force 
scouting  betwixt  Dranesville  and  the 
Potomac.  Gen.  Ord's  brigade  con- 
sisted of  the  9th,  Col.  C.  F.  Jackson, 
10th,  Col.  J.  S.  McCalmont,  12th, 
Col.  John  H.  Taggart,  the  Bucktail 
Rifles,  Lt.-Col.  T.  L.  Kane,  a  part  of 
the  6th,  with  Easton's  battery  and 
two  squadrons  of  cavalry ;  in  all,  about 
4,000  men.  "While  halting  to  load 
forage  just  east  of  Dranesville,  he 
was  attacked  by  a  Rebel  brigade,  led 
by  Gen.  J.  E.  B.  Stuart,  composed 
of  the  11th  Yirginia,  the  6th  South 
Carolina,  10th  Alabama,  1st  Ken- 
tucky, the  Sumter  Flying  Artillery, 
and  detachments  from  two  cavalry 
regiments — the  whole  force  number- 
ing, according  to  Rebel  accounts, 
only  2,500.  Stuart  appears  to  have 
been  likewise  on  a  foraging  excur- 
sion ;  as  he  had  with  him  about  200 
wagons,  which  probably  returned 
empty  of  aught  but  wounded  men. 
They  came  up  the  road  leading 
southwardly  from  Dranesville  to 
Centerville,  some  fifteen  miles  dis- 
tant, and  were  foolishly  pushed  on 
to  attack,  though  the  advantage  in 
numbers,  in  position,  and  even  in  ar- 
tillery, appears  to  have  been  decided- 
ly on  our  side.  They  were,  of  course, 
easily  and  badly  beaten ;  the  Penn- 
sylvanians  fighting  with  cool  intre- 
pidity ajid  entire  confidence  of  suc- 
cess. Our  aggregate  loss  was  but  9 
killed  and  60  wounded — among  the 
latter,  Lieut. -Col.  Kane,  who  led  his 
men  with  signal  gallantry.  The 
Rebels  lost,  by  their  own  account, 
230;  among  them,  Col.  Forney,  of 
the  10th  Alabama,  wounded,  and 
Lieut.  Col.  Martin,  killed.  They 
left  25  horses  dead  on  the  field,  with 
two  caissons — one  ot  them  exploded, 


— running  off  their  guns  by  hand; 
the  6th  South  Carolina,  out  of  315 
present,  losing  65 — in  part,  by  the 
fire  of  the  1st  Kentucky  (Rebel), 
which,  mistaking  them  for  Unionists, 
poured  a  murderous  volley  into  them 
at  forty  yards'  distance.  It  was  a 
foolish  affair  on  the  part  of  Stuart, 
who  was  palpably  misled  by  the  gas- 
conade of  Evans,  with  regard  to  his 
meeting  and  beating  more  than  four 
to  one  at  Ball's  Bluff.  When  he 
found  himself  overmatched,  losing 
heavily,  and  in  danger  of  being  out- 
flanked and  destroyed,  the  Rebel 
General  withdrew  rapidly,  but  in 
tolerable  order,  from  the  field;  and 
Gen.  McCall,  who  came  up  at  this 
moment,  wisely  decided  not  to  pur- 
sue; since  a  Rebel  force  thrice  his 
own  might  at  any  moment  be  inter- 
posed between  him  and  his  camp. 
■  Each  party  returned  to  its  quarters 
that  night. 

The  victory  of  Dranesville,  unim- 
portant as  it  may  now  seem,  diffused 
an  immense  exhilaration  throughout 
the  Union  ranks.  It  was  a  fitting 
and  conclusive  answer  to  every  open 
assertion  or  whispered  insinuation 
impeaching  the  courage  or  the  steadi- 
ness of  our  raw  Northern  volunteers. 
The  encounter  was  purely  fortuitous, 
at  least  on  our  side ;  two  strong  for- 
aging parties,  believed  by  our  men  to 
be  about  equal  in  numbers,  had  met 
on  fair,  open  ground ;  had  fought  a 
brief  but  spirited  duel,  which  had 
ended  in  the  confessed  defeat  and 
flight  of  the  Rebels,  whose  loss  was 
at  least  twice  that  they  inflicted  on 
us.  Admit  that  they  were  but  2,500 
to  our  4,000  ;  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac, now  nearly  200,000 11  strong, 
and  able  to  advance  on  the  enemy 


"Gen.  McCleHan,  in  his  deliberately  prepared,  loudly  trumpeted,  and  widely  circulated  Report, 


THE    SITUATION   AT   THE    CLOSE    0  F  1861. 


627 


with  not  less  than  150,000  sabers  and 
bayonets,  eagerly  awaited  the  long- 
expected  permission  to  prove  itself 
but  fairly  represented  in  that  casual 
detachment  which  had  fought  and 
won  at  Dranesville. 

In  every  other  quarter,  our  arms 
were  in  the  ascendant.  The  blow 
well  struck  by  Butler  and  Stringham 
at  Hatteras,  had  never  been  retaliated. 
The  Rebels'  attempt  to  cut  off  Brown's 
regiment  at  Chicamicomico  had  re- 
sulted in  more  loss  to  them  than  to 
us.  Du  Pont's  triumph  at  Port  Royal 
had  dealt  a  damaging  blow  to  our 
foes,  and  inflicted  signal  injury  on 
the  original  plotters  of  treason,  with- 
out loss  to  our  side.  In  West  Vir- 
ginia, the  campaign  was  closing  with 
the  prestige  of  success  and  superiority 
gilding  our  standards,  and  with  at 
least  nine-tenths  of  the  whole  region 
securely  in  our  hands.  In  Missouri, 
Gen.  Fremont — though  vehemently 
reproached  for  not  advancing  and 
fighting  sooner,  and  though  never 
enjoying  facilities  for  obtaining  arms, 
munitions,  or  any  material  of  war,  at 
all  comparable  to  those  at  all  times 
eagerly  accorded  to  McClellan — had 
collected,  organized,  armed,  and  pro- 
vided, a  movable  column  of  nearly 
40,000  men,  at  whose  head  he  had 
pushed  Price — one  of  the  very  ablest 
of  the  Rebel  chieftains — to  the  fur- 
thest corner  of  the  State,  and  was  on 
the  point  of  hunting  him  thence  into 
Arkansas  or  eternity,  when  the  order 
which  deprived  him  of  his  command 
was  received  at  Springfield  on  the  2d 
of  November.  Yet  then  and  through- 
out the  Winter,  Gen.  McClellan,  who 

states  the  force  under  his  more  immediate  com- 
mand on  the  1st  of  December — that  is,  the  force 
then  in  the  Federal  District;,  Maryland,  Delaware, 
and  the  small  patch  of  Eastern  Virginia  opposite 
Washington  held  by  him — at  198,213;  whereof 


had  been  called  to  command  at  Wash- 
ington on  the  same  day  that  Fremont 
left  New  York  for  St.  Louis,  stood 
cooped  up  and  virtually  besieged  in 
the  defenses  of  Washington,  holding 
barely  ground  enough  in  Yirginia  to 
encamp  and  maneuver  his  army ; 
while  the  Rebels  impudently  ob- 
structed the  navigation  of  the  lower 
Potomac,  on  one  hand,  by  batteries 
erected  at  commanding  points  on  the 
Yirginia  shore,  while  the  Baltimore 
and  Ohio  Railroad  was  dismantled 
and  obstructed  by  them  at  Harper's 
Ferry  and  further  west  on  the  other ; 
leaving  the  city  of  Washington,  as 
well  as  his  vast  army,  dependent  on 
the  single  track  of  the  Branch  Rail- 
road for  all  their  subsistence  and  sup- 
plies, throughout  the  tedious  Winter 
that  followed. 

The  Confederates  had  not  yet  en- 
forced a  general  Conscription ;  and, 
though  volunteering  was  widely  stim- 
ulated by  Police  discipline  and  Lynch 
law,  while  the  more  ignorant  and  ill- 
informed  young  women  of  many 
slaveholding  localities  were  enven- 
omed Secessionists,  refusing  to  give 
any  but  the  most  furious  counte- 
nance to  young  men  who  hesitated 
to  enlist,  yet  the  white  population 
of  the  States  actually  controlled  by 
the  Rebels  was  so  very  far  inferior  hi 
numbers  to  that  of  the  loyal  North 
and  West,  that  the  Rebel  armies 
were  necessarily  and  vastly  the  less 
numerous  likewise. 

Gen.  McClellan,  indeed,  appears  to 
have  estimated  their  numbers  in  East- 
ern Yirginia  at  150,000 ;  but  the  in- 
formation on  which  he  acted  differed 

169,452  were  "fit  for  duty."  This  does  not  in- 
clude Gen.  Wool's  command  at  and  near  Fortress 
Monroe.  On  the  1st  of  January  following,  ho 
makes  his  total  219,707  ;  on  the  1st  of  February, 
222,190. 


628  THE  AMERICA 

widely  from  that  of  his  subordinates 
who  spent  the  Winter  in  camp  in 
Virginia,  while  he  remained  snugly 
housed  in  Washington.  Gen.  Wads- 
worth,  who  saw  and  (until  forbidden) 
questioned  the  '  contrabands'  and 
other  deserters  who  came  within  our 
lines  from  Centerville  and  vicinity 
that  Autumn  and  Winter,  was  con- 
fident that  60,000  was  the  highest 
number  they  ever  had  encamped  in 
our  front ;  and  these  we  might  have  as- 
sailed at  a  day's  notice  with  120,000 ; 
and,  by  taking  three  days  for  prepara- 
tion, with  150,000.    Why  not  ? 

The  weather  was  magnificent ;  the 
roads  hard  and  dry,  till  far  into  Win- 
ter. An  artillery  officer  wonderingly 
inquired :  "  What  is  such  weather 
/or,  if  not  fighting  ?" 

The  loyal  masses — awed  by  the  ob- 
loquy heaped  on  those  falsely  accused 
of  having  caused  the  disaster  at  Bull 
Run  by  their  ignorant  impatience  and 
precipitancy — stood  in  silent  expecta- 
tion. They  still  kept  raising  regiment 
after  regiment,  battery  after  battery, 
and  hurrying  them  forward  to  the  all- 
ingulfing  Army  of  the  Potomac,  to 
be  in  time  for  the  decided  movement 
that  must  be  just  at  hand — but  the 
torrent  was  there  drowned  in  a  lake 
of  Lethean  stagnation.  First,  we  were 
waiting  for  reenforcements — which 
was  most  reasonable;  then,  for  the 
requisite  drilling  and  fitting  for  ser- 
vice— which  wTas  just  as  helpful  to  the 
Rebels  as  to  us ;  then,  for  the  leaves 
to  fall — so  as  to  facilitate  military 
movements  in  a  country  so  w^ooded 
and  broken  as  Yirginia;  then,  for  can- 
non— whereof  we  had  already  more 
than  200  first-rate  field-guns  in  Yir- 
ginia, ready  for  instant  service :  and 
so  the  long,  bright  Autumn,  and  the 
colder  but  still  favorable  December, 


N"  CONFLICT. 

wore  heavily  away,  and  saw  nothing 
of  moment  attempted.  Even  the 
Rebel  batteries  obstructing  the  lower 
Potomac  were  not  so  much  as  men- 
aced— the  Navy  laying  the  blame  on 
the  Army ;  the  Army  throwing  it 
back  on  the  Navy — probably  both 
right,  or,  rather,  both  wTrong :  but  the 
net  result  was  nothing  done;  until 
the  daily  repetition  of  the  stereotyped 
telegraphic  bulletin,  "  All  quiet  on 
the  Potomac" — which  had  at  first 
been  received  with  satisfaction ;  after- 
ward with  complacency;  at  length 
evoked  a  broad  and  general  roar  of 
disdainful  merriment. 

And  so,  Winter  at  last  settled  down 
upon  that  vast,  gallant,  most  effect- 
ive army,  Two  Hundred  Thousand 
strong,  able  and  ready,  on  any  fair 
field,  to  bear  down  at  a  charge  all  the 
Rebels  in  their  front  without  coming 
to  a  stand ;  yet  lying  thus  beleaguered 
and  paralyzed,  shivering  and  dying  in 
the  tents  to  which  they  had  been  so 
suddenly  transferred  from  their  com- 
fortable homes — not  allowed  to  build 
themselves  huts,  such  as  the  Rebels 
had,  because  that  would  reveal  to  the 
country  the  fact  that  nothing  was  to 
be  attempted  till  Spring  or  later ;  ex- 
pecting, hoping  every  day  to  receive 
the  long-awaited  order  to  advance; 
but  seeing  night  after  night  close  in 
without  it;  and  sinking  into  home- 
sickness and  disease,  which  employ- 
ment for  body  and  mind  would  readi- 
ly have  repelled  and  dissipated. 

Is  this  obstinate  fixity,  this  rooted 
neglect  and  waste  of  the  grandest  op- 
portunities, explicable  ?  Not  by  the 
hypothesis  of  a  constitutional  aversion 
to  the  shedding  of  blood — that  is,  of 
other  men's — on  the  part  of  our 
c  Young  Napoleon ;'  for  he  was  at 
that  moment  among  the  most  eager 


McCLELLAN'S    T  0  E  P  0  R  —  FIT  F  ULLT  BROKEN. 


629 


to  have  our  country  involved  in  still 
another  great  war,  by  a  refusal,  on 
the  part  of  our  Government,  to  sur- 
render Mason  and  Slidell.  Not  even 
Yallandigham  was  more  belligerent 
in  that  direction.  Constitutional 
timidity  arid  irresolution — an  over- 
whelming sense  of  responsibility  and 
inadequacy  to  so  stupendous  a  trust — 
were  probably  not  without  their  in- 
fluence in  the  premises.  But,  beyond 
and  above  all  these,  there  was  doubt- 
less a  slowly  awakened  consciousness 
that  Slavery  was  the  real  assailant  of 
our  National  existence,  and  that  to 
put  down  the  Rebellion  by  a  positive, 
determined  exertion  of  force,  was  to 
seal  the  doom  of  its  inciting  cause, 
which  had  so  recent!/  transformed 
into  downright  traitors  so  many  high 
officers  who  once  honored  and  loved 
our  Union  and  its  flag.  It  was  hard 
for  one  who  had  long  been  arguing 
and  voting  that,  in  our  current  poli- 
tics, Slavery  was  not  the  aggressor, 
but  the  innocent  victim,  to  unlearn 
this  gross  error  in  a  year ;  and  Gen. 
McClellan  is  essentially  slow.  But, 
in  the  high  position  to  which  he  had 
been  so  suddenly  exalted,  it  was  hard 
also  not  to  see  that,  in  order  to  save 
both  Slavery  and  the  Union,  there 
must  be  little  fighting  and  a  speedy 
compromise — that  fighting  must  be 
postponed,  and  put  off,  and  avoided, 
in  the  hope  that  financial  embarrass- 
ment, a  foreign  war,  or  some  other 
complication,  would  compel  the  mu- 
tual adoption  of  some  sort .  of  Critten- 
den Compromise,  or  kindred  6  adjust- 
ment,' whereby  the  Slave  Power 
would  graciously  condescend  to  take 
the  Union  afresh  into  its  keeping,  and 
consent  to  a  reunion,  which  would 
be,  in  effect,  an  extension  of  the  em- 
pire of  Jefferson  Davis  to  the  Canada 


frontier,  and  a  perpetual  interdict  of 
all  Anti-Slavery  discussion  and  effort 
throughout  the  Republic.  On  this 
hypothesis,  and  on  this  alone,  Gen. 
McClellan's  course  while  in  high 
command,  but  especially  during  that 
long  Autumn  and  Winter,  becomes 
coherent  and  comprehensible. 

The  Rebels,  so  vastly  outnumbered 
and  overmatched  in  every  thing  but 
leadership,  were,  of  course,  too  glad 
to  be  allowed  to  maintain  a  virtual 
siege  of  Washington,  with  all  but  one 
of  its  lines  of  communication  with  the 
loyal  States  obstructed,  to  make  any 
offensive  movement ;  and  the  only  as- 
sault made  that  Winter  upon  our  Gen- 
eral-in-Chief's main  position,  was  re- 
pelled with  prompt,  decided  energy. 
The  circumstances  were  as  follows : 

A  portion  of  the  melodious  Hutch- 
inson family,  having  been  attracted 
to  Washington  by  the  novelty  of  find- 
ing the  public  halls  of  that  city  no 
longer  barricaded  against  the  utter- 
ance of  humane  and  generous  senti- 
ments, had  there  solicited  of  the  Sec- 
retary of  War  permission  to  visit  the 
camps  across  the  Potomac,  in  order  to 
break  the  monotony  and  cheer  the 
ruggedness  of  Winter  with  the  spon- 
taneous, unbought  carol  of  some  of 
their  simple,  heartfelt  songs.  Gen. 
Cameron  gave  their  project  not  mere- 
ly his  cordial  assent,  but  his  emphatic 
commendation;  and,  thus  endorsed, 
they  received  Gen.  McClellan's  gra- 
cious permission.  So  they  passed  over 
to  the  camps,  and  were  singing  to  de- 
lighted crowds  of  soldiers,  when  an 
officer's  quick  ear  caught  the  drift  of 
what  sounded  like  Abolition  !  Forth- 
with, there  were  commotion,  and  ef- 
fervescence, and  indignation,  rising 
from  circle  to  circle  of  the  military 
aristocracy,  until  they  reached  the 


630 


THE 


AMERICAN 


CONFLICT. 


very  highest,  drawing  thence  the  fol- 
lowing order : 

"  By  direction  of  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan, 
the  permit  given  to  the  Hutchinson  Family 
to  sing  in  the  camps,  and  their  p>ass  to  cross 
the  Potomac,  are  revoked,  and  they  will  not 
be  allowed  to  sing  to  the  troops.'''' 

As  the  then  freshly  uttered  stanzas 
of  John  G-.  Whither,  which  thns 
caused  the  peremptory,  ignominious 
suppression  and  expulsion  of  the 
Hutchinsons,  are  of  themselves  a 
memorable  and  stirring  portion  of 
the  history  of  our  time,  they  may  fit- 
ly— as  they  will  most  worthily — close 
this  volume : 

"  EIN  FESTE  BURG  1ST  UNSER  GOTT."  1Q 

(Luther's  Hymn.) 

We  wait  beneath  the  furnace-blast 

The  pangs  of  transformation : 
Not  painlessly  doth  God  recast 
And  mold  anew  the  nation. 
Hot  burns  the  fire 
Where  wrongs  expire ; 
Nor  spares  the  hand 
That  from  the  land 
Uproots  the  ancient  evil. 

The. hand-breadth  cloud  the  sages  feared 

Its  bloody  rain  is  dropping  ; 
The  poison-plant  the  fathers  spared 
All  else  is  overtopping. 
East,  West,  South,  North, 
It  curses  earth ; 
All  justice  dies, 
And  fraud  and  lies 
Live  only  in  its  shadow. 

What  gives  the  wheat-field  blades  of  steel  ? 

What  points  the  rebel  cannon  ? 
What  sets  the  roaring  rabble's  heel 
On  th'  old  star-spangled  pennon  ? 
What  breaks  the  oath 
Of  th'  men  o'  th'  South? 
What  whets  the  knife 
For  the  Union's  life?-. 
Hark  to  the  answer :  Slavery  ! 

Then  waste  no  blows  on  lesser  foes, 

In  strife  unworthy  freemen : 
God  lifts  to-day  the  vail,  and  shows 

The  features  of  the  demon ! 


O  North  and  South, 
Its  victims  both, 
Can  ye  not  cry, 
"Let  Slavery  die!" 
And  Union  find  in  Freedom? 

What  though  the  cast-out  spirit  tear 

The  nation  in  his  going  ? 
We,  who  have  shared  the  guilt,  must  share 
The  pang  of  his  o'erthrowing ! 
Whate'er  the  loss, 
Whate'er  the  cross, 
Shall  they  complain 
Of  present  pain 
Who  trust  in  God's  hereafter? 

For  who  that  leans  on  His  right  arm 

Was  ever  yet  forsaken  ?  . 
What  righteous  cause  can  suffer  harm 
If  He  its  part  has  taken  ? 
Though  wild  and  loud 
And  dark  the  cloud, 
Behind  its  iblds 
His  hand  upholds 
The  calm  sky  of  To-Morrow ! 

Above  the  madd'ning  cry  for  blood, 

Above  the  wild  war-drumming, 
Let  Freedom's  voice  be  heard,  with  good 
The  evil  overcoming. 
Give  prayer  and  purse 
To  stay  the  Curse 
Whos»  wrong  we  share, 
Whose  shame  we  bear, 
Whose  end  shall  gladden  Heaven ! 

In  vain  the  bells  of  war  shall  ring 

Of  triumphs  and  revenges, 
While  still  is  spared  the  evil  thing 
That  severs  and  estranges. 
But  blest  the  ear 
That  yet  shall  hear 
The  jubilant  bell 
That  rings  the  knell 
Of  Slavery  forever ! 

Then  let  the  selfish  lip  be  dumb, 
,  And  hushed  the  breath  of  sighing : 
Before  the  joy  of  peace  must  come 
The  pains  of  purifying. 
God  give  us  grace, 
Each  in  his  place, 
To  bear  his  lot. 
And,  murmuring  not, 
Endure  and  wait  and  labor ! 


"  'Our  God  is  a  strong  fortress,'  (or  castle.) 


ADDITIONAL  NOTES. 


i 

It  is  stated  on  page  119  that  "the  Synod  of 
Kentucky  adopted  a  report  on  Slavery  which 
condemned  slaveholding  broadly  and  thorough- 
ly," etc.  That  statement  is  not  literally  accurate. 
The  Synod  met  at  Danville,  in  the  Autumn  of 
1835,  and  appointed  a  Committee  of  ten — five 
ministers  and  five  elders — who  were  instructed 
to  "  digest  and  prepare  a  plan  for  the  moral  and 
religious  instruction  of.  our  slaves,  and  for  their 
future  emancipation,"  etc.  The  Committee  did 
its  duty  faithfully,  and  the  report  in  due  time 
appeared — its  character  being  such  as  is  indicated 
in  the  text.  The  result  was  duly  submitted  to 
the  Synod  at  its  next  meeting,  at  Bardstown,  in 
1836;  but  no  action  was  taken  thereon,  beyond 
noting  on  the  Synod's  records  the  reception  of 
the  report,  which  had  meantime  been  printed, 
and  had  excited  some  feeling  among  the  slave- 
holders. 

II. 

The  statement  on  page  120,  respecting  the 
attitude  of  the  New  School  Presbyterian  Church 
toward  Slavery,  is  held  by  members  of  that 
Church  to  require  qualification,  in  view  of  its 
more  recent  action  on  the  subject.  The  mate- 
rial facts  are  as  follows : 

At  the  session  of  the  General  Assembly  at 
Cleveland,  Ohio,  for  1857,  a  report  on  Slavery 
of  the  Committee  on  Bills  and  Overtures,  after 
having  been  debated  with  great  animation  for 
the  better  part  of  a  week,  was  finally  adopted 
(June  3d),  by  the  decisive  majority  of  169  yeas 
to  26  nays.  This  report  is  largely  devoted  to  a 
recital  of  the  former  testimonies  of  the  Presby- 
terian Church  on  the  general  subject,  and  is 
leveled  at  the  new  Southern  doctrine  that  Sla- 
very is  essentially  beneficent  and  just — a  doc- 
trine notoriously  at  variance  with  that  originally 
maintained  by  this  Church.    The  Report  says : 

"  We  are  especially  pained  by  the  fact  that 
the  Presbytery  of  Lexington,  South,  have  given 
official  notice  to  us  that  a  number  of  ministers 
and  ruling  elders,  as  well  as  many  church-mem- 
bers, in  their  connection,  hold  slaves  'from 
principle'  and  'of  choice,'  'believing  it  to  be, 
according  to  the  Bible,  right,'  and  have,  without 
any  qualifying  explanation,  assumed  the  respon- 
sibility of  sustaining  such  ministers,  elders,  and 
church-members,  in  their  position.  We  deem  it 
our  duty,  in  the  exercise  of  our  constitutional 
authority,  'to  bear  testimony  against  error  in 
doctrine,  or  immorality  in  practice,  in  any  church, 
Presbytery,  or  Synod,'  to  disapprove  and  ear- 
nestly condemn  the  position  which  has  been  thus 
assumed  by  the  Presbytery  of  Lexington,  South, 
as  one  which  is  opposed  to  the  established  oon- 


victions  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  and  must 
operate  to  mar  its  peace  and  seriously  hinder  its 
prosperity,  as  well  as  bring  reproach  on  our  holy 
religion ;  and  we  do  hereby  call  on  the  Presby- 
tery to  review  and  rectify  their  position.  Such 
doctrine  and  practice  cannot  be  permanently 
tolerated  in  the  Presbyterian  Church.  May  they 
speedily  melt  away  under  the  illuminating  and 
mellowing  influence  of  the  Gospel  and  grace  of 
God  our  Saviour ! 

"  We  do  not,  indeed,  pronounce  a  sentence  of 
indiscriminate  condemnation  upon  all  our  breth- 
ren who  are,  unfortunately,  connected  with  the 
system  of  Slavery.  "We  tenderly  sympathize 
with  all  those  who  deplore  the  evil,  and  are 
honestly  doing  all  in  their  power  for  the  present 
well-being  of  their  slaves,  and  for  their  com- 
plete emancipation.  We  would  aid,  and  not 
embarrass,  such  brethren.  And  yet,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  General  Assembly  of  1818,  we 
would  '  earnestly  warn  them  against  unduly  ex- 
tending the  plea  of  necessity ;  against  making 
it  a  cover  for  the  love  and  practico  of  Slavery, 
or  a  pretense  for  not  using  efforts  that  are  law- 
ful and  practicable  to  extinguish  this  evil.'  " 

Upon  the  announcement  of  this  vote,  Rev. 
James  G.  Hamner,  of  the  Synod  of  Virginia, 
presented  the  protest  of  twenty-two  Southern 
members  of  the  Assembly  against  this  doctrine 
of  the  Report,  saying : 

"  We  protest — Because,  while  past  General 
Assemblies  have  asserted  that  the  system  of 
Slavery  is  wrong,  they  have  heretofore  affirmed 
that  the  slaveholder  was  so  controlled  by  State 
laws,  obligations  of  guardianship,  and  humanity, 
that  he  was,  as  thus  situated,  without  censure 
or  odium  as  the  master.  This  averment  in  the 
testimony  of  past  Assemblies  has  so  far  satis- 
fied the  South,  as  to  make  it  unnecessary  to  do 
more  than  protest  against  the  mere  anti-Slavery 
part  of  such  testimony. 

"  We  protest,  then,  now,  That  the  present  act 
of  the  Assembly  is  such  an  assertion,  without 
authority  from  the  word  of  God,  or  the  organic 
law  of  the  Presbyterian  body. 

"  We  protest  that  such  action  is,  under  pre- 
sent conditions,  the  virtual  exscinding  of  the 
South,  whatever  be  -the  motives  of  those  who 
vote  the  deed. 

"We  protest,  that  such  indirect  excision  is 
unrighteous,  oppressive,  uncalled  for — the  ex- 
ercise of  usurped  power — destructive  of  the 
unity  of  the  Church — hurtful  to  the  North  and 
the  South — and  adding  to  the  peril  of  the  Union 
of  these  United  States." 

Prom  the  date  of  this  action — which  seems  to 
have  been  but  a  more  explicit  reaffirmance  of 
the  older  testimonies  of  the  Church  against  Sla- 
very, and  to  have  stopped  far  short  of  declaring' 
slaveholding  inconsistent  with  the  Christian 
character — the  New  School  Presbyterian  Church 
had  hardly  a  foothold  in  the  Slave  States. 


632 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


in. 

The  Albany  Evening  Journal  of  May  20th,  1861, 
commenting  on  a  very  abusive  attack  on  G-ov. 
Seward,  in  a  then  recent  Richmond  Whig,  with 
regard  to  his  assurances  to  or  through  Judge 
Campbell,  respecting  Fort  Sumter,  says : 

"  If  the  Secretary  of  State  were  at  liberty  to 
reply  to  ex-Judge  Campbell,  revealing  all  that 
passed  between  them  on  several  occasions,  not 
only  no  imputation  of  insincerity  would  rest 
upon  the  Secretary,  but  the  facts  would  seriously 
affect  Judge  Campbell's  well-established  reputa- 
tion for  candor  and  frankness.  These  revela- 
tions would  furnish  no  evidence  of  either  the 
'  falsehood'  or  '  duplicity'  of  Governor  Seward  ; 
for  there  was  nothing  of  either  in  his  conver- 
sations. 

"We  violate  no  confidence  in  saying  that  Judge 
Campbell  balanced  long  between  Loyalty  and 
Secession  ;  the  preponderance,  up  to  a  late  day, 
being  in  favor  of  the  Union.  If  he  at  any  time 
looked  with  favor  or  satisfaction  upon  Secession, 
he  was  much  and  generally  misunderstood.  If 
he  did  not  seriously  contemplate  remaining  in 
the  Union  and  upon  the  Bench,  he  was  misun- 
derstood. If,  during  that  period  of  mental  trial, 
he  was  acting  in  harmony  with  the  leading  ene- 
mies of  the  Union,  he  was  grossly  misunderstood. 

"That  Gov.  Seward  conversed  freely  with 
Judge  Campbell,  we  do  not  deny ;  nor  do  we 
doubt,  that,  in  those  conversations,  at  one  period, 
he  intimated  that  Fort  Sumter  would  be  evacuat- 
ed. He  certainly  believed  so ;  founding  his  opinion 
upon  a  knowledge  of  Gen.  Scott's  recommenda- 
tion. Subsequently,  the  President  deemed  it  his 
duty  to  authorize  an  effort  to  reenforce  and  pro- 
vision that  fortress.  We  do  not  know  whether 
Gov.  Seward  met  Judge  Campbell  after  that 
change  of  purpose ;  but  he  was  not  at  liberty,  if 
they  did  meet,  to  reveal  what  was  so  well  kept. 

"  But,  whatever  Gov.  Seward  said  or  intimated 
to  Judge  Campbell,  was  true  at  the  time  it  was 
said. 

"  That  Judge  Campbell  reported  to  the  Confede- 
rate President  half  that  he  said  or  intimated,  is 
more  than  doubtful." 

IV.  • 

The  statement  on  pages  449-50,  that  the 
original  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  was  impelled  by 
a  stringent,  imperative  political  necessity — that 
hostilities  were  inaugurated,  to  prevent  the  else 
inevitable  crumbling  away  and  utter  collapse  of 
the  Confederacy — has  received  additional  con- 
firmation since  that  portion  of  this  work  was 
stereotyped,  through  an  averment  of  Hon.  Jere. 
Clemens,  late  U.  S.  Senator  from  Alabama,  who, 
in  a  Union  meeting  held  at  the  city  of  his  resi- 
dence, Huntsville,  Ala.,  March  13,  1864,  said: 

"Before  I  declare  this  meeting  adjourned,  I 
wish  to  state  a  fact  in  relation  to  the  commence- 
ment of  the  war:  Some  time  after  the  ordi- 
nance of  Secession  was  passed.  I  was  in  Mont- 
gomery, and  called  upon  President  Davis,  wko 
was  in  that  city.  Davis,  Memminger,  the  Secre- 
tary of  "War,  Gilchrist,  the  member  from  Lowndes 


County,  and  several  others,  were  present.  As  I 
entered,  the  conversation  ceased.  They  were 
evidently  discussing  the  propriety  of  firing  upon 
Fort  Sumter.  Two  or  three  of  them  withdrew 
to  a  corner  of  the  room ;  and  I  heard  Gilchrist 
say  to  the  Secretary  of  "War,  1  It  must  be  done. 
Delay  two  months,  and  Alabama  stays  in  the  Union. 
You  must  sprinkle  blood  in  the  faces  of  the  people.1 " 
The  Secretary  of  War  in  question  was  Mr. 
Leroy  Pope  Walker,  also  a  citizen  of  Huntsville, 
who  made,  the  evening  after  Fort  Sumter's  sur- 
render, a  public  proclamation  that  the  Rebels 
would  have  possession  of  Washington  City  within 
a  month.  He  was  an  original  Secessionist ;  while 
Senator  Clemens,  with  most  of  the  people  of  their 
county  (Madison),  clung  to  the  Union,  so  long  as 
they  could  with  safety.  That  Mr.  Clemens  has 
fabricated  such  a  statement  with  regard  to  two 
of  Ms  neighbors,  by  whom  it  might  so  easily  be 
refuted,  if  untrue,  will  hardly  be  suggested. 

V. 

That  the  speedy  capture  and  occupation  of 
Washington  by  the  Confederates  were  confi- 
dently anticipated  by  their  chiefs,  as  among  the 
earliest  and  most  inevitable  results  of  the  War 
they  were  inaugurating,  has,  perhaps,  been  suffi- 
ciently established  in  due  course  ;  but,  since  the 
Governors  of  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  Kentucky, 
Tennessee,  and  Missouri,  with  others,  boldly 
and  broadly  charged  President  Lincoln  with 
wantonly  inaugurating  civil  war,  by  his  Procla- 
mation calling  out  75,000  militia  for  the  defense 
of  the  Federal  metropolis,  it  may  be  proper  to 
accumulate  evidence  on  this  head.  Here  is  what 
Wm.  H.  Russell,  TJie  Times1  s  correspondent,  who 
was  in  the  South  when  Sumter  was  reduced,  re- 
cords in  his  '  Diary,'  under  the  date  of  April  20th, 
1861,  just  after  dining  at  Charleston  with  W. 
H.  Trescott,  W.  Porcher  Miles,  Gov.  Manning, 
and  other  pioneers  of  Disunion : 

"  The  Secessionists  are  in  great  delight  over 
Gov.  Letcher's  proclamation,  calling  out  troops 
and  volunteers ;  and  it  is  hinted  that  Washing- 
ton will  be  attacked,  and  the  nest  of  Black  Repub- 
lican vermin,  which  haunt  the  capital,  be  driven 
out." 

VI. 

It  is  stated  on  page  348,  that  the  North  Caro- 
lina Convention,  which  ultimately  passed  an 
Ordinance  of  Secession,  was  the  same  which  the 
people  of  that  State  originally  elected  to  keep  her 
in  the  Union,  and  decided  should  not  meet.  The 
fact  appears  to  have  been  otherwise — that  the 
Convention  which  did  the  deed  was  a  new  one, 
elected  just  after  the  reduction  of  Fort  Sumter, 
and  under  the  popular  conviction  that  Mr.  Lin, 
coin  was  waging  an  unprovoked  war  on  '  the 
South.' 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX, 


A. 

Abaco,  The  Island  of,  176;  598. 
Abolitionists,  Convention  of  in  1823—4,  113; 

irreverent  and  'infidel'  tendencies  of,  121;  they  oppose 

Clay  for  President  in  1844,  167. 

Abolition  Society  of  Pennsylvania,  The,  107. 

Aborigines,  The,  Enslavement  of,  27 ;  do.  by 
the  Puritans,  30. 

Academies,  etc.,  number  of,  by  the  8th  Census,  23. 

Adams,  Charles  Francis,  nominated  for  Vice- 
President  by  the  1  Freesoilers,'  191. 

Adams,  Ex-Goy.,  one  of  South  Carolina's  Com- 
missioners to  Washington,  411. 

Adams,  Green,  of  Kentucky,  194. 

Adams,  John,  allusion  to,  33 ;  35  ;  42 ;  letter 
from,  to  Robt.  G.  Evans,  51 ;  letter  to  Jefferson  on  the 
Missouri  Eestriction,  SO;  81;  becomes  President  in 
1797,  83 ;  his  Treaty  with  the  Indians  in  179S,  102. 

Adams,  John  Quincy,  his  firm  stand  in  behalf 
of  the  Georgia  Indians,  103;  attempts  to  purchase 
Texas,  149;  unites  in  an  anti-Annexation  Address, 
159;  allusion  to,  24S;  250;  favors  the  Panama  Con- 
gress, 267-8;  357. 

Adams,  Samuel,  42. 

Adrain,  Garnet  B.,  of  N.  J.,  Resolution,  374. 
Agriculture,  19;  20-21;  statistics  of  by  8th 

U.  S.  Census,  22 ;  value  of  implements  of,  by  do.,  23. 

Aiken,  William,  (Gov.)  of  S.  C,  241. 

Aiken,  U.  S.  Cutter,  surrendered  to  the  South 
Carolinians,  410 ;  reappears  as  the  Petrel  599. 

Alabama,  123;  Legislature  of  favors  Annexa- 
tion, 157;  the  '  Union'  party  triumph  in,  211 ;  Legisla- 
tive instructions  to  her  delegates  to  the  Democratic 
National  Convention,  312-13;  statement  and  withdraw- 
al of  the  delegation,  313-14;  secession  meeting  in,  330; 
her  Commissioner  at  the  South  Carolina  Convention, 
344  ;  Governor  of,  sends  a  dispatch  to  the  Convention, 
845;  secession  of,  and  vote  thereon,  347;  population  in 
I860,  351 ;  "  Declaration  of  Causes"  at  Mobile,  355 ;  of- 
fers volunteers  to  South  Carolina,  410;  seizure  of  Fed- 
eral property  in,  412;  surrender  of  the  U.  S.  cutter 
Cass  to,  41-5. 

Alabama,  The  Privateer,  is  fitted  out  at  Liver- 
pool, for  Rebel  service,  603. 
Alamo,  The,  battle  of,  150. 
Albany,  X.  Y.,  '  Peace'  Convention  at,  388-96. 

Albany  Argus,  The,  editorial  of,  sympathizing 
with  and  justifying  'the  South,'  895;  against  'coercion,' 
390;  on  the  President's  call  for  troops,  456-7. 

Albany  Evening  Journal,  The,  editorial  of,  in  fa- 
vor of 1  Conciliation,'  360-61 ;  citation  from,  632. 

Alexander  I.  of  Russia,  arbitrates  between 
Great  Britain  and  the  United  States,  176. 

Alexandria,  Ya.,  originally  included  in  the 
District  of  Columbia,  142;  retaken  by  Unionists,  533. 

Alien  and  Sedition  Laavs,  82-3  ;  are  denounced 

by  Jefferson,  in  his  "  Resolutions  of  '98,"  84. 

Alleghany  Summit,  Ya.,  battle  at,  527. 
Allentown,  Pa.,  military  organization  at,  in 
1800,  for  defense  of  '  Southern  Rights,'  896. 


Alton,  111.,  Lovejoy's  speech  at  the  Court  House 

of,  138;  Federal  property  taken  thither  from  St.  Louis, 
490.   See  Lovejoy,  and  The  St.  Louis  Observe?: 

American  Colonization  Society,  The,  73. 

American  Society  for  promoting  National  Uni- 
ty, The,  439 ;  programme  of,  439-40. 

Anderson,  Maj."  Robert,  evacuates  Fort  Moul- 
trie and  occupies  Fort  Sumter,  407-3;  The  Charleston 
Courier  accuses  him  of  commencing  civil  war,  403; 
attempt  to  relieve  him  by  the  Star  of  the  West,  412 ; 
confers  with  Col.  Lamon,  442 ;  is  notified  that  he  will 
be  attacked,  443 ;  surrenders  the  fort,  44S ;  his  report  to 
the  Secretary  of  "War,  449 ;  is  in  command  in  Kentucky ; 
solicits  reinforcements  from  Fremont,  587;  012;  613. 

Anderson,  Richard  C,  of  Ky.,  appointed  to  at- 
tend the  Panama  Congress,  268-9. 
Andrew,  Gov.  John  A.,  of  Mass.,  a  delegate 

to  the  Chicago  Convention,  321 ;  his  correspondence 

with  Mayor  Brown,  of  Baltimore,  465-6. 
Andrews,  T.  A.,  of  Phila.,  letter  refusing  the  use 

of  his  hall  to  George  W.  Curtis,  307. 
Annapolis,  Md.,  landing  of  Gen.  Butler  at,  469. 
Anthony,  Henry  B.,  of  R.  L,  his  speech  on  the 

crisis,  3S1-2  ;  allusion  to,  404. 

Archy,  a  fugitive  slave  in  California,  218. 

Arista,  Gen.,  defeated  at  Palo  Alto,  187. 

Arkansas,  legislative  enslavement  of  free  ne- 
groes in,  73 ;  withdraws  from  the  Democratic  National 
Convention,  315;  341 ;  secession  of,  and  vote  thereon, 
343  ;  population  in  1800,  351 ;  progress  of  secession  in ; 
Convention  votes  nt4  to  secede,  4S6:  Ordinance  of  se- 
cession passed ;  the  nature  of  her  tenure  to  her  soil ; 
action  of  the  '  conservatives,"  487 ;  seizure  of  Fort  Smith, 
4*8;  testimony  of  Gen.  Gantt  in  regard  to  Union  senti- 
ment in,  515. 

Arkansas  Territory,  organization  of,  75  ;  108. 

Armstrong,  Commander,  orders  the  surrender 
of  the  Pensacola  forts,  412. 

Atchison,  David  R.,  his  advice  to  the  Border 
Ruffians,  237;  surrounds  Lawrence  with  an  army  of 
Missourians,  243;  244  ;  283;  defeats  a  small  Union 
force  in  Northern  Missouri,  5S7. 

Atiierton,  Charles  G.,  of  X.  H.,  offers  resolu- 
tions to  reject  petitions  for  the  abolition  of  Slavery  in 
the  District  of  Columbia,  146. 

Atlantic  States,  The,  poverty  of  at  close  of 

Revolution,  18;  obstacles  to  transportation  in,  19. 

Aughey,  Rev.  John  A.,  of  Miss.,  reference  to, 
850;  extract  from  his  "Iron  Furnace,"  514. 

Augusta,  Ga.,  seizure  of  the  Federal  Arsenal, 
411 ;  a  letter  from,  iu  testimony  of  the  common  use  of 
deadly  weapons  by  the  Southrons,  500. 

Augusta  (Ga.)  Chronicle,  The,  extract  from,  123; 
citation  from,  "Death  to  the  Abolitionist,"  128;  cita- 
tion from,  847. 

Austin,  Moses,  148. 

Austin,  Stephen  F.,  148;  150. 

Avery,  William  W.,  of  N.  C,  218  ;  his  resolves 

in  the  Democratic  National  Convention,  809-10 ;  his 

speech  there,  311 ;  818. 
Avis,  ('apt.  John,  referred  to  in  one  of  John 

Brown's  letters,  296;  his  treatment  of  old  Brown,  289. 

Ayres,  Capt.,  engaged  at  Blackburn's  Ford,  539. 


634  THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


B. 

Badger,  George  E.,  of  N.  C,  wants  liberty  to 

take  his  "  old  mammy"  to  Kansas,  231 ;  232. 

Baker,  Col.  Edward  D.,  422 ;  reenforces  Col. 
Devens  at  Ball's  Bluff,  622;  his  death,  623;  orders  from 
Gen.  Stone  to,  624. 

Bagby,  Arthur  P.,  of  Ala.,  on  Annexation,  174. 

Bailey,  Godard,  an  account  of  his  defalca- 
tions at  Washington,  410-11. 

Baldwin,  Roger  S.,  of  Conn.,  397;  393;  404. 

Baldwin,  Henry,  of  Pa.,  Ms  vote  on  the  Mis- 
souri Compromise,  80. 

Ballou,  Major,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545  ;  552. 

Ball's  Bluff,  Battle  of,  621  to  624;-  bravery  of 
the  Federal  troops  at.  625. 

Baltimore,  Dem.  Convention  of  1844  at,  164; 
Convention  of  1848  at.  191;  Conventions  at,  in  1852, 
222-3  :  Whig  Convention  of  1S56  at.  247;  Seceders'  and 
Douglas  Conventions  at,  317-18;  other  Conventions  at, 
318-19  ;  407 ;  420  ;  President  Lincoln's  passage  through, 
421;  461;  Secession  meeting  at,  462;  the  mobbing  of 
the  Federal  troops,  463-4  ;  great  Union  meeting;  at, 
471;  Gen.  Butler  takes  possession  of,  471 ;  472;  523-9. 

Baltimore  Exchange,  The,  endeavors  to  incite  a 
mob  against  Pres;dent  Lincoln,  420. 

Baltimore  Republican,  The,  420. 

BiUimore  Sun,  The,  428. 

Bi-igor  Union,  The,  citation  from,  392;  on  the 
President's  call  fur  troops.  45G. 

Banks,  Gen.  N.  P.,  elected  Speaker,  241 ;  suc- 
ceeds Gen.  Patterson,  539  ;  620;  at  Ball's  Bluif,  624. 

BAPrrsrs,  The,  and  Slavery,  119  to  121. 

Barbour,  James,  176. 

Bar3Dur,  Philip  P,  of  Va.,  his  remarks  on  the 

Missouri  question,  110. 
Barboursville,  Ky.,  captured  by  Zollicoffer,  614. 
B  ARB  a  urs  vr i l le,  Va.,  captured  by  Gen.  Cox.  524. 
Barber,  Tiios.  W.,  shot  dead  in  Kansas,  243. 
Barker,  George  P.,  166. 
Barnwell,  R.  W.,  of  S.  C,  a  Commissioner  to 

Washington,  411. 

Barringer,  Daniel  M.,  of  N.  C,  in  the  'Peace 

Conference,1  401. 

Barron,  Com.  S.,  surrenders  at  Hatteras,  600. 
Barrow,   "Washington,  Commissioner  to  the 

Confederacy  from  Gov.  Harris.  482. 

Barry,  Major,  on  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  545. 
Barry,  Mr.,  of  Miss.,  withdraws  from  the  Dem. 
Convention  at  Charleston,  314. 

Bartow,  Gen.,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  543  ;  515. 

Bates,  Edward,  of  Mo.,  247;  in  the  Chicago 
Convention,  321 ;  in  President  Lincoln's  Cabinet,  42S. 

Baton  Rouge,  La.,  Arsenal  seized  at,  412  ;  490. 

Bayard,  James  A.,  (father,)  107. 

Bayard,  James  A.,  (son,)  315;  presides  at  the 
Seceders'  Convention,  317,  on  Secession,  350;  437;  562. 

Beaufort,  S.  C,  captured  by  Federals,  605. 

Bejauregard,  Gen.  G.  P.  T.,  442 ;  demands  the 
surrender  of  Fort  Sumter,  443;  proclamation  by,  534; 
commands  the  Rebels  at  Bull  Bun,  539;  his  official 
report,  541  to  546 ;  551. 

Beckwith,  Major,  at  Lexington,  Mo.,  588. 

Bedford,  Pa.,  fugitive-slave  arrests  near,  210. 

Bee,  Gen  ,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Bull  Run,  543  ;  545. 

Bell,  John,  his  election  to  Congress,  in  1827, 
aided  by  negro  votes,  179 ;  207 ;  nominated  for  Presi- 
dent, 319 ;  325;  432 ;  vote  cast  for  him  in  Ky.,  492. 

Bell,  Joshua  F  ,  of  Ky.,  338. 

Belmont,  Mo.,  battle  of,  594  to  597;  The  Chicago 
Journal 8  report,  595-6;  other  reports,  etc.,  597. 

Bendix,  Col.,  (Union,)  529;  530. 

Benham,  Gen.,  525;  on  Floyd's  retreat,  526. 

Benning,  Henry  L.,  in  Dem.  Convention,  315. 

Benton,  Col.  Thomas,  106;  159;  speech  against 

the  Annexation  treaty,  164-5;  his  repugnance  to  An- 
nexation overcome,  174;  207;  on  the  Dred  Scott  deci- 
sion, 253-9 ;  allusion  to,  438. 


Berrien,  John  M.,  of  Ga.,  268. 

Big  Bethel,  Va.,  battle  of,  529  to  531. 

Big  Springs,  Kansas,  Free-State  meeting  at,  240. 

Bing,  Julius,  at  Bull  Run,  547  ;  550. 

Bingham,  John  A.,  of  Ohio,  570. 

Birney,  James  G.,  candidate  for  President,  167. 

Black  Jack,  Kansas,  battle  of,  244. 

Black,  Jeremiah  S.,  his  opinion  of  Secession, 
371-2;  appointed  Secretary  of  State,  411. 

Blair,  Col.  Frank  P.,  490;  has  an  interview 
with  Gen.  Price,  491 ;  his  strictures  on  Gen.  Scott,  543- 
9;  555;  offers  a  resolve  to  expel  John  B.  Clark,  562. 

Blair,  Montgomery,  in  Lincoln's  Cabinet,  428. 

Blakey,  Geo.  D.,  in  Chicago  Convention,  321. 

Blue  Mills  Landing,  Mo.,  Union  defeat  at,  587. 

Bocock,  Thos.  S.,  of  Va.,  304-5. 

Bolivar  Hights,  captured  by  the  Federals,  620. 

Boone ville,  Mo.,  Rebels  defeated  at,  574. 

Booth,  Sherman  M.,  case  of,  at  Milwaukee,  215. 

Border  Ruffians,  one  of  their  resolutions,  235 ; 
further  resolves,  236  ;  237 ;  233 ;  numerous  outrages  by, 
242  to  245;  their  manner  of  voting,  249;  are  taught 
piety  by  John  Brown,  286 ;  allusion  to,  490. 

Boreman,  Arthur  J.,  chairman  of  the  Wheel- 
ing Convention,  518. 

Borland,  Solon,  of  Ark.,  226 ;  he  seizes  Fort 
Smith,  488. 

Boston,  memorializes  Congress  on  the  Mis- 
souri question,  73;  respectable  Pro-Slavery  mob  at, 
127;  repugnance  to  the  i  ugitive  Slave  Law,  215. 

Boston  Courier,  The,  on  Secession,  etc.,  356. 

Boston  Post,  The,  on  the  President's  calls,  457. 

Boteler,  A.  R.,  of  Va.,  372. 

BorcE,  W.  W.,  of  S.  C,  speech  at  Columbia,  332. 

Boyd,  Col.,  reenforces  Price  at  Lexington,  587. 

Boyd,  Lixn,  of  Ky.,  208;  chosen  Speaker,  226; 
again  chosen,  250. 

Bradley,  Dr.,  of  Plymouth,  Mass.,  125. 

Bragg,  Gen.  Braxton,  his  order  as  to  Fort 
Pickens,  436  ;  601;  atta.ks  Wilson's  Zouaves,  etc.,  602. 

Braine,  Lieut.,  commanding  the  Monticello,  601. 

Branch,  Adjt.,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Branson,  Jacob,  arrested  by  Sheriff  Jones,  242. 

Breckinridge,  John  C,  nominated  for  Vic3- 
President,  246;  elected,  24S;  vote  for,  in  the  Douglas 
Convention,  31S;  nominated  for  President,  319 ;  322; 
review  of  the  canvass,  323  to  326 ;  classified  table  of  the 
Presidential  vote,  328;  allusion  to,  376;  402;  declares 
Lincoln  duly  elected,  418;  421;  437;  is  answered  by 
Douglas,  441;  vote  cast  for  him  in  Kentucky,  492,  5G4»- 
5 ;  flees  to  the  Confederacy,  614 ;  his  Address,  615. 

Breckinridge,  Senator,  Jefferson's  letter  to,  85. 
Breckinridge,  Rev.  Robt.  J.,  495. 
Breshwood,  Capt.,  surrenders  the  cutter  Mc- 

Clellan  to  the  Rebels,  413. 
Briggs,  Gov.  Geo.  N.,  of  Mass.,  106 ;  appoints 

Samuel  Hoar  as  Commissioner  to  Charleston,  180. 

Bright,  Jesse  D.,  of  Ind.,  197. 
Brinckerhoff,  Jacob,  of  Ohio,  189. 
Brodhead,  John,  his  letter  to  Jeff.  Davis.  278. 
Brolaski,  Capt.,  (Union,)  killed  at  Belmont,  597. 
Brooks,  James,  speech  on  the  Mexican  War,  200. 
Brooks,  Preston  S.,  assails  Senator  Sumner,  209. 
Brown,  Aaron  V.,  sends  T.  W.  Gilmer's  letter 

to  Gen.  Jackson,  158. 
Brown,  Albert  G.,  of  Miss.,  visits  Buchanan, 

277 ;  his  interview,  278 ;  373. 

Brown,  B.  Gratz,  at  Chicago  Convention,  321. 
Brown,  Col.,  (Union,)  at  Chicamicomico,  600. 
Brown,  Col.  Harvey,  at  Fort  Pickens,  601. 
Brown,  David  Paul,  126. 
Brown,  Frederick,  killed  by  Martin  "WTiite,  284. 
Brown,  Gov.  Joseph  E.,  of  Ga.,  speech  at  Con- 
vention, 337 ;  his  Message,  urging  Secession,  347. 


ANALYTICAL 


Brown,  John,  at  the  battle  of  Black  Jack,  244 ; 

279;  his  early  life,  230  to  232;  what  Kedpath  says  of 
him,  2S2-3;  at  the  battle  of  Osawatooiie,  234;  his 
speech  at  Lawrence,  234-5 ;  he  releases  a  number  of 
slaves, 286;  "battle  of  the  spurs,"  2S6 ;  goes  to  Canada; 
his  "Constitution,"  2S7-8;  goes  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
289 ;  captures  the  Arsenal,  290-91 ;  the  fight,  292-3 ; 
his  capture,  294-5 ;  letter  to  L.  Maria  Child,  295 ;  letter 
to  his  family,  296;  letter  to  Mr.  Humphrey,  297 ;  his 
execution,  298-9;  Congressional,  305. 

Brown,  Mayor,  of  Baltimore,  461 ;  harangues 
the  mob,  464;  sends  envoys  to  the  President;  his  cor- 
respondence with  Gov.  Andrew,  465-6 ;  his  interview 
with  the  President,  466. 

Brown,  Milton,  of  Term.,  111. 

Brown,  Oliver,  killed  at  Harper's  Ferry,  292. 

Brown,  Owen,  son  of  John  Brown,  288;  es- 
capes from  Harper's  Perry,  299. 

Brown,  Watson,  killed  at  Harper's  Ferry,  291. 

Brownell,  Francis  E.,  kills  the  murderer  of 

Ellsworth,  533. 

Browning,  0.  H,  of  111.,  in  Senate,  565-7. 
Brownlow,  Parson,  citation  from,  484. 
Brunswicker,  TJie,  (Mo.,)  citation  from,  238. 
Bryan,  Guy  M.,  of  Texas,  withdraws  from 
the  Dem.  Convention,  315. 

Bryant,  William  Cullen,  166. 

Buchanan,  James,  94;  presents  an  Aboli- 
tion petition  to  Congress,  144 ;  in  the  Convention  of 
1S48,  191  ;222;  nominated  for  President,  246;  elected, 
248;  appoints  R.  J.  Walker  Governor  of  Kansas,  243; 
urges  the  acceptance  of  the  Lecompton  Constitution, 
250;  252  ;  253;  his  Imugural,  extract  from,  264;  at- 
tends the  Ostend  meeling,  etc.,  273;  condemns  the  ar- 
rest of  William  Walker,  276;  is  visited  by  Albert  G. 
Brown,  277-S;  offers  a  reward  for  the  capture  of  John 
Brown,  286 ;  338 ;  his  Message  in  the  S.  C.  Convention, 
345;  his  last  Annual  Message,  367  to  371;  408;  sends 
Cushing  to  Charleston,  409;  411;  414;  423;  vote  cast 
for  him  in  Kentucky,  492;  letter  to  Jeff.  Davis,  511. 

Buckingham,  Gov.,  of  Conn.,  is  reelected,  326. 
Buckner,  Aylett,  of  Ky.,  194. 
Buckner,  Gen.  Simon  B.,  organizes  State  Guard; 
Louisville  Journal  curses  him,  494;  496  ;  509  ;  609. 

Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  the  Free-Soil  Convention  at, 
191 ;  its  Platform,  192. 

Buford,  Col.,  of  Ala.,  his  arrival  in  Kansas, 
243 ;  besieges  Lawrence,  243. 

Bull  Run,  battle  of,  539  to  547  ;  our  army 
moves  on  Centerville,  539;  map  of  the  field,  540;  our 
feint  disregarded,  541;  Beauregard's  report,  extracts 
from,  541  to  546;  account  of  The  Richmond  Din- 
patch,  542-3;  other   accounts,  dispatches,  etc.,  543 

;  -4;  losses  sustained,  545;  Heintzelman — Pollard— 
Bing,  546-7;  causes  of  the  disaster,  547  to  554;  Gen. 
Scott's  failure  to  send  force  enough,  etc.,  550 ;  evil  of 
short  enlistments,  551;  552;  consternation  of  the 
North,  552-3  ;  618. 

Burnett,  Henry  C,  of  Ky.,  304 ;  496  ;  555  ; 
becomes  a  member  of  the  Rebel  Congress  and  a  Senator 
on  the  same  day,  617. 

Burnett,  L.  W.,  of  K  J.,  letter  from  Gov. 

Price  to,  439. 

Burnett,  Thos.  L.,  of  Ky.,  Rebel  Congress,  617. 

Burns,  Anthony,  the  case  of,  215  ;  220. 

Burns,  Wm.,  makes  a  speech  at  Baltimore,  462. 

Burnside,  Col.,  at  Bull  Run,  541. 

Burrow,  B.,  of  Ark.,  in  Dem.  Convention,  315. 

Burt,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Ball's  Bluff,  624. 

Burt,  Gen.  Armistead,  of  S.  C,  196 ;  378. 

Burton,  Gov.  Wm.,  of  Del.,  Message,  350 ;  460-61. 

Butler,  Andrew  P.,  of  S.  C,  denounces  Clay's 
Compromise  measures,  205 ;  299. 

Butler,  Pierce,  of  S.  C,  remarks  on  the  adop- 
tion of  the  Constitution,  45,  47. 

Butler,  Gen.  Benjamin  F.,  in  the  Charleston  Con- 
vention, .311;  318;  arrives  in  Maryland  with  the  8th 
Mass.,  468;  at  Annapolis,  409-70 :  takes  possession  of 
Baltimore,  471;  ''born  in  Liberia,"  508;  528;  seizes 
Geo.  P.  Kane,  529 ;  commands  the  Hattoras  expedition, 
699;  600;  627. 


INDEX.  635 

Butler,  Gen.  Wm.  0.,  of  Ky.,  nominated  for 

Vice-President,  191. 

Butler,  Major,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Belmont,  597. 

c. 

Cabell,  E.  C,  envoy  from  Jackson  to  Davis,  587. 

•Cairo,  111.,  threatened  by  the  Rebels,  583. 

Calhoun,  John  C,  73;  is  contrasted  with  Gen. 
Jackson,  83-9;  93;  resigns  the  Vice-Presidency,  etc., 
94;  supports  the  Compromise  Tariflf,  101 ;  his  duplicity 
with  the  Georgia  Indians,  103 ;  his  report  on  incendiary 
mail-matter,  etc.,  129;  143-4;  154-5-6;  Secretary  of 
State  under  Tyler,  155;  159;  instructs  our  Minister  at 
Paris  with  regard  to  Annexation,  169  to  171 ;  175;  18S; 
in  the  Democratic  Convention  of  1S48, 191;  194;  248, 
his  opinions  compared  with  the  Dred  Scott  decision, 
259  ;  265;  Keverdy  Johnson's  recollections  of,  357-8; 
allusion  to,  384. 

California,  in  Congress,  190  to  196  ;  201 ;  Presi- 
dent Taylor's  Message  in  relation  to,  202 ;  congression- 
al, 203 ;  Mason,  Davis,  Clay,  and  Webster  on  Slavery 
in,  204-6;  admitted  as  a  State,  208;  fugitive-slave  case 
in,  218;  301 ;  withdraws  from  Dem.  Convention,  318. 

Caln  Meeting,  Abolition  petition  from,  144. 

Cambreleng,  C.  C,  109. 

Cameron,  Col.  James,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Cameron,  Gen.  Simon,  in  the  Chicago  Conven- 
tion, 321;  a  member  of  President  Lincoln's  Cabinet, 
42S;  449;  visits  Gen.  Fremont  in  Missouri,  590;  his 
visit  to  Sherman  in  Kentucky,  615;  endeavors  to  post- 
pone the  attack  at  Bull  Kun,  618. 

Campbell,  Judge  John  A.,  his  opinion  in  Dred 

Scott's  case,  258;  430;  letter  to  Gov.  Seward,  433-4; 
The  Albany  Evening  Journal  on,  632. 

Camp  Carlile,  Ohio,  Virginia  Unionists  at,  520. 

Camp  Cole,  Mo.,  a  Union  regiment  routed  at,  575. 

Camp  Jackson,  Mo.,  captured  by  Lyon,  490 ;  491. 

Canterbury,  Conn.,  mob  violence  at,  127. 

Carlile,  Col.,  (Union,)  moves  against  Jeff.  Thomp- 
son at  Fredericktovvn,  Mo.,  591. 

Carlile,  John  S.,  518-19;  takes  his  seat  in  the 
XXXVIIth  Congress,  559  ;  takes  his  seat  in  the  Sen- 
ate, 561-2 ;  demurs  to  Mr.  Browning's  views,  567 ;  op- 
poses the  '  Peace1  measure  of  Johnson,  of  Mo.,  571. 

Carltle,  Thomas,  25;  505. 
Carr,  Wilson,  N.  C,  speech  at  Baltimore,  462. 
Carrick's  Ford,  battle  of,  523-4. 
Carroll,  Charles,  President  of  the  Colonization 
Society,  72. 

Carthage,  Mo.,  Rebels  defeated  near,  575. 
Cartter,  David  K,  in  Chicago  Convention,  321. 
Cass,  Gen.  Lewis,  164;  opposes,  as  Minister  at 

Paris,  the  Slave-Trade-suppression  quintuple  treatv, 
177;  189;  his  opinion  of  the  Wihnot  Proviso,  190; 
nominated  for  President,  191;  222,  229;  232;  246; 
resigns  his  post  at  Washington,  411. 

Cass,  The  Cutter,  given  up  to  Rebels,  413. 

Castle  Pinckney,  occupied  by  S.  Carolina,  409. 

Catron,  Judge,  opinion  in  Dred  Scott  case,  258. 

Channlng,  Wm.  E.,  125;  142;  to  Webster,  353. 

Chapman,  Reuben,  in  Dem.  Convention,  314. 

Charleston,  S.  C,  58 ;  rifling  of  the  mails  at, 
128-9;  reception  accorded  to  Mr.  Hoar  at,  180  to  184; 
joy  evinced  at  Lincoln's  election  at,  332 ;  336 ;  incident 
at  the  Wistar  Club  at,  853-4;  reception  of  Caleb  Cush- 
ing at,  etc.,  409 ;  surrender  of  the  cutter  Aiken  at,  410 ; 
excitement  during  the  bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter, 
447-8.   See  Fort  Sumteb. 

Charleston  Courier,  The,  citation  from,  129;  331- 
2;  337 ;  announces  the  raising  of  troops  in  the  North  to 
defend  '  the  South,'  396 ;  on  the  occupation  of  Sumter 
by  Major  Anderson,  408. 

Charleston  Mercury,  The,  332 ;  on  the  forts  in 
Charleston  harbor,  407. 

Charlestown,  Ya.,  John  Brown  and  his  followers 
imprisoned  at,  294 ;  their  execution  there,  298-9 ;  emis- 
saries sent  to  Baltimore  from,  462. 

Charlotte,  N.  C,  U.  S.  Mint  seized  at,  485. 


636 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Chase,  Salmon  P.,  229;  moves  to  amend  the 
Nebraska  bill,  232;  233;  his  majority  for  Governor  of 
Ohio,  300;  in  the  Chicago  Convention,  321;  in  the 
'Peace  Conference,1  398;  401;  his  remarks  there,  404; 
a  member  of  President  Lincoln's  Cabinet,  423. 

Chase,  Samuel,  38 ;  107. 

Chatham,  C.  W.,  Brown's  Convention  there,  287. 
Chatham-st.  Chapel,  Abolition  meeting  at,  126. 
Cheatham,  Gen.,  fights  at  Belmont,  596. 
Cheat  Mountain,  Va.,  battle  of,  526. 
Cherokees  and  Creeks,  their  expulsion  from 
Georgia,  102  to  106;  allusion  to,  378. 

ChesnuTj  James,  Jr.,  of  S.  C.,  his  views  on  Sla- 
very, 73 ;  his  speech  at  Columbia,  331 ;  resigns  his  seat 
in  the  U.  S.  Senate,  337 ;  visits  Fort  Sumter,  448. 

Chicago,  III,  Republican  Convention  at,  319. 

Chicago  Journal,  Tlie,  on  battle  of  Belmont,  595-6. 

Chicago  Times,  The,  on  the  President's  call,  457. 

Chicamicomico,  N.  C,  the  fighting  at,  600-1. 

Christabel,  quotation  from  the  poem  of,  121. 

Christiana,  Pa.,  fugitive-slave  case  there,  215. 

Church,  Sanford  E.,  of  N.  T.,  in  Douglas  Con- 
vention, 318;  in  Albany  'Peace1  Convention,  3S8. 

Cincinnati,  Ohio,  the  fugitive-slave  case  at,  218- 
19  ;  Democratic  Convention  at,  245. 

Cincinnati  Enquirer,  The,  392;  citation  from,  406. 

Cincinnati  Gazette,  The,  citation  from,  524. 

Clark,  John  B.,  of  Mo.,  304-5;  expelled  from 
the  House  for  treason,  562 ;  a  Rebel  Brigadier,  574. 

Clark,  Daniel,  of  N.  H.,  381 ;  his  substitute  for 

the  Crittenden  Compromise,  382 ;  337 ;  403 ;  allusion  to, 
50S;  his  resolve  to  expel  Rebel  members,  560;  570. 

Clark,  M.  L.,  of  Mo.,  574;  at  Wilson's  Creek,  582. 

Clarksburg,  Va.,  surrender  of  Rebels  at,  520. 

Clay,  Cassius  M.,  in  the  Chicago  Convention, 
321 ;  commands  the  volunteers  at  Washington,  470. 

Clay,  James  B.,  of  Ky.,  in  the  'Peace  Confer- 
ence,1 399 ;  allusion  to,  509. 

Clay,  Henry,  18;  President  of  the  Colonization 
Society,  72;  opposes  the  Missouri  Restriction,  75;  his 
injunction  to  the  Missouri  delegate,  SO;  90;  introduces 
his  Compromise  Tariff,  101 ;  defends  the  Cherokees,  102 ; 
proposes  Emancipation  in  Kentucky,  111;  143-9;  is 
written  to  by  Tyler  inlS25, 154 ;  155;  156;  his  letter  to 
The  X<ttion<il  Intelligencer,  etc.,  167;  review  of  the 
Presidential  canvass,  163;  his  instructions  to  Mr.  Gal- 
latin, 176;  in  the  Whig  Convention  of  1S4S,  192;  his 
Compromise  of  1850, 203  ;  replies  to  Jeff.  Davis,  205;  re- 
ports a  bill  organizing  Utah,  etc.,  207;  his  Compromise 
measures  adopted,  2(>S;  222;  Dixon's  opinion  of  Clay's 
sentiments,  230-1;  265;  favors  the  Panama  Congress, 
267;  instructions  to  Minister  Everett,  268 ;  instructions 
to  Messrs.  Anderson  and  Sergeant,  269;  letter  to  Leslie 
Combs,  etc.,  343-4;  he  likens  the  Union  to  a  marriage, 
357;  allusion  to,  399;  404;  Pollard's  estimate  of  Clay's 
influence,  etc.,  609-10. 

Clayton,  John  M.,  of  Del.,  190. 

Clemens,  Hon.  Jere.,  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,  632. 

Cleveland,  Ohio,  Gov.  Seward's  speech  at,  199  ; 

John  Brown's  proceedings  at,  2S3. 
Clingman,  Thomas  L.,  of  X.  C,  308;  329  ;  his 

prescription  for  " free  debaters,"  373;  allusion  to,  406; 

437;  in  Confederate  Congress,  435-6;  allusion  to,  514. 

Clinton,  De  Witt,  allusion  to,  18 ;  394. 
Clinton,  George,  allusion  to,  42 ;  264. 
Clinton,  George  Wm  speech  at  Albany,  394-5. 
Clinton  Hall,  X.  Y.,  proposed  meeting  at,  125. 
Clinton,  Miss.,  against  Abolitionists,  128. 
Clover,  Rev.  L.  P.,  letter  to  Gov.  Letcher,  397. 
Cobb,  Howell,  of  Ga.,  chosen  Speaker,  203  ; 
222  ;  258 ;  resigns  the  control  of  the  Treasury,  411 

Cochrane,  John,  of  N.  Y.,  374. 
Cockeysville,  Md.,  occupied  by  Federals,  471. 
Cogswell,  Col.  Milton,  at  Bail's  Bluff,  623-4. 
Colburn,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gent.  A.  V.,  621. 
Colcock.  C.  J.,  resigns  as  Coll.  at  Charleston,  336. 
Collamer,  Jacob,  of  Yt.,  308;  at  Chicago,  321 


Collinsville,  Conn.,  John  Brown  contracts  for 

a  thousand  pikes  at,  288. 

Colorado  Territory,  organized,  388. 

Columbia,  Pa.,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  216. 

Columbia,  S.  C.,  Legislature  convenes  at,  330; 
Chesnut's  speech  at,  331 ;  Boyce's  332 ;  Puffin's,  885. 

Columbus,  Christopher,  implicated  in  the  Slave- 
Trade,  26 ;  discovers  cotton  in  the  West  Indies,  57. 

Colujibus,  Ohio,  President  Lincoln  at,  419. 

Combs.  Gen.  Leslie,  of  Ky.,  letter  to,  343-4 ;  492. 

Comet,  The  Brig,  lost,  with  cargo  of  slaves,  176. 

Concord,  N.  H.,  pro-Slavery  mob  at,  127. 

Congregation alists,  The,  and  Slavery,  119. 

Connecticut,  slave  population  in  1790;  troops 
furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  37;  first  Aboli- 
tion society  in,  107 ;  108;  diminished  Republican  ma- 
jority in,  800 ;  Buckingham  reelected  in,  326. 

Conner,  James,  resigns  at  Charleston,  336. 

Conway,  Gov.  Elias  W.,  of  Ark.,  341. 

Cook,  Capt.,  routed  at  Camp  Cole,  Mo.,  575. 

Cook,  with  John  Brown,  298  ;  is  executed,  299. 

Copel and,  with  John  Brown,  298 ;  is  executed, 299. 

C0PP0C,with  John  Brown, 294;  298;  executed,299. 

Coppoc,  escapes  from  Harper's  Ferry,  299. 

Corcoran,  Col.  Michael,  533;  wounded  and 

taken  prisoner  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Cortes,  discovers  cotton  in  Mexico,  58. 

Corwin,  Thomas,  of  Ohio,  appointed  Chairman 
of  a  Select  Committee,  372 ;  his  report,  386-7 ;  offers 
a  joint  resolve  to  amend  the  Constitution,  387-8 ;  405. 

Cotton  Gin,  history,  53-66.    See  Whitney. 

Cox,  Gen.,  (Union,)  captures  Barboursville,  Va., 
and  pursues  Wise,  524-5. 

Cox,  Rev.  Samuel  H.,  his  church  mobbed,  126. 

Cox,  Samuel  S.,  of  Ohio,  offers  a  '  Peace'  resolu- 
tion in  the  House,  570. 

Cranch,  Judge,  signs  an  Abolition  petition,  142* 

Crandall,  Prudence,  persecuted  for  teaching 

colored  children,  127. 

Crawford,  Martin  J.,  a  Confederate  Commis- 
sioner at  Washington,  430  to  436. 

Crawford,  Wm.  H.,  of  Ga.,  91. 

Crittenden,  J.  J.,  of  Ky.,  308 ;  pleads  for  '  Con- 
ciliation' in  the  Senate,  373;  introduces  his  Compro- 
mise, 376-7;  reflections  on  its  nature,  378  to  881  ;  383; 
402 ;  403 ;  presides  over  the  Kentucky  Convention,  495 ; 
555 ;  offers  a  resolution  in  the  House,  568. 

Croghan,  Col.  St.  George,  (Rebel,)  killed,  526. 
Cross-Lanes,  Va.,  Federals  defeated  at,  525. 
Cruse,  Davtd,  a  Missouri  slaveholder,  slain,  286". 1 
Cuba,  268  to  272;  its  acquisition  demanded  by 
the  Democratic  Convention  of  1860,  278. 

Cumberland,  U.  S.  Frigate,  at  Norfolk,  478. 
Cuming,  Col.  Wm.,  of  Ga.,  91. 
Curtin,  Gov.  Andrew  G.,  of  Pa.,  elected,  326. 
Curtis,  Geo.W.,  suppressed  at  Philadelphia,  367. 
Curtis,  Judge  B.  R.,  252 ;  on  Dred  Scott,  260-3. 
Cushing,  Caleb,  146;  chosen  President  of  the 

Charleston  Convention,  309;  resigns  the  chair,  318; 

President  of  the  Seceders'  Convention,  318;  sent  to 

Charleston  by  Buchanan,  409. 
Cuyler,  Theodore,  speech  at  the  Philadelphia 

'  Peace'  meeting,  365 ;  welcomes  President  Lincoln,  419. 

D. 

DAKOTAn  Territory,  organization  of,  388. 
Dallas,  George  M.,  of  Pa.,  on  the  Tariff  and 

Slnvery,  92;  nominated  for  Vice-President,  164;  191. 
Dane,  Nathan,  reports  Ordinance  of  1787,  40. 
Daniel,  Judge,  of  Virginia,  on  Dred  Scott,  257-8. 
Darien  (Ga.)  Resolutions,  The,  33. 
Davis,  Col.  T.  A.,  (Union,)  at  Bull  Run,  544. 
Davis,  Com.  C.  H.,  rescues  Walker  at  Rivas,  276. 
Davis,  Garret,  of  Ky.,  allusion  to,  615. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


637 


Davis,  Gen-.  Jeff.  C,  in  command  at  Jefferson 

City,  DSC ;  5S 7 ;  is  directed  to  intercept  Price,  539. 
Davis,  Henry  Winter,  votes  for  Pennington, 
306 ;  resolve,  in  the  Committee  of  Thirty -three,  3S6 ; 
is  beaten  by  May,  for  Congress,  555. 

Davis,  Jefferson,  97 ;  votes  against  Gen.  Tay- 
lor, 199;  opposes  Clay's  Compromise  measures,  204; 
heads  the  '  State  Rights'  Ticket  in  Miss.,  211 ;  in  the 
Dem.  Convention  of  1S52,  222 ;  251 ;  letter  from  Brod- 
head  to,  278 ;  his  seven  resolves  in  Congress,  306  to 
309 ;  in  the  Convention  of  I860,  317 ;  is  answered  by 
Henry  Clay,  343 ;  in  favor  of  '  Conciliation,'  373 ;  374 ; 
his  proposition  to  amend  the  Constitution,  381;  382; 
consents  to  serve  on  the  Committee  of  13,  3S3 ;  3S8 ; 
elected  President  of  the  Confederacy ;  his  speeches  at 
Jackson,  Miss.,  and  Stevenson,  Ala.,"  415 ;  his  Inaugu- 
ral, 415-16 ;  427 ;  his  Cabinet,  429 ;  his  duplicity  with 
regard  to  Maryland,  472 ;  sends  a  Commissioner  to  Ar- 
kansas, 4S6;  extracts  from  his  Message,  497-8 ;  his  Mes- 
sage of  July  20th,  498;  506-7;  capture  of  his  corre- 
spondence; letter  from  Buchanan  to,  511;  letters  from 
Reynolds  and  Pierce,  512-13 ;  is  present  at  Bull  Run, 
543;  his  dispatch  describing  the  battle,  544;  forms  an 
alliance  with  Gov.  Jackson,  577;  writes  to  President 
Lincoln  respecting  the  captured  privateersmen,  599. 

Davis,  John,  of  Mass.,  189. 

Davis,  John  G-.,  of  Ind.,  named  for  Speaker,  305. 

Davis,  John  W.,  of  Ind.,  chosen  Speaker,  186. 

Dawson,  Wm.  C,  of  Ga.,  229. 

Dayton,  Jonathan,  LL.  D.,  44. 

Dayton,  William  L.,  nominated  for  Vice-Presi- 
dent, 246 ;  in  the  Chicago  Convention,  321. 

De  Bow's  Review,  citation  from,  73. 

Declaration  of  Independence,  The,  extract 

from  the  original ;  reasons  for  a  certain  omission,  34 ;  its 
adoption,  35 ;  its  precepts  defied  by  Judge  Taney,  254. 

Delaware,  slave  population  in  1790,  36;  37; 
Legislature  favors  the  Missouri  Restriction,  78;  with- 
drawal of  from  the  Douglas  Convention,  318;  refuses 
to  secede ;  answer  to  the  Miss.  Commissioner,  350 ; 
population  in  1860,  351 ;  407;  Gov.  Burton's  action  with 
regard  to  the  President's  call  for  troops,  460 ;  555. 

De  Sausstjre,  W.  F.,  of  S.  C,  resolution  of,  346. 

De  Soto,  discovers  the  Mississippi ;  his  death,  53. 

Detroit,  Mich.,  fugitive-slave  arrests  at,  216. 

Detroit  Free  Press,  The,  citation  from,  392  ;  on 
the  President's  call  for  troops,  457. 

Devens,  Col.,  at  Ball's  Bluff,  621. 

Dickinson,  John,  of  Del.,  45. 

Dickinson,  Daniel  S.,  191 ;  at  Charleston,  317. 

Dickinson,  Mr.,  of  Miss.,  Com.  to  Delaware,  350. 

District  of  Columbia,  142;  143;  petitions  to 

abolish  Slavery  in,  143  to  147;  Gott's  resolution,  193; 
Clay's  compromise  measures  regarding,  203;  popula- 
tion in  1860,  351. 

Diven,  Col.  Alexander  S.,  of  JST.  T.,  572. 

Dix,  John  A.,  his  repugnance  to  Annexation 
overcome,  174;  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  41 2 ;  his 
celebrated  order,  413;  appointed  a  Major-General,  529. 

Dixon,  Archibald,  of  Ky.,  Ms  proposed  amend- 
ment to  the  Nebraska  bill,  228;  concurs  with  Mr.  Doug- 
las, 229 ;  231 ;  at  the  Union  meeting  at  Louisville,  493. 

Dixon,  James,  of  Conn.,  on  the  Rebellion,  565. 

Doddridge,  Philip,  110. 

Dodge,  Augustus  C.,  of  Iowa,  submits  the  Ne- 
braska bill  to  the  Senate,  227. 

Donaldson,  Marshal,  of  Kansas,  244. 

Donelson,  Andrew  J.,  for  Vice-President,  247. 

Dorset,  Mr.,  of  W.  Ya.,  favors  new  State,  519. 

Dorsheimer,  Major,  on  Zagonyi's  charge,  592. 

Doubleday,  Capt.  Abner,  at  Fort  Sumter,  444. 

Dougherty,  Col.,  wounded  at  Belmont,  597. 

Dougherty,  Lieut.,  killed  at  Belmont,  597. 

Douglas,  Stephen  A.,  189;  194;  reports  a  bill 
to  organize  Oregon,  196;  proposes  to  extend  the  36' 
30'  line  to  the  Pacific,  197;  198 ;  reports  a  bill  lo  admit 
California,  and  organize  Utah  and  New  Mexico,  207 ; 
222;  bill  to  organize  Nebraska,  226 ;  his  report  accom- 
panying it,  227-8;  the  Nebraska-Kansas  bill,  228;  re- 
sponds to  Seuator  Dixon,  230 ;  in  the  Dem.  Convention 


of  1856,  246;  opposes  the  Lecompton  Constitution, 
250;  canvasses  Illinois  with  Lincoln.  301 ;  302;  Demo- 
cratic hostility  to  in  Congress,  306;  in  the  Convention 
of  1860, 317;  nominated  for  President,  318;  322;  review 
of  the  canvass,  323  to  326;  classified  table  of  the  Presi- 
dential vote,  32S ;  favors  the  Union,  342 ;  in  the  Com- 
mittee of  Thirteen,  3S3 ;  402 ;  motion  in  favor  of  tho 
House  plan,  403  ;  436-7;  heartily  supports  his  whole 
country,  440-1 ;  his  reply  to  Breckinridge,  441 ;  vote 
cast  for  him  in  Kentucky,  492 ;  said  to  have  complained 
that  'the  South  were  too  easily  satisfied,'  512. 

Dow,  William,  shot  dead  in  Kansas,  241. 

Downs,  of  La.,  denounces  Clay's  measures,  205. 

Dranesville,  battle  of,  625-6. 

Drayton,  Commander  E.,  at  Port  Royal,  605. 

Drayton,  Gen.  T.,  (Rebel,)  at  Port  Royal,  605. 

Drywood,  Mo.,  skirmish  at,  585. 

Dug  Spring,  Mo.,  Rebels  defeated  at,  577. 

Dumont,  Col..  Philippi,  522;  Carrick's  ford,  523. 

Dunn,  Wm.  M.,  of  Ind.,  'Peace'  project  of,  374. 

Du  Pont,  Com.  Samuel  F.,  604 ;  bombards  the 
Port  Loyal  forts,  604;  Pvebels  surrender  to,  605;  627. 

Duryea,  COL.  H.  B.,  529;  at  Little  Bethel,  531. 

E. 

Earle,  Thomas,  biographer  of  Benj.  Lundy.  115. 

Early,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  at  Bull  Run,  543. 

East  Tennessee,  Declaration  of  Grievances  by 
the  people  of,  483-4;  Unionism  in;  persecution  by  tho 
Rebels,  484;  her  expectations  from  our  forces  in  Ken- 
tucky, 616;  her  hopes  blasted  by  Schoepf  s  retreat,  617. 

Eddy,  Sam.,  of  R.  I.,  on  Missouri  Compromise,  80. 

Edmonds,  John  W.,  166. 

Edmundson,  Henry  A.,  of  Ya.,  abettor  of  the 
assault  on  Sumner,  299. 

Edwards,  Rev.  Jonathan,  extract  from  hia 
sermon  on  the  Slave-Trade,  etc.,  50 ;  70 ;  255 ;  501. 

Edwardsville,  111.,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  217-18. 

Elliot,  John  M.,  of  Ky.,  in  Conf.  Congress,  617. 

"Elliot's  Debates,"  extract  from,  81. 

Ellis,  Gov.  John  W.,  of  N.  C,  calls  a  Conven- 
tion, 348;  his  seizure  of  Federal  property,  411-12:  an- 
swers President's  call  for  troops,  459  ;  exerts  his  influ- 
ence for  Secession  ;  seizes  Federal  property,  etc.,  485. 

Ellsworth,  Col.,  at  Alexandria,  and  death,  533. 

Elmore,  John  A.,  Commissioner  from  Alabama 
to  the  South  Carolina  Convention ;  his  speech,  344-5. 

Elseffer,  Mr.,  speech  at  Tweddle  Hall,  394-5. 

Elzey,  Col.  Arnold,  (Rebel.)  at  Bull  Run,  543. 

Emancipator,  The,  112. 

Emerson,  Dr.,  owner  of  Dred  Scott,  251-2. 

Encomium,  The,  wrecked,  with  slaves,  176. 

English,  William  H.,  of  Ind.,  proviso  to  the 

Nebraska  bill,  233 ;  250 ;  a  '  Peace '  proposition,  374. 

Enterprise,  The,  driven  into  Bermuda,  176. 

Eppes,  Mr., of  Fla.,  at  Charleston  Convention,  314. 

Etheridge,  Emerson,  is  threatened  with  "cold 
steel  and  bullets,"  if  he  speaks  for  the  Union,  484 ; 
chosen  Clerk  of  the  House,  555. 

Eustis,  captured,  with  Mason  and  Slidell,  606. 

Evans,  Robt.  J.,  letter  to,  from  John  Adams,  51. 

Evarts,  Jeremiah,  on  Slavery  and  Indians,  106. 

Evarts,  Wm.  M.,  of  N.  T.,  at  Chicago  Con.,  321. 

Everett,  Alexander  H.,  his  instructions  re- 
specting Cuba,  263. 

Everett,  Edward,  early  pro-Slavery  opinions 
of,  109;  extract  from  his  Message  as  Governor  of 
Massachusetts,  124;  his  diplomacy  with  respect  to 
Cuba,  270  to  273;  nominated  for  Vice-President,  319; 
letter  to,  from  Eeverdy  Johnson,  358. 

Ewell,  Gen.,  repulsed  at  Bull  Run,  544. 

Exports,  value  of,  by  8th  Decennial  Census,  23. 

F. 

Fairfax  Court-House,  Va.,  Union  cavalry  dash 
into,  533;  redecupied  by  our  forces,  620. 


638 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Fairfield,  Mr.,  of  Me.,  offers  petitions  for  Abo- 
lition in  the  Federal  District,  143. 

Faneuil  Hall,  Boston,  is  refused  for  a  meeting 
to  consider  the  circumstances  of  Lovejoy's  death,  142. 

Fannin,  Col.,  captured  and  shot  in  Texas,  150. 

Farnham,  Col.  N.  L.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Fayetteville,  N".  C,  seizure  of  Arsenal,  411 ;  485. 

"Federalist,  The"  citation  from,  42;  45;  46. 

Federalists,  The,  their  political  blunders,  ,82 ; 

their  foreign  policy,  265. 

Female  Anti-Slavery  Society,  mobbed,  12*7. 

Field,  David  Dudley,  1GG;  in  the  'Peace'  Con- 
ference, 39S ;  absent  from,  400. 

Fllllbustering,  with  regard  to  Cuba,  2G9-270; 
participators  in,  never  brought  to  justice  in  the  Union, 
275;  indorsed  by  the  Democratic  party,  277-8;  de- 
nounced by  the  Republicans,  278. 

Fillmore,  Millard,  nominated  for  Vice-Presi- 
dent, 192;  his  accession  to  the  Presidency,  208;  in  the 
Whig  Convention  of  1852,  223;  nominated  for  Presi- 
dent, 247;  his  speech  at  Albany,  248;  the  vote  he  re- 
ceived, 248;  vote  cast  for  him  in  Kentucky,  492. 

Fisher,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Fitzpatrick,  Benjamin,  of  Ala.,  nominated  for 

Vice-President,  318. 
Florida,  invasions  of;  destruction  of  the  negro 
and  Indian  fort  there,  177;  withdraws  from  the  Demo- 
cratic Convention,  314;  secession  meeting  in,  330 ;  se- 
cession of,  and  vote  thereon,  347;  population  in  I860, 
351;  seizure  of  Federal  property;  Fort  Pickens  be- 
sieged, 412. 

Flour,  annual  product  of,  by  8th  census,  22. 

Floyd,  John,  Governor  of  Va.,  sympathizes  with 
the  Nullifiers,  100. 

Floyd,  John  B.,  his  opinion  on  the  Cuba  ques- 
tion, 263 ;  his  disposition  of  the  Federal  forces  in  Texas, 
840;  resigns  his  post  of  Secretary  of  War  ;  schedule  of 
his  order  for  transfer  of  arms  from  Pittsburgh,  408;  his 
reasons  for  resigning,  409 ;  an  account  of  his  defalca- 
tions, 410,  411 ;  allusion  to,  413;  Pollard's  enumeration 
of  the  services  of,  414;  allusion  to,  442;  506;  supersedes 
Gen.  Wise  in  West  Virginia;  the  battle  of  Carnifex 
Ferry,  525;  effects  his  escape  from  Gen.  Benham,  526/ 

Flournoy,  Francis  B.,  of  Ark.,  309;  315. 

Foote,  H.  S.,  of  Miss.,  197 ;  opposes  Clay's  Com- 
promise measures,  203;  does  not  object  to  abolishing 
the  Slave-Trade  in  the  District,  204;  207;  chosen 
4  Union'  Governor  of  Mississippi,  211. 

Foote,  Capt.,  at  the  battle  of  Belmont,  597. 

Forney,  Col.  John  II.,  (Rebel,)  allusion  to  in 

Bragg's  order,  43G;  wounded  at  Dranesville,  626. 

Forney,  John  W.,  chosen  Clerk  of  the  House, 

306;  chosen  Clerk  of  the  Senate,  555. 
Forsyth,  John  C,  to  envoy  from  Texas,  151, 
Fort  Beauregard,  besieged  and  taken,  G04-5. 
Fort  Clark,  bombarded,  599;  captured,  600. 
Ft.  Hatteras,  bombarded,  509;  captured,  600. 
Fort  Jackson,  Ga.,  seized  by  Georgia,  411. 
Fort  Jackson,  La.,  seized  by  the  State,  412. 
Fort  Macon,  seized  by  North  Carolina,  411. 
Fort  McRae,  seized  by  the  Florida  troops,  412. 
Fort  Morgan,  seized  by  Alabama,  412. 
Fort  Moultrie,  evacuated  by  Major  Anderson, 

407;  what  the  Charleston  papers  said,  407-S;  occu- 
pied by  S.  C,  409;  fires  on  Star  of  the  West,  412  . 

Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  occupied  by  Lieut.  Slemmer, 
412;  order  of  Bragg,  436;  President's  Message,  556; 
Rebel  attack  on  Santa  Rosa  Island,  etc.,  601-602. 

Fort  Pike,  seized  by  Louisiana  troops,  412. 

Fort  Pulaski,  seized  by  Georgia  troops,  411. 

Fort  Scott,  Kansas,  captured  by  Montgomery, 
235;  occupied  by  Gen.  Price,  585. 

Fort  Smith,  Ark.,  seized  by  Solon  Borland,  488. 

Fort  St.  Philip,  seized  by  Louisiana,  412. 

Fort  Sumter,  401 ;  Major  Anderson  takes  pos- 
session of;  what  the  Charleston  papers  said,  407-S;  the 
Star  of  the  "West,  412 ;  closely  invested,  436 ;  Gen.  Scott 
favors  the  evacuation  of,  436;  Col.  Lamon's  visit  to 


Charleston,  442 ;  commencement  of  the  bombardment, 
443-4 ;  map  of  the  contest ;  enthusiasm  of  the  defend- 
ers, 445;  report  of  an  eye-witness,  446-7 ;  Wigfall  visits  . 
the  fort,  448;  the  surrender, 44S-9 ;  great  excitement  at 
the  North,  453;  the  President's  Message,  556. 

Fort  Walker,  bombarded,  604 ;  captured,  605.  • 

Foster,  Ephraim  H.,  on  annexation,  172. 

Foster,  Henry  D.,  of  Pa.,  beaten,  by  Curtin,  326." 

Fouke,  Col.  Philip  B.,  anecdote  of,  597. 

France,  acquisition  of  Louisiana  by,  54 ;  cession 
of,  to  the  United  States,  56 ;  is  propitiated  to  favor  our 
Annexation  schemes,  169  to  171 ;  the  policy  of  Wasl&- 
ington  toward,  265;  extract  from  the  treaty  with,  265- 
266;  proposes  to  guarantee  Cuba  to  Spain,  270 ;  499. 

Frankfort,  Ky.,  Secessionists  to  meet  there,  493.' 
Franklin,  Benjamin,  35  ;  42;  107;  255;  385-6. 
Franklin,  Jesse,  of  N.  C,  Chairman  of  Com- 
mittee on  Indiana  Territory  memorials  for  Slavery,  53. 
Franklin,  T.  E.,  in  'Peace  Conference,'  401. 
Frederick,  Md.,  a  constable  at,  makes  an  offer 

to  the  sheriff  of  Montreal,  218;  the  Legislature  convenes 
at,  470;  a  Union  Home  Guard  organized  at,  471. 

Frederickto wn,  Mo.,  Rebels  beaten  at,  591. 

Free  Press,  The,  115. 

Free-Soilers,  The,  their  Convention  of  1848, 
191 ;  their  Platform,  192 ;  Convention  of  1852,  223. 

Free-State  Hotel,  at  Lawrence,  destroyed,  244. 

Frelinghuysen,  Theo.,  for  Yice-President,  164. 

Fremont,  John  C,  nominated  for  President,  246 ; 
the  vote  he  received,  24S;  causes  assigned  for  his  largo 
vote,  etc.,  299-300;  vote  cast  for  him  in  Kentucky,  492; 
appointed  Maj. -General  in  the  Regular  Army,  528;  ap- 
pointed to  the  Missouri  Department,  5S2;  his  letter  to 
the  President,  583-4;  his  testimony  before  the  Com- 
mittee on  the  Conduct  of  the  War,  584 ;  his  Proclama- 
tion of  Aug.  31,  1861,  5S5;  the  disposition  of  his  forces; 
his  reply  to  the  requisition  on  him  from  Washington, 
587;  his  efforts  to  relieve  Lexington,  587-8;  goes  to 
Jefferson  City,  589;  pushes  westward;  is  visited  by 
Gen.  Cameron  and  suite,  590;  reaches  Warsaw;  Zago- 
nyi's  charge,  591-2;  is  relieved  of  his  command,  593; 
review  of  the  difficulties  attending  his  campaign,  eta, 
593^1;  allusion  to,  627. 

Frost,  Gen.  D.  M.,  surprised  and  captured,  490. 

Fugitive  Slave  Law,  109;  210  to  224;  212-13. 

Fulton,  Robert,  18;  Eli  Whitney  to,  65  ;  68. 

G. 

Gaines,  Gen.,  ordered  to  Georgia,  103;  instructed 

to  destroy  Florida  fort,  177. 

Gallatin,  Mr.,  approaches  Great  Britain  with 
respect  to  fugitive  slaves,  176. 

Gamble,  H.  R.,  signer  of  a  letter  to  Lovejoy,  131; 
132 ;  makes  a  report  in  the  Missouri  Convention,  488 ; 
is  chosen  Governor  of  Missouri,  576. 

Gantt,  Gen.  E.  W.,on  Unionism  in  Arkansas,515. 

Gardner,  Lieut.  Col.,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  542. 

Garner,  Margaret,  the  case  of,  219. 

Garnett,  Muscoe  R.  H,  of  Va.,  exultingly  pro- 
claims the  secession  of  S.  C,  at  Washington,  407 ;  letter 
to  Trescott,  of  S.  C,  479-80. 

Garnett,  Gen.  Robert  S.,  attacked  at  Laurel 

Hill,  522;  at  Carriers  Ford,  523;  his  death,  524. 

Garnett,  Mr.,  of  Va.,  reports  in  favor  of  slave- 
holding  in  Indiana  Territory,  52. 

Garrard,  Col.,  in  command  at  Wildcat,  615. 

Garrett,  J.  "VV.,  President  of  B.  and  Ohio  Rail- 
road ;  his  dispatch  to  the  Baltimore  authorities,  465 ;  466. 

Garrisonians,  The,  116;  117. 

Garrison,  Wm.  Lloyd,  114;  sketch  of  his  life, 

115  to  117 ;  allusion  to,  121 ;  125;  127  ;  141. 
Gasconade  Bridge,  Mo.,  burnt  by  Rebels,  491. 
Gaston,  Judge  Wm.,  of  N.  C,  his  opinion  applied 

in  the  Dred  Scott  case,  261. 
Gates,  Gen.,  emancipates  his  slaves,  107;  515. 
Gaulden,  AY.  B.,  of  Ga.,  in  Dem.  Convention, 

316-17. 

Gauley  Bridge,  burnt  by  Gen.  Wise,  524. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX 


639 


Gauley  Mount,  Rosecrans's  attempt  on,  526. 

Geary  &  Weller,  in  the  Alton  riots,  137. 

Geary,  Gen.,  captures  Bolivar  Eights,  620. 

Geary,  John  W.,  Governor  of  Kansas,  249. 

Gen.  Armstrong,  The  Privateer,  603. 

Genius  of  Universal  Emancipation,  The,  112. 

George  IV.,  Manifesto  of  Jan.  9th,  1813,  607. 

Georgia,  settlement  of,  by  Oglethorpe,  31 ;  oppo- 
sition to,  and  introduction  of,  Slavery,  32;  Darien  Re- 
solutions on  Slavery,  33;  concurrence  of,  in  the  Decla- 
ration of  Independence,  35;  slave  population  in  1790; 
troops  furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  her  terri- 
torial claims.  37;  cedes  her  territory,  50;  in  connection 
with  the  Cotton  Gin,  63  to  65;  Gov.  Troup  sympa- 
thizes with  the  Nulliliers,  100;  her  perfidious  treatment 
of  the  Indians,  102  to  106;  108;  she  offers  a  reward  for 
the  arrest  of  Garrison,  122;  withdraws  from  the  Demo- 
cratic Convention,  315;  Mr.  Gaulden  protests,  316; 
Secession  meeting  in,  330;  Military  Convention  at 
Milledgeville.  337;  Stephens's  Union  speech,  342  to 
344;  her  appeal  for  delay  kept  secret  in  the  South  Caro- 
lina Convention,  345;  Secession  of  and  vote  thereon, 
347;  population  in  1S60,  351 ;  offers  volunteers  to  South 
Carolina,  410;  seizure  of  Federal  property  by,  411. 

Ghent,  Treaty  of,  102  ;  do.  results,  176. 
Giddings,  Joshua  R.,  159;  321. 
Gilman,  Mr.,  of  Alton,  111.,  139  to  141. 
Gilmer,  John  A.,  of  N.  C,  resolution  by,  305-6. 
Gilmer,  Thos.  W.,  to  The  Madisonian,  156;  158. 
Gist,  Gov.,  of  S.  C,  summons  his  Legislature, 

330 ;  his  Message,  330-31. 
Gleason,  Capt.,  at  siege  of  Lexington,  Mo.,  588-9. 
Glen,  Mr.,  of  Miss.,  in  Dem.  Convention,  314. 
Globe,  The,  143. 

Godfrey,  Gilman  &  Co.,  in  Alton  mob,  139-141. 
Gold,  export  of,  by  8th  Decennial  Census,  23. 
Goliad,  Texas,  battle  at,  150. 
Goodell,  William,  114;  125. 
Gorman,  Gen.,  at  Edward's  Ferry,  624. 
Gosport  ;  see  Norfolk. 

Gott,  Daniel,  of  N.  Y.,  his  resolve  condemning 
the  Slave-Trade  in  the  Federal  District,  193. 

Grafton,  Va.,  521;  522. 

Graham,  Wm.  A., of  N.  C,  forVice-President,223. 
Grant,  Gen.  U.  S.,  278;  solicits  reinforcements 

of  Fremont,  5S7,  sends  troops  against  Jeff.  Thompson, 

591;  his  attack,  on  the  Rebels  at  Belmont,  594  to  597  ; 

his  horse  is  killed  under  him  there,  597;  occupies  Pa- 

ducah,  612;  his  proclamation,  613. 

Great  Britain,  her  tardy  recognition  of  our 
independence,  17;  first  traffic  in  slaves  by,  2S;  early 
judicial  opinions  on  the  Slave-Trade,  29 ;  allusion  to, 
38;  prejudice  against  the  Cotton  Gin,  62;  the  war  of 
1812,91;  her  treaty  stipulations  with  regard  to  the 
Indians,  102;  accused  of  intriguing  against  our  Annex- 
ation schemes,  169  to  171 ;  controversy  with  regard  to 
fugitive  slaves,  175  to  177;  the  Holy  Alliance,  267; 
proposes  to  guarantee  Cuba  to  Spain,  270;  499;  action 
with  respect  to  Rebel  privateers;  precedents  furnished 
by  England  in  the  War  of  1812,  60S;  Mason  and  Slidell, 
606:  extract  from  the  Prince  Regent's  Manifesto  of 
1S13;  the  Queen's  Proclamation  of  1S61,  607;  demands 
and  receives  the  persons  of  Mason  and  Slidell,  60S. 

Grerle,  Lt.  John  T.,  killed  at  Great  Bethel,  531. 

Greene,  Mrs.  Gen.,  befriends  Whitney,  60-61. 

Green,  one  of  John  Brown's  men,  294;  298-9. 

Greenville,  Tonn.,  Union  Convention  at,  483. 

Gregg,  Col.  Maxcy,  at  Vienna,  Va.,  533. 

Grier,  Justice,  217;  on  Dred  Scott,  257. 

Grow,  Galusha,  of  Pa.,  offers  a  bill  for  the  ad- 
mission of  Kansas,  251  ;  is  a  candidate  for  Speaker, 
304 ;  chosen  Speaker  at  the  Extra  Session,  555. 

G  ruber,  Rev.  Jacob,  109. 

Grundy,  Felix,  beaten  by  John  Bell,  179. 

Guthrie,  James,  of  Ky.,  in  the  Democratic  Con- 
vention of  1S60,  817;  318;  his  report  in  the  'Peaco 
Conference,'  397-S  ;  his  plan  of  amendment,  and  tho 
voting  thereon,  399  to  401 ;  his  preamble,  and  tha 


adopted  propositions,  402;  takes  part  in  the  Union 
meeting  at  Louisville,  493. 
Guyandotte,  Va.,  captured  by  Rebels,  526. 


H. 

Hackley,  Prof.  Chas.  W.,  to  Jeff.  Davis,  512. 

Hagerstown,  Md.,  John  Brown  at,  288. 

Haggerty,  Lieut.  Col.,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

H alderman,  Dr.  J.  A.,  35. 

Hale,  John  P.,  of  N.  H.,  171;  175;  nominated 
for  President,  223  ;  224 ;  402  ;  his  report  on  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Norfolk  Navy  Yard,  47:3-4;  477. 

Hall,  Willard  P.,  of  Mo.,  225;  chosen  Lieut. 
Governor  of  his  State,  576. 

Halleck,  Gen.  Henry  W.,  succeeds  to  the  com- 
mand in  Missouri,  594. 

Hamilton,  Alexander,  42  ;  letter  from  Lafay- 
ette to,  51 ;  82 ;  107 ;  letter  to  Madison,  357. 

Hamilton,  Andrew  J.,  of  Texas,  339 ;  350. 

Hamilton,  Gen.  James,  Jr.,  of  S.  C,  169. 

Hamlet,  James,  a  fugitive  slave,  215. 

Hamlin,  Hannibal,  189;  nominated  for  Vice- 
President,  321. 

Hammet,  Wm.  H.,  of  Miss.,  161. 

Hammond,  James  H.,  of  S.  C,  144;  180;  181 ; 
330;  337. 

Hamner,  Rev.  James  G.,  on  Slavery,  631, 

Hampton,  Va.,  burnt  by  Magruder's  order,  529. 

Hampton,  Col.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  543. 

Hardy,  Commander  Robert,  603. 

Hardwicke,  Lord,  on  Slavery,  29. 

Harlan,  Mr,  of  Iowa,  307. 

Harney,  Gen.  Wm.  S.,  makes  a  compact  with 
Gen.  Price :  is  superseded,  491. 

Harper's  Ferry,  414;  arsenal  fired  and  evacu- 
ated, 462 ;  evacuated  by  Rebels,  535.   See  John  Brown. 

Harrisburg,  Pa.,  fugitive-slave  arrests  at,  216. 

Harrisburg,  Texas,  burnt  by  Santa  Anna,  150. 

Harris,  Gov.  Isham  G.,  of  Tenn.,  349 ;  his  an- 
swer to  the  President's  requisition,  459;  4S3;  612. 

Harris,  GexN.,  (Rebel,)  574;  576;  589. 

Harrison,  Wm.  Henry,  52-3;  154;  515. 

Hartford  Convention,  The,  85. 

Hatteras,  bombardment  of  the  forts  at,  599; 
their  capture,  600 ;  627. 

Ha wes,  Richard,  of  Ky.,  allusion  to,  509;  suc- 
ceeds Johnson,  as  '  Provisional'  Governor,  617. 

Hawkins,  Capt.,  at  Fredericktown,  Mo.,  591. 

Hawkins,  Col.,  (Union,)  600. 

Hawkins,  Jn.,  the  first  English  slave-trader,  28. 

Hayne,  Col.,  sent  to  W.  by  Gov.  Pickens,  412. 

Hayne,  Robert  Y.,  86 ;  93. 

Hazelhurst,  Isaac,  speech  at  the  Philadelphia 
1  Peace1  meeting,  3G6. 

Hazlitt,  with  Brown,  298;  is  executed,  199. 

Heintzelman,  Gen.  S.  P.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run, 
545;  official  report  of  the  battle,  546  ;  551. 

Helper,  Hinton  R.,  304. 

Hendricks,  T.  A.,  of  Ind.,  beaten  by  Lane,  326. 

Henry,  Alex.,  Mayor  of  Philadelphia ;  calls  a 
'  Peace1  meeting,  362 ;  his  speech,  363 ;  his  prohibition 
of  G.  W.  Curtis';  367 ;  406. 

Henry,  Gustavus  A.,  a  Commissioner  from  Ten- 
nessee to  the  Confederacy,  4S2. 

Henry,  Patrick,  33;  42;  speech  against  con- 
solidation of  Federal  power,  etc.,  81. 

Herkimer,  N.  Y.,  Dem.  Convention  at,  166. 

Hickory  Point,  Ks.,  Free-State  meeting  at,  242. 

Hicks,  Gov.  Tiios.  LL,  of  Md.,  refuses  to  con- 
vene his  Legislature,  349 ;  461;  harangues  the  Balti- 
more mob,  464  ;  465;  his  interview  with  the  President, 
466;  letter  from  Secretary  Seward  to,  467;  469;  his 
Message  to  tho  Legislature,  470-71 ;  issues  a  proclama- 
tion for  troops,  472. 


640 


THE  AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Hill,  D.  H..  report  of  fight  at  Bethel,  531. 

Hindman,  Thos.  C,  of  Ark.,  proposes  an  amend- 
ment to  the  Constitution,  374. 

Hoar,  Samuel,  account  of  his  mission  to  South 
Carolina,  178  to  1S5  ;  his  official  report,  185. 

Hodge,  Geo.  B.,  of  Ky.,  in  Rebel  Congress,  617. 

Holllns,  Commander,  his  Mississippi  fight,  603. 

Holman,  Mr.,  of  Ind.,  560 ;  561. 

Holmes,  John,  of  Mass.,  79;  his  vote  on  the 
Missouri  Compromise,  80 ;  265. 

Holt,  Joseph,  of  Ky.,  Secretary  of  "War,  499. 

Hopkins,  Ret.  Samuel,  37;  71;  254-5. 

Houston,  Sam.,  149;  goes  to  Texas,  150;  con- 
fers with  Jackson,  151 ;  beats  Eunnells  for  Governor, 
339 ;  his  death,  340.   See  Texas. 

Huger,  Gen.,  commands  near  Fort  Monroe,  529. 

Hughes,  Francis  W.,  439. 

Humphrey,  Rev.  Luther,  John  Brown  to,  297. 

Hunt,  Gen.  Memucan,  151. 

Hunter,  Gen.  David,  wounded  at  Bull  Run, 
545;  551;  593;  594. 

Hunter,  R.  M.  T.,  of  Ya.,  317;  a  Commissioner 
from  Davis  to  Gov.  Jackson,  577. 

Huntersville,  Va.,  Rebel  post  captured,  527. 

Hutchinsons,  The,  McClellan  expels,  629-30. 

I. 

Iberville,  erects  a  fort  on  the  Mississippi,  54. 

Ibrahim  Pacha,  plants  cotton  in  Egypt,  58. 

Illinois,  the  Douglas-Lincoln  debate  in,  301 ;  the 
result,  302;  the  State  pledges  assistance  to  the  Ken- 
tucky Unionists,  495.   See  Cairo  and  Alton. 

Imports,  value  of.  by  8th  decennial  census,  23. 

Indiana,  Republicans  beaten  in,  301;  Republi- 
cans a  majority  in,  326;  the  Stato  pledges  assistance  to 
the  Kentucky  Unionists,  495. 

Indiana  Territory,  formation  of,  efforts  to  in- 
troduce Slavery,  etc.,  52-3. 

Indianapolis,  Ind.,  President  Lincoln  at,  419. 

Indian  Corn,  19;  annual  product  of  in  1859,  22. 

Indianola,  Texas,  Star  of  the  West  seized  at,  413. 

Indians,  enslavement  of,  27;  do.  by  the  Puri- 
tans, 80;  treatment  of  the  Creeks  and  Cherokees  by 
Georgia;  President  Adams  protects  them  from  the 
Georgian  authorities,  etc.,  103;  President  Jackson  fa- 
vors their  expulsion  from  Georgia,  104;  their  lands  dis- 

{>osed  of  by  lottery,  105 ;  Georgia  defies  the  Indian 
aws,  and  hangs  Tassells,  106;  treaties  made  with  those 
of  Kansas,  235. 

Ingersoll,  Charles  J.,  of  Pa.,  reports  in  favor 

of  Annexation,  171 ;  extract  from  speech  in  1S45,  1S6. 

Ingersoll,  Joseph  R.,  of  Pa.,  speech  at  the  Phil- 
adelphia '  Peace'  meeting,  363. 

Iowa,  diminished  Republican  vote  in,  300-301. 

Iredell,  James,  of  N.  C,  explains  the  omission 
of  the  word  sla  ve  in  the  Constitution,  43. 

Iron,  product  of,  pig  and  wrought,  23. 

Irvine,  Col.,  crosses  into  West  Virginia,  521. 

Iverson,  Alf.,  of  Ga.,  'fire-eating'  speech  of,  373. 

J. 

Jackson,  Andrew,  contrasted ' with  Calhoun; 

their  early  life ;  are  chosen  President  and  Vice-Presi- 
dent, in  1S28,  etc.,  83-9;  he  advocates  the  Protective 
system,  89 ;  is  reelected  in  1832,  93;  his  orders  to  Gen. 
Scott  and  instructions  to  the  Collector  of  Charleston, 
94;  is  strikingly  contrasted  with  Buchanan;  his  Proc- 
lamation, 95;  he  anticipates  and  refutes  one  of  Jeff. 
Davis's  manifestoes ;  appeals  to  the  people  of  South 
Carolina,  etc.,  97 ;  his  Special  Message  against  Nullifi- 
cation, 99;  his  subsequent  reelection,  and  strength  in 
the  Free  States,  100 ;  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  Com- 
promise Tariff,  etc.,  101 ;  writes  to  a  friend  his  opinion 
thereon,  102;  negotiates  a  treaty  with  the  Cherokees  in 
1817,  102;  his  election  in  1828;  he  ignores  the  rights  of 
the  Indians;  extract  from  his  Message,  104;  his  dupli- 
city with  the  Indians,  105;  permits  Georgia  to  defy  the 
U.  S.  Court  decree,  106;  his  Message  on  the  circulation 


of  Abolition  documents,  123 ;  letter  to,  from  Dr.  Mayo, 
149 ;  151 ;  his  reply  to  Gilmer's  letter,  153-9 ;  instruc- 
tions to  Gen.  Gaines  with  respect  to  fugitive  slaves, 
177;  243;  250;  allusion  to,  370;  426;  515. 

Jackson,  Claiborne  F.,  of  Mo.,  chosen  Gov- 
ernor, 341 ;  fully  committed  to  Secession,  342 ;  calls  his 
Legislature  together,  349;  his  reply  to  the  President's 
call  for  troops,  460;  his  election  as  Governor  of  Mo., 
4S3;  4S9;  issues  a  circular;  calls  for  50,000  militia, 491- 
2;  allusion  to,  509 ;  his  military  appointments ;  he  iiies 
to  Warsaw,  574;  retreats  through  Carthage,  575;  his 
Declaration  of  Independence,  577 ;  negotiates  an  allL- 
ance  with  the  Confederacy,  577 ;  assembles  his  Legisla^ 
ture  at  Neosho,  and  has  an  Ordinance  of  Secession 
passed,  589-90. 

Jackson,  Gen.  H.  R.,  commands  Rebel  forces 

at  Monterey,  Va.,  524  ;  526. 
Jackson,  Gen.,  ("  Stonewall,")  falls  back  before 

Patterson's  advance,  535. 
Jackson,  Mr.,  of  Mass.,  petitions  for  Abolition 

in  the  Federal  District,  143. 
Jackson,  the  hotel-keeper  at  Alexandria,  kills 

Ellsworth,  and  is  himself  slain,  533. 

J ackson  ;  see  Fort  Jackson  and  Camp  Jackson. 
Jacobins,  The,  their  demands  of  the  U.  S.,  2 GO. 
Jamison,  Gen.  D.  P.,  of  S.  ft,  chosen  President 

of  the  Secession  Convention  ;  his  speech,  344. 
Jay,  John,  his  Treaty  with  Great  Britain,  83 ; 
President  of  the  N.  Y.  Emancipation  Society,  107 ;  255 ; 
his  Treaty  burnt  in  the  streets,  265. 

Jefferson,  Thomas,  18;  citation  from  "Notes 

on  Virginia,"  21;  33;  extract  from  the  original  Declara- 
tion of  Independence  ;  his  reasons  for  the  omission  of 
a  certain  passage,  etc.,  34;  35;  presents  Virginia's  deed 
of  cession,  33;  his  Ordinance  of  1784,  39;  42;  53;  in- 
structions to  Livingston,  55;  his  diplomacy  with 
France  and  purchase  of  Louisiana,  55-6;  recommends 
the  Cotton-Gin,  63;  takes  the  Southern  view  of  the 
Missouri  question,  75;  letter  from  Adams  on  the  ques- 
tion, 81 ;  becomes  the  leader  of  the  fc  Republicans,1  or 
'Anti-Federalists,'  82;  his  authorship  of  the  Resolu- 
tions of '93,  83;  his  unconstitutional  Louisiana  Bcheme, 
84;  letters  to  Senator  Breckinridge  and  Wilson  C.  Nich- 
olas, 85 ;  official  recommendation  of  the  Protective  sys- 
tem, 89;  122;  147;  254;  his  foreign  policy,  2G4-5;  his 
opinion  of  the  nature  of  a  contract,  358;  allusion  to, 
426;  allusion  to  in  a  Message  of  Jeff.  Davis,  497. 

Jenkins,  Col.,  surprises  Guyandotte,  Ya.,  526. 
Johnson,  Alex.  B.,  speech  of,  at  Albany,  380- 
-90;  effect  of  his  sentiments  on  the  Rebels,  396. 

Johnson,  Andrew,  of  Tenn.,   voted  for  in 

Charleston  Convention,  317 ;  speaks  in  favor  of  the 
Union  in  the  Senate,  402 ;  burnt  in  effigy  at  Memphis, 
407 ;  offers  a  resolution  in  the  Senate,  503. 

Johnson,  Bradley  T.,  dispatch  from  Kane,  405. 
Johnson,  Geo.  W.,  flees  from  Kentucky  to  the 

Confederacy,  614;  chosen  'Provisional'  Governor,  617; 

dies,  and  is  succeeded  by  Richard  Hawes,  617. 

Johnson,  Herschel  V.,  of  Ga.,  nominated  for 
Vice-President  by  the  Douglas  Committee,  31S;  votes 
against  the  Georgia  Ordinance  of  Secession,  347. 

Johnson,  J.  P.,  of  Ark.,  announces  the  withdrawal 

of  that  State  from  the  Democratic  Convention,  315. 

Johnson,  Judge,  on  the  Cotton-Gin,  G5. 
Johnson,  Lieut.-Col.,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  543. 
Johnson,  Reverdy,  on  J.  C.  Calhoun,  337-8. 
Johnson,  Rev.  Thomas,  settled  in  Kansas,  235. 
Johnson,  Richard  M.,  an  amalgamationist,  i:;G. 
Johnson,  Thos.  B.,  of  Ky.,  in  Conf.  Congress,  G17. 
Johnson,  Waldo  P.,  of  Mo.,  offers  a  'Peace'  re- 
solve in  the  Senate,  571. 
Johnson,  Wm.  Cost,  of  Md.,  offers  resolves  to 

reject  Abolition  petitions,  146. 
Johnston,  Col.  Edward,  commands  the  Rebels 

at  Alleghany  Summit,  Ya.,  527. 

Johnston,  Gen.  Joseph  E.,  evacuates  Harper's 

Ferry,  etc.,  535;  is  left  at  liberty  to  reenforce  Beaure- 
gard, 536 ;  reenforces  Beauregard  at  Manassas,  540  ; 
542 ;  outranks  Beauregard,  544 ;  allusion  to,  618. 

Johnston,  Josiah  S.,  of  La.,  on  Cuba,  268. 
Jones,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  542. 


ANALYTIC 

Jones,  Col.  James  A.,  Alleghany  Summit,  527. 

Jones,  Lieut.,  evacuates  Harper's  Ferry,  642. 

Jones,  Sheriff  Samuel  J.,  a  Border  Ruffian, 
242 ;  threatens  to  bombard  Lawrence,  244. 

Jordan,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  boasts  of  having  received 
details  of  our  plan  of  battle  before  Bull  Run,  550. 

Joseph,  The,  captured  by  the  Savannah,  598. 

Journal  of  the  Times,  The,  115. 

Judah,  The,  destroyed  at  Pensacola,  601-2. 

Julian,  George  W.,  of  Ind.,  nominated  for  Vice- 
President  by  the  Free-Soilers,  224. 

K. 

Kagi,  J.  EL,  a  liberator  of  slaves,  286;  rejoins 
Brown  at  Topeka,  2S7;  is  Brown's  Secretary  of  "War, 
288;  killed  at  Harper's  Ferry,  292. 

Kanawha  :  see  West  Virginia. 

Kane,  Judge  John  K.,  letter  to  from  Polk,  169 ; 
his  decision  in  the  case  of  Euphemia  Williams,  216. 

Kane,  George  P.,  Marshal  of  the  Baltimore  Po- 
lice, 421 ;  puts  a  stop  to  the  riot  at  Baltimore,  464;  his 
dispatch  to  Bradley  T.  Johnson,  465;  is  sent  to  Fort 
Mcllenry  by  Gen.  Butler,  529. 

Kansas,  the  Nebraska-Kansas  struggle,  224  to 
251;  admitted  as  a  State,  251.  (See  John  Brown, 
Border  Ruffians,  etc.) 

Kearsarge,  U.  S.  Gunboat,  blockades  the  Sum- 
ter at  Gibraltar,  602. 

Keitt,  Lawrence  M.,  of  S.  C,  an  abettor  of  the 
assault  on  Sumner,  299;  in  Secession  Convention,  345. 

Kelley,  Col.,  of  W.  Va.,  in  command  of  Camp 
Carlile,  Ohio,  520;  crosses  to  Wheeling,  522;  is  wound- 
ed at  Philippi,  522;  captures  Romney,  etc.,  527. 

Kelly,  William,  at  Tweddle  Hall,  388. 

Kendall,  Amos,  to  P.  M.  at  Charleston,  129. 

Kentucky,  17;  slave  population  in  1790,  36; 
unanimously  devoted  to  Jefferson,  etc.,  83 ;  the  Resolu- 
tions of  "98, 83 ;  withdrawal  of  delegates  from  the  Doug- 
las Convention,  318;  Magoffin  elected  Governor,  338; 
his  course  toward  South  Carolina,  S40;  the  State  re- 
mains in  the  Union,  349;  population  in  1S60,  351 ;  Leg- 
islature of,  proposes  a  general  Convention  of  the  States, 
897-403 ;  her  Governor's  answer  to  the  President's  call 
for  troops,  460 ;  progress  of  secession  in ;  Magoffin's 
message,  492-3 ;  Legislature  remains  loyal ;  Union  meet- 
ing in  Louisville,  493-4;  the  nature  of  the  State  Guard  ; 
Buekner;  Legislature  reassembles;  speech  of  Rous- 
seau, 494-5  ;  neutrality  sentiments  of  the  Legislature; 
election  for  the  '  Peace  Convention,'  495;  activity  of  the 
secessionists;  vote  of  the  State  for  Congressmen,  496; 
her  Members  at  the  extra  session,  555;  President's 
Message  with  regard  to  her  neutrality,  557 ;  Rebels  in 
the  Western  portion  threaten  Cairo,  583;  disposition 
of  Federal  troops,  587;  review  of  her  political  course, 
608-9 ;  her  vote  for  the  Union ;  Union  Legislature  as- 
sembles, 609;  Magoffin's  letter  to  the  President,  610; 
the  reply,  611;  Magoffin's  Message,  612;  loyal  resolves 
of  the  Legislature ;  Gen.  Grant  occupies  Paducah,  612 ; 
Gens.  Polk  and  Zollicoffer  invade  the  State,  613 ;  ex-Gov. 
Morehead  arrested ;  Zollicoffer  captures  Barboursville, 
614;  Breckinridge's  Address,  615;  Gen.  Sherman  suc- 
ceeds Anderson,  615;  the  affairs  at  Wild-Cat  and  Pike- 
ton,  616;  Schoepf  s  retreat ;  proceedings  of  the  Seces- 
sion Convention  at  Russellville,  617. 

Kentucky  Yeoman,  The,  on  fugitive  slaves,  217. 

Kidnapping,  cases  of,  217. 

Killinger,  Mr.,  in  American  Convention.  247. 

King,  Rufus,  remarks  in  Convention,  42. 

King,  Thomas  Butler,  goes  to  California,  201. 

King,  Wm.  P.,  Minister  to  Paris ;  is  instructed 
by  Calhoun  as  to  Annexation,  169 ;  denounces  Clay's 
Compromise,  205 ;  nominated  for  Vice-President,  222. 

King  wood,  Va.,  Union  meeting  at,  518. 

"Knights  of  the  Golden  Circle,"  their  influ- 
ence at  the  South,  350 ;  do.  in  Kentucky,  493. 

Krum,  John  M.,  Mayor  of  Alton,  141. 

L. 

Lafayette,  letter  from  Washington  to,  51 ;  let- 
ter from,  in  prison,  51 ;  letter  to  Hamilton,  51;  254. 
Lamof,  Col.  Ward  H.,  visits  Charleston,  542. 

41 


AL    INDEX.  641 

Lander,  Gen.,  at  the  battle  of  Philippi,  522. 
Lane,  Gen.  Henry  S.5  of  Ind.,  246;  elected 

Governor  inlS60,  326. 

Lane,  Gen.  James  H.,  turns  back  the  Border 
Ruffians,  2S4;  in  Congress,  504;  585;  587;  593. 

Lane,  Joseph,  of  Oregon,  in  the  Dem.  Conven- 
tion of  1860,317;  nominated  for  Vice-President,  319; 
makes  a  speech  against  coercion,  402. 

La  Salle,  voyages  on  the  Mississippi,  54 ;  147. 

Lauman,  Col.,  wounded  at  Belmont,  697. 

Laurel  Hill,  Va.,  fight  at,  522-3. 

Laurens,  Henry,  "letter  from  Washington  to, 
19 ;  254;  letter  to  his  son,  36. 

Law,  George,  in  the  American  Convention  of 
1856,  247;  his  letter  to  the  President,  467-8. 

Lawless,  Judge,  his  charge  at  St.  Louis,  134. 

Lawrence,  Abbott,  of  Mass.,  in  the  Whig  Con- 
vention of  184S,  192. 

Lawrence,  Kansas,  the  founding  of,  236 ;  illegal 
voting  at,  238 ;  beleaguered  by  Atchison,  etc.,  243-4 ; 
Brown's  speech  at,  284-5;  the  fight  at,  285. 

Lay,  Col.  G.  W.,  goes  to  Charleston,  442. 
Leavenworth,  Kansas,  outrages  at,  239;  335. 
Leavitt,  Judge,  in  case  of  Margaret  Garner,  219. 
Lecompton,  Kansas,  Convention  at,  240. 
Lecompton  Constitution,  The,  submitted  to  a 

vote  of  the  people,  249-50;  finally  rejected,  250. 

Lee,  Col.,  (Union,)  at  Ball's  Bluff,  623. 

Lee,  Gen.  Eobert  E.,  brings  reinforcements 
against  old  Brown  at  Harper's  Ferry,  293;  takes  com- 
mand of  Rebel  forces  in  Virginia,  518;  commands  in 
West  Virginia,  525-6. 

Leeman,  Wm.  EL,  killed  at  Harper's  Ferry,  292. 

Leigh,  Benj.  Watkins,  Comm'r  to  S.  C,  100 ;  110. 

Lesesne,  Mr.,  of  S.  C,  favors  1  cooperation,'  333. 

Letcher,  John,  his  politics,  etc.,  225 ;  his  pecu- 
liar position  as  Governor  of  Virginia,  340 ;  hastes  to 
join  the  traitors,  342;  calls  his  Legislature  together, 
348;  his  letters  to  L.  P.  Clover,  of  111.,  397;  considers 
New  England  past  forgiveness,  438;  his  answer  to  the 
President's  requisition,  459;  465;  proclaims  the  adop- 
tion of  the  Confederate  Constitution,  516;  proclamation 
calling  out  the  militia,  516  to  517;  his  Message  on  the 
proceedings  in  West  Virginia,  etc.,  519. 

Lewinsville,  Va.,  reoccupied  by  our  army,  620. 

Lex,  Charles  E.,  speech  at  Philadelphia,  365. 

Lexington,  Mo.,  a  Border  Ruffian  rendezvous, 
283;  the  siege  and  battle  of,  586  to  589;  Col.  Mulligan'* 
official  report,  5SS-9 ;  why  not  reenforced,  593-4. 

Liberator,  The,  116  ;  122. 

Liberia,  colonization  of,  72. 

Liberty,  Mo.,  Federal  Arsenal  seized  at,  490. 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  in  the  Rep.  Convention  of 
1S56,  246;  his  canvass  of  Illinois  with  Douglas,  301; 
his  speeches  there,  301-2;  nominated  for  the  Presidency, 
321 ;  his  position  in  the  canvass  defined,  322;  review  of 
the  canvass,  323  to  326 ;  classified  table  of  the  vote,  323 ; 
357;  403;  Breckinridge  declares  him  duly  elected;  his 
journey  to  the  capital,  418;  speeches  at  Indianapolis, 
Columbus,  and  Pittsburgh,  419  ;  speech  at  Philadelphia, 
419-20;  his  Inaugural,  422  to  426;  reflections,  and 
opinions  of  the  Press  thereon,  427-8;  his  Cabinet,  428; 
his  incredulity,  etc.,  429;  reply  to  the  Virginia  Com- 
missioners, 452;  proclamation  calling  for  75,000  troops, 
453-4;  opinions  of  the  Press,  454  to  45S;  replies  of 
Southern  Governors ;  spirit  of  Southern  Press,  459  to 
461 ;  holds  an  interview  with  Gov.  Hicks  and  Mayor 
Brown,  466;  with  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Com- 
mittee, 466-7 ;  letter  from  George  Law  to,  467-8;  allu- 
sion to  by  The  Richmond  Examiner,  470;  vote  cast 
for  him  in  Kentucky,  492;  494  ;  497-8;  total  vote  re- 
ceived by  him,  500;  Magruder's  treachery,  506;  allusion 
to  by  The  Norfolk  Herald,  508;  510;  his  view  of  West 
Virginia,  519;  proclaims  a  blockade;  calls  for  42,000 
more  troops,  523;  551;  his  Message  at  the  Extra  Ses- 
sion, 555  to  559 ;  Gen.  Fremont's' letter  to,  583-4;  Davis 
writes  to,  with  regard  to  the  privateersmen,  599  ;  Ma- 
goffin's letter,  and  the  President's  reply,  610-11 ;  direct* 
the  formation  of  army  corps,  619. 

Livingston,  Edward,  95. 


642 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


Locke,  John,  on  the  Slave-Trade,  28. 
Loguen,  Jerry,  a  fugitive  slave,  215. 
London  Times,   The,  Russell's  estimate  of  our 
forces  prior  to  Bull  Eun,  550. 

Lone  Star,  order  of  the,  270;  350. 
Longstreet,  Gen.  Jas.,  at  Blackburn's  ford,  539. 
Lopez,  his  intrigues  and  death,  270. 
Loring,  Ellis  Gray,  his  church  mobbed,  126. 
Louis  XIV.,  decides  to  acknowledge  our  Inde- 
pendence, 265. 

Louisiana,  53;  purchase  of,  84-5;  Whig  or 
'Union'  party  triumph  in,  211;  withdraws  from  the 
Dem.  Convention,  814;  legislative  instructions  to  her 
delegates,  316;  secession  of,  and  the  votes  thereon, 
348; "population  in  1860,351;  seizure  of  Federal  pro- 
perty in,  412 ;  surrender  of  the  cutter  McClellan  to  the 
authorities  of,  413. 
i  Louisville,  Ky.,  dispatch  from,  announcing  the 
order  of  the  Montgomery  "War  Department,  460;  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Union  meeting  at,  493-4. 

'Louisville  Courier,  The,  infamous  fabrication  of, 
'508;  its  report  of  Bull  Run,  543  ;  617. 

Louisville  Journal,  The,  on  the  President's  call 
to  arms,  460;  on  the  mockery  of  the  vote  in  Virginia, 
•    479;  on  the  reign  of  terror  in  Tennessee,  4S3;  denun- 
ciation of  Buckner,  494 ;  citation  from,  617. 

Lovejoy,  Elijah  P.,  sketch  of  his  life,  martyr- 
dom, and  death,  130  to  142. 

Lovejoy,  Owen,  of  Ills.,  374;  560. 

Lowe,  Col.,  killed  at  Fredericktown,  Mo.,  591. 

Lowe,  Col.,  (Union,)  repulsed  at  Scary  town,  52-1 ; 
killed  at  Carnifex  Ferry,  525. 

Lowe,  Gov.  Louis  E.,  to  the  Baltimore  mob,  464. 
Lowe,  Gov.,  of  Iowa,  his  majority,  300. 
Ludlow,  Dr.,  his  church  mobbed,  126. 
Lundy,  Benjamin,  biographical  sketch  of,  111 

to  115;  allusion  to,  141;  152;  353. 
Lyons,  Lord,  demands  Mason  and  Slidell,  608. 
Lyon,  Robert,  of  S.  C,  to  a  friend  in  Texas,  450. 
Lyon,  Gen.  Nathaniel,  his  services  at  St. 

Louis  ;  captures  Gen.  Frost's  camp,  490  ;  succeeds  Gen. 
Harney;  has  an  interview  with  Gen.  Price,  491 ;  whips 
Marmaduke,  574;  arrives  at  Springfield,  576;  defeats 
the  Rebels  at  Dug-Springs,  577;  attacks  the  enemy  at 
Wilson's  Creek,  573;  his'heroism  and  death,  579-S0; 
Pollard's  opinion  of  him,  5S2. 
Lytle,  Col.,  wounded  at  Carnifex  Perry,  525. 

V. 

Madison  County,  Miss.,  men  hung  there,  128. 

Madison,  Jame"s,  42;  43;  63;  72;  takes  the 
Southern  view  of  the  Missouri  question,  75;  82;  83; 
drafts  the  Virginia  Resolves  of  1799,  S4;  110;  264-5; 
letter  to  Hamilton,  357 ;  497. 

Madisonian,  The,  letter  from  Gilmer  to,  156. 

Magoffin,  Beriah,  of  Ky.,  elected  Governor, 
338;  his  Union  Address,  340;  his  answer  to  the  Presi- 
dent's requisition,  etc.,  460;  his  Message,  492-3  ;  493; 
494;  496;  509;  609;  his  letter  to  the  President,  610; 
the  reply,  611;  Message,  611,  612;  Zollicoffer  to,  613. 

Magrath,  Judge,  of  S.  C,  336;  345. 

Magruder,  J.  B.,  506;  529;  531. 

Maine,  admission  of  into  the  Union,  79-80;  326. 

Mallory,  Stephen  R.,  of  Fla,,  429. 

Marcy,  Gov.,  of  N.  Y.,  122;  extract  from  his 
Message,  124;  186;  222;  273. 

Markle,  Capt.,  (Union,)  killed  at  Belmont,  597. 

Marmaduke,  Col.,  routed  at  Booneville,  Mo.,  574. 

Marshall,  Chief  Justice,  106;  109;  110;  252. 

Marshall,  Humphrey,  of  Ky.,  539;  614. 

Marston,  Col.  Gilman,  at  Bull  Run,  525. 

Martin,  Luther,  44;  107. 

Maryland,  36;  first  Abolition  Society  in,  107; 
142;  withdraws  from  the  Douglas  Convention,  318; 
849;  population  in  1860,  351 ;  461";  468;  Butler  lands  at 
Annapolis,  468-9;  Legislature  convenes  at  Frederick, 


470;  decides  not  to  secede,  etc.,  471;  471-2';  loyal  at 
last,  472 ;  555.   See  Baltimore. 

Marysville,  Kansas,  fraudulent  voting  at,  238. 

Mason,  James  M.,  35;  73;  opposes  Clay's  Com- 
promise measures,  204;  212;  attends  the  Ostend  meet- 
ing, 273,  305;  favors  further  efforts  for . 'conciliation,' 
373;  382;  405;  his  letter  to  Tfie  Wi nchester  Virginian, 
478-9;  514;  taken  from  the  Trent  by  Capt  Wilkes, 
606;  is  rendered  up  to  Great  Britain,  603. 

Mason,  Major,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  543. 

Massachusetts,  20;  slave  population  in  1790; 

troops  furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  37;  abol- 
ishes Slavery,  108;  125;  Disunion  hinted  at,  175;  send* 
Mr.  Hoar  to  Charleston,  180;  withdraws  from  the 
Douglas  Convention,  318;  362. 

May,  Henry,  555;  makes  a  'personal  explana- 
tion,1 563-4;  615. 

McCauley,  Capt.,  at  Norfolk  Navy  Yard,  473-5. 

McCall,  Gen.,  620;  624;  625-6. 

McCalmont,  Col.  J.  S.,  (Union,)  626. 

McClarty,  Mr,,  of  Ky.,  492. 

McClellan,  Gen.  Geo.  B.(  496;  his  Address  to 
the  West  Virginians,  520;  521;  522;  Laurel  Hill,  Cheat 
Mountain,  523;  524  ;  523;  593;  615;  takes  command  at 
Washington,  etc.,  619;  extract  from  his  report,  etc., 
620-21;  624;  626-7;  "All  quiet  on  the  Potomac,"  623; 
his  interdict  of  the  Hutchinsons,  etc.,  629-630. 

McClellan,  U.  S.  cutter,  betrayed  to  Rebels,  413. 
McClelland,  Robert,  of  Mich.,  189. 
McClurken,  Major,  wounded  at  Belmont,  697. 
McClernand,  John  A.,  of  Ills.,  189;  195;  306; 
562-3;  597. 

McCrillis,  Mr.,  of  Me.,  delegate  to  Chicago,  321. 

McCurdy,  Edward,  speech  at  Charleston,  408. 

McCulloch,  Gen.  Ben.,  413;  575;  defeated  at 
Dug  Springs,  Mo.,  577;  commands  at  Wilson's  Creek, 
578;  5S1;  his  proclamation,  582;  is  joined  by  Price  at 
Neosho,  5S9. 

McGowan,  Mr.,  of  S.  C,  in  Convention,  334-5. 

McDowell,  Gen.,  533  ;  his  General  Order  No.  4, 
534-5;  moves  on  Centerville.  539;  his  plan  of  battle, 
540;  report  of  our  losses,  545;  550-1;  552;  report 
with  regard  to  the  three  months'  men,  553;  613. 

McDougall,  Mr.,  ofCal.,  571. 

Macfarland,  with  Mason  and  Slidell,  606. 

McIntosh,  Francis  J.,  burnt  by  a  mob,  1 34. 

McLean,  Judge,  decision  in  Margaret  Garner's 
case,  219;  opinion  in  the  Dred  Scott  case,  260. 

Mecklenburg  Declaration,  The,  35. 
Memphis,  Tenn.,  celebration  of  South  Carolina's 
secession  at;  Senator  Johnson  burnt  in  effigy,  etc.,  407. 
Memphis  Appeal,  The,  citation  from,  597. 
Memphis  Avalanche,  The,  citation  from,  597. 
Meigs,  Henry,  vote  on  Missouri  Compromise,  80. 
Memminger,  Chas.  G.,  of  S.  C,  344;  429. 
Mervine,  Com.  Wm.,  destroys  the  Judah,  601-2. 
Methodists,  The,  and  Slavery,  120-21. 
Mexico,  148;  176;  war  with,  186-7;  188;  190. 
Milwaukee,  "Wise,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  215. 
Milton,  John,  of  Fla.,  in  Dem.  Convention,  314. 
Milledgeville,  Ga.,  Military  Convention  at,  337. 
Miles,  ¥m.  Porcher,  of  S.  C,  337;  448. 
Miles,  Col.  D.  J.,  at  Bull  Run,  552. 
Milroy,  Gen.,  (Union,)  527. 
Minnesota,  300 ;  301. 

Mississippi,  128;  157;  211;  Foote  chosen  Gov- 
ernor, 211;  withdraws  from  the  Democratic  Conven- 
tion, 314;  330  ;  344;  secession  of,  and  the  vote  thereon, 
347-8;  350;  population  in  1S60,  351;  Mr.  Aughey's 
experience,  etc.,  514. 

Missouri,  struggle  for  the  admission  of,  74  to  80 ; 
108;  225;  235  ;  262;  withdraws  from  the  Douglas  Con- 
vention, 318;  Jackson  chosen  Governor,  341;  refuses 
to  secede,  349;  population  in  I860, 351:  460  ;  489 ;  Jack- 
son calls  for  50.000  militia,  491-2  :  555;  map  of  tha 
war  region  in,  573  ;  sham  Secession  at  Neosho,  589-90. 
See  C.  F.  Jackson,  Kkynolds,  St.  Louis,  etc. 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


643 


Missouri  Argus,  Tlie,  citation  from,  128. 
Mitchell,  Col.,  wounded  at  Wilson's  Creek,  597. 
•Mobile,  Ala.,  declaration  of  causes,  etc.,  at,  355; 

407 ;  seizure  of  the  Federal  Arsenal  at,  412  ;  surrender 

of  the  cutter  Cass  at.  413. 
Mobile  Advertiser,  The,  citation  from,  459. 
Montgomery,  Col.,  captures  Fort  Scott,  185. 
MONROE,  Jas.,75  ;  10S-(J-10 ;  154;  175 ;  266 ;  267. 
Monroe,  Thos.  B.,  Sr.,  of  Ky.,  614;  becomes  a 

member  of  the  Eebel  Congress  and  a  Senator,  617. 

Monroe,  Thos.  B.,  Jr.,  614. 

Montreal,  the  sheriff  of,  tempted  to  engage  in 

slave-catching,  218. 
Moody,  Col.,  (Union,)  at  Alleghany  Summit,  527. 
Moore,  Got.  A.  B.,  of  Ala.,  his  dispatch  to  the 

S.  C.  Convention,  845;  347;  orders  the  seizure  of  Fed- 
eral property,  412. 

Moore,  Gov.  Thos.  0.,  of  La.,  calls  a  Secession 

Convention,  348. 
Moore,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545. 
Morehead,  Charles  S.,  509  ;  614. 
More,  Hannah,  her  opinion  of  Oglethorpe,  32. 
Morgan,  Capt.  John,  597  ;  614. 
Morris,  Gouverneur,  43  to  45. 
Morris,  Isaac  N.,  of  111.,  375. 
Morrison,  Capt.  J.  J.,  surrenders  the  cutter 

Cass  to  the  Rebels,  413. 

Morse,  Prof.  Samuel  P.  B.,  439. 
Mount  Oread,  Kansas,  seized  by  the  Border 
Ruffians,  243. 

Mouton,  Mr.,  of  La.,  "withdraws  from  the  Dem- 
ocratic Convention,  314. 

Mullins,  Mr.,  of  S.  C,  Secession  speech  of,  335. 

Mulligan,  Col.,  is  besieged  in  Lexington,  586  ; 
his  report  of  the  siege,  588-9. 


Napoleon,  Ark.,  seizure  of  the  Arsenal  at,  488. 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  acquires  Louisiana  of 

Spain.  54;  sells  it  to  the  United  States,  5G;  his  rapa- 
city compared  with  the  Ostend  Manifesto,  275. 

Nashville  Banner,  The,  citation  from,  349. 

Nashville  Gazette,  The,  extract  from,  484. 

Nashville,  The  Privateer,  she  burns  the  Har- 
vey Birch ;  is  blockaded  by  the  Tuscarora,  etc.,  603. 

National  Intelligencer,  The,  its  letter  from  Henry 
Clay,  162  to  164;  on  the  President's  call,  460 ;  letter  to, 
supposed  to  be  from  Gen.  Scott,  549. 

Nebraska,  the  Kansas  struggle,  224  to  251. 
Nelson,  Gen.  ¥m,  at  Piketon,  Ky.,  616, 
Nelson,  Judge  Samuel,  252;  on  Dred  Scott,  257. 
Nelson,  Thos.  A.R.,of  Tenn.,  renounces  theUnion 

on  his  way  to  Congress,  555. 
Nevada  Territory,  organized  by  Congress,  388. 
Newark,  N.  J.,  pro-Slavery  riots  at,  126. 
Newby,  D.,  killed  at  Harper's  Perry,  292. 
New  Hampshire,  20;  slave  population  in  1790; 

troops  furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  abolishes 

Slavery,  108;  State  election  of  1860,  326. 

New  Jersey,  slave  population  of;  troops  fur- 
nished during  the  Revolution,  36;  Legislature  favors 
the  Missouri  Restriction,  77 ;  first  Abolition  Society  in, 
107;  provides  for  Emancipation,  10S;  Republican  tri- 
umph in,  in  1858,300. 

New  Mexico,  in  Congress,  190  to  196;  201; 

President  Taylor's  Message  in  relation  to,  202 ;  in  Con- 
gress again,  203;  Mason,  Jeff.  Davis,  Clay,  and  Webster, 
as  to  Slavery  in,  204  to  206 ;  208 ;  acts  of  her  Legisla- 
ture with  respect  to  Slaves,  etc.,  302  to  304 ;  the  ques- 
tion of  iu  the  '  Peace  Conference,'  404-5. 

New  Orleans,  54;  "Walker  arrested  at,  276: 
celebration  of  the  Secession  of  S.  C.  at,  407 ;  seizure  of 
the  Mint  and  Custom  House  at,  412. 

New  Orleans  Bee,  The,  on  '  Black  Republicans,'  437. 


New  Orleans  Picayune,  The,  quotation  from,  Gen. 
Butler's  pedigree,  etc.,  508;  its  construction  of  Lin- 
coln's Indianapolis  speech,  510. 

New  Orleans  True  American,  The,  citation  from,  12  8. 

New  York,  19;  slave  population  of,  in  1790; 
troops  furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  Legisla- 
ture favors  Missouri  Restriction,  77;  provides  for 
Emancipation,  108;  action  against  the  Abolitionists,  in 
1836, 124 ;  changes  from  Republican  to  Democratic,  300 ; 
political  condition  of,  prior  to  Lincoln's  election,  827; 
reduction  of  Republican  strength,  in  Dec,  1860,  882  : 
arrival  of  the  7th  and  71st  regiments  at  "Washington, 
469. 

New  York  City,  Hamlet,  a  fugitive  slave  at,  215 

New  York  Courier  and  Enquirer,  The,  124. 

New  York  Express,  The,on  President's  call,455 ;  457. 

New  York  Herald,  The.  dispatch  from  "Washington 
to,  332 ;  letter  from  Charleston  to,  841 ;  on  the  condi- 
tion of  the  North  in  the  event  of  Disunion,  855;  up- 
holding the  right  of  secession,  396;  letter  from  Charles- 
ton to,  427;  Washington  dispatch  to,  438;  on  Fort 
Sumter,  442;  dispatch  from  Charleston  to;  dispatch 
from  Richmond,  453 ;  on  the  President's  call  for  troops, 
457 ;  apprehends  the  capture  of  "Washington,  45S-9. 

New  York  Journal  of  Commerce,  Tlie,  extract  from, 
128*;  439  ;  on  the  President's  call  for  troops,  457. 

New  York  Times,  Tlie,  statement  of  a  conversa- 
tion with  Gen.  Scott,  547. 

New  York  Tribune,  The,  poem  from,"  The  Flaunting 
Lie,"  220;  editorial  from,  "Going  to  go," 358-9;  on  pro- 
ceedings at  Charleston,  after  Sumter's  fall,  449  ;  on  the 
President's  call  for  troops,  454-5;  the  infamous  fabrica- 
tion of  Tits  Louisville  Courier,  508;  report  of  the  bat- 
tle of  Bull  Run,  544;  evidence  from,  that  the  Rebels 
were  acquainted  with  our  plan,  550. 

Nicaragua,  invaded  by  "Walker,  276;  Demo- 
cratic resolves  with  regard  to,  277. 

Nicholas,  Wilson  ft,  letter  from  Jefferson  to,  85. 

Niles,  John  M.,  of  Conn.,  on  Annexation,  174. 

Niles 's  Register,  citation  from,  80;  110. 

Norfolk,  Ya.,  seizure  of  the  Navy  Yard  at,  414; 
troops  set  in  motion  for  the  seizure,  453;  the  ships, 
property,  etc.,  at,  473 ;  map  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth, 
474;  destruction  of  the  Yard  and  its  contents,  475;  the 
State  troops  take  possession,  476;  vigorous  Union  sen- 
timent at,  just  prior  to  the  work  of  destruction,  477, 

Norfolk  Herald,  The,  rumors  quoted  from,  508. 

Norris,  Moses,  of  N.  H,  229. 

North  Alabamian,  Tlie,  letter  from  Henry  Clay  on 
Annexation,  166 ;  final  letter  from  Clay,  167. 

North  Carolina,  slave  population  in  1790; 
troops  furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  cedes  her 
territory,  49 ;  the  cotton  gin,  64;  123;  allows  free  ne- 
groes to  vote,  179;  withdraws  from  the  Douglas  Con- 
vention, 318;  secession  of,  348 ;  population  in  1S60, 851 ; 
seizure  of  Federal  property  by,  411-12 ;  her  Governor's 
answer  to  the  President's  call  for  troops,  459;  progress 
of  Secession ;  vote  on  the  holding  of  a  Convention;  re- 
solve of  tho  Legislature,  4S5;  resolve  of  the  Confeder- 
ate Congress  with  regard  to ;  Ordinance  of  Secession 
passed,  4S6.   See  Appended  Notes,  632. 

Northfeeld,  N.  H,  pro-Slavery  violence  at,  127. 

"Notes  on  Virginia,"  citation  from,  21. 

0. 

Oats,  annual  product  of,  by  8th  U.  S.  Census,  22. 
Ochiltree,  Judge  W.  B.,  of  Texas,  339. 
Odell,  Mr.,  537-8. 

Oglethorpe,  James,  his  early  history,  and  set- 
tlement of  Georgia,  31 ;  his  opposition  to  Slavery  and 
the  use  of  rum ;  his  integrity,  etc.,  82. 

Ohio,  becomes  a  State  in  1803,  52 ;  diminished 
Republican  majority  in,  300;  Republican  majority 
swelled  in,  301;  pledges  assistance  to  the  Kentucky 
Unionists,  495. 

Ohio  Statesman,  The,  on  the  President's  call,  457. 

O'Kane,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  surprises  Camp  Cole,  575. 

Oldham,  Wm.  S.,  sent  by  Davis  to  Arkansas,  488. 

Oliver,  Mordecai,  241 ;  chosen  Secretary  of 
State  in  Missouri,  576. 


6M 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT 


Ord,  Gen-.,  commands  at  Dranesville,  625-6. 

Ordinance  op  1784,  The,  39;  50. 

Ordinance  op  1787,  The,  passage  of,  and  an  ex- 
tract from,  40;  50;  allusion  to,  369. 

Ordinance  op  Nullification,  The,  93. 

Oregon,  congressional  action  upon  the  Territory 
of,  190  to  19S ;  has  a  Democratic  majority,  300,  301. 

Orr,  James  L.,  of  S.  C,  sent  to  Washington,  411. 

Osawatomie,  Kansas,  sacked  and  burnt  by  Bor- 
der Euffians,  244;  battle  of,  2S4. 

Ostend  Manifesto,  The,  extract  from,  273-4-5. 

Otis,  Harrison  Gray,  122. 

"Out  of  the  Tavern,"  353. 

Owen,  Robert  Dale,  cited  by  Lovejoy,  132. 

Oxford,  Kansas,  fraudulent  voting  at,  249 ;  285. 

P. 

Palmer,  Rev.  B.  M.,  his  Sermon,  501-2. 

Palmyra,  Kansas,  sacked  by  Border  Ruffians. 

Palmyra,  Mo.,  Rebels  defeated  at,  576. 

Palo  Alto,  battle  of,  187. 

Palsley,  Daniel,  Lt.-Gov.  of  W.  Virginia,  519. 

Panama,  the  Congress  at,  267-8. 

Parker,  Amasa  J.,  President  of  the  Tweddle 
Hall  Convention,  388 ;  his  speech,  3S9 ;  396. 

Parker,  Mr.,  of  S.  C,  remarks  of,  in  the  Seces- 
sion Convention,  345. 

Parkersburg,  Va.,  occupied  by  Unionists,  512. 

Parkville  Luminary*  The,  Mo.,  destroyed,  238-9. 

Parrott,  Lieut.  E.  G.,  takes  the  Savannah,  598. 

Parsons,  Gen., (Rebel,)  in  Northern  Missouri,587. 

Pate,  H.  Clay,  whipped  at  Black-Jack,  244. 

Patterson,  Com.,  destroys  a  Florida  fort,  17  7. 

Patterson,  Gen.  Robert,  528;  crosses  the  Po- 
tomac, 535;  moves  from  Bunker  Hill  to  Charlestown, 
536;  Gen.  Sanford's  testimony,  536  to  53S;  Patterson 
falls  back  to  Harper's  Ferry  and  is  superseded,  539 ; 
Gen.  Scott's  dispatch,  and  Patterson's  reply,  539 ;  allu- 
sion to,  540  ;  549-50;  his  politics;  refuses  to  display 
the  American  flag,  550;  allusion  to,  618. 

Patton,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  victor  at  Scary  town,  524; 

'  marches  to  reiinforce  Price  at  Lexington,  5S7. 

Patriot  and  Union,  The,  on  President's  call,  457. 

Paulding,  Com.  Hiram,  captures  Walker,  276; 

takes  command  at  Norfolk  Navy  Yard,  475;  his  work 
of  destruction  there,  476. 

Pawnee,  U.  S.  Ship,  arrives  at  Norfolk  Navy 
Yard,  475 ;  two  of  her  officers  made  prisoners,  476. 

Payne,  Henry  B.,  of  Ohio,  his  resolves  in  the 
Charleston  Convention.  310;  312;  318. 

Payne,  R.  G.,  threatens  Mr.  Etheridge,  484. 

Pearce,  Gen.,  reenforees  Gov.  Jackson,  575. 

Pegram,  Col.  John,  defeated  at  Rich  Mountain, 
522-3 ;  is  captured,  with  600  men,  523. 

Pennington,  Wm.,  Speaker,  305;  306;  372. 

Pensacola,  Fla.,  seizure  of  Federal  property  at, 
412;  Bragg  in  command;  schooner  Judah  burnt,  601- 
2;  the  Rebels  attack  Santa  Rosa  Island;  they  evacuate 
the  post,  502. 

Pennsylvania,  slave  population  in  1790 ;  troops 

furnished  during  the  Revolution;  emancipation,  36; 
Legislature  favors  the  Missouri  Restriction,  77;  108; 
Republicans  triumph  in,  300:  Curtin  elected  Governor, 
326;  396;  militia  of,  attacked  at  Baltimore,  463-4. 

Pennsylvania  Freeman,  The,  114. 

Pennsylvania  Hall,  burned  by  a  mob,  115. 

Perry,  U.  S.  Brig,  captures  the  Savannah,  598. 

Petrel,  The  Privateer,  sunk,  599. 

Pettus,  Gov.  John  J., of  Miss.,  for  Secession,  347. 

Phelps,  Col.,  in  the  battle  of  Big  Bethel,  529. 

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  riots  at,  126 ;  fugitive-slave 
arrests  at,  216;  Convention  at  in  1856,  247;  Peace 
Meeting  at,  362  to  866;  Geo.  W.  Curtis  at,  367;  speech 
of  President  Lincoln,  419-20. 

Philadelphia  Pennsylvania^  The,  on  the  Presi- 
dent's Inaugural,  428 ;  45T. 


Philanthropist,  The,  112. 

Philbrick,  Capt.,  (Union,)  at  Ball's  Bluff,  621. 
Philippi,  Va.,  521-2. 
Phillips,  Wendell,  116;  117;  142. 
Phillips,  "Wm.,  tarred  and  feathered  by  the  Bor- 
der Ruffians,  239  ;  killed  at  Leavenworth,  245. 

Pickens,  Gov.  Francis  W.,  of  S.  C,  347;  410; 

sends  Col.  Ilayne  to  "Washington,  412;  confers  with 
Col.  Lamon,  442. 

Pierce,  Franklin,  of  N.  H.,  nominated  for 
President,  222;  elected  224;  inaugurated,  224  ;  226; 
227;  appoints  Reeder  Governor  of  Kansas,  236;  dis- 
perses the  Free-State  Legislature  at  Topeka,  244;  246; 
270;  directs  the  Ostend  meeting,  273;  in  the  Conven- 
tion of  1S60,  317;  497;  his  letter  to  Jeff.  Davis,  512. 

Pierce,  Gen.  E.  W.,  at  Big  Bethel,  530-31. 

Pierpont,  Francis  II.,  518;  chosen  Governor  of 
Virginia,  519;  appoints  two  Senators,  562. 

Piketon,  Ky.,  affair  at,  616. 

Pillow,  Gen.,  at  the  battle  of  Belmont,  596. 

Pinckney,  Charles  C,  on  the  adoption  of  the 
Constitution,  43  to  45;  speech  of  Jan.  17th,  17S7,  49. 

Pinckney,  Henry  L.,  of  S.  C,  144;  145. 
Pinkney,  Wil-liam,  of  Md.,  on  Missouri,  76. 
Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  the  Convention  of  1856  at, 

246;  excitement  at,  in  regard  to  the  transfer  of  arms 
to  the  South,  408;  schedule  of  the  order  of  transfer, 
403;  speech  of  President  Lincoln  at,  419. 

Pittsfield,  N.  H.,  Geo.  Storrs  mobbed  at,  27. 

Platte  Argus,  The,  Mo.,  citation  from,  238. 

Plummer,  Rev.  Wm.,  D.  D.,  128. 

Plummer,  Col.  John  B.,  581;  591. 

Poinsett,  Joel  R.,  149;  176. 

Polk,  Gen.  Bishop,  bombards  our  troops  at  Bel- 
mont, 595;  crosses  to  Belmont;  drives  off  the  Union- 
ists, 596;  occupies  Columbus,  Ky.,  613. 

Polk,  James  K,  69 ;  nominated  for  President, 
164;  is  elected,  167;  168;  letter  to  John  K.  Kane,  169; 
is  openly  committed  to  Annexation,  174;  185;  186; 
his  special  message,  1S7;  makes  an  offer  for  Cuba,  269. 

Pollard,  Edward  A.,  his  summing  up  of  the 
initial  conquests  by  the  South,  413-14;  his  estimate 
of  the  troops  furnished  by  the  North  and  South  respect- 
ively, in  1812,  and  the  Mexican  War,  500;  remarks  on 
the  battle  of  Carnifex  Ferrv,  525;  remarks  on  the  bat- 
tle of  Bethel,  531 ;  his  estimate  of  Rebel  forces  at  Bull 
Run,  546;  on  the  manner  in  which  Gen.  Johnston 
eluded  Patterson,  549-50;  testifies  as  to  the  Union 
sentiment  of  Missouri,  573-4;  account  of  the  affair  at 
Camp  Cole,  Mo.,  575;  opinion  of  Gen.  Lyon,  etc.,  582; 
589  ;  590  ;  593;  statement  of  Rebel  loss  at  Belmont, 
597;  admits  the  hostility  of  Kentucky  to  the  Rebel- 
lion; on  Henry  Clay's  influence,  609-10;  estimate  of 
the  Rebel  forces  in  Kentucky,  615. 

Pope,  Gen., in  Northern  Missouri,  587  ;  dispatch 
to  Gen.  Fremont,  588;  in  6outh-western  Missouri,  593. 

Porter,  Col.  Andrew,  appointed  Provost-Mar- 
shal of  Washington,  619. 

Porter,  Fitz  John,  testifies  for  Patterson,  538. 

Porter,  W.  D.,  President  of  the  S.  C.  Senate,  330. 

Port  Royal,  expedition  to,  604  to  606;  map  of 
the  bombardment,  604;  surrender  of  the  forts,  605; 
Sherman's  proclamation ;  '  contrabands'  flock  in,  606. 

Potter.  Bishop,  prays  at  'Peace'  meeting,  363. 

Potter,  Major  James  D.,  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Pound  Gap,  Ky.,  the  Rebels  retreat  to,  616. 

Powell,  Lazarus  W.,  of  Ky.,  proposes  a  Com- 
mittee of  Thirteen  on  the  Crisis,  375;  382;  562;  564. 

Presbyterians,  The,  and  Slavery,  118;  631. 

Preston,  Mr.,  of  S.  C.,  on  Abolitionists,  128. 

Preston, TVm.,  509  ;  flees  to  the  Confederacy,  614. 

Preston,  "Wit.  B.,  one  of  Virginia's  Commis- 
sioners to  President  Lincoln,  452. 

Price,  Gov.  Rodman  M.,  to  L.  "W.  Burnett,  439. 

Price,  Gen.  Sterling,  his  election  to  the  Mis- 
souri Convention,  488 ;  makes  a  compact  with  Harney ; 
has  an  interview  with  Gen.  Lyon,  491 ;  allusion  to,  509; 
is  appointed  Major-General,  574;  resigns  tho  command 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


645 


to  McCulloch,  at  Wilson's  Creel?,  5T3;  wounded,  532; 

besieges  Lexington,  535-6;  captures  Lexington,  539; 

retreats  to  Pineville,  590;  will  not  yield  Missouri  with- 
•     out  a  battle,  593. 
PbtoR;  Roger  A.,  visits  Fort  Sumter,  448. 
Pugh,  Geo.  E.,  of  Ohio,  at  Charleston,  322. 
Punta  Arenas,  surrender  of  Walker  at,  276. 

Q. 

Quakers,  The,  assist  Lundy  in  North  Carolina, 
113;  their  opposition  to  Slavery,  117-18  ;  they  petition 
Congress  for  abolition  in  the  Federal  District,  144. 

Quincy,  Josiah,  of  Boston,  threatens  contingent 
secession.  So. 

Quitman,  John  A.,  in  the  Democratic  Conven- 
tion of  1S56,  246 ;  a  filibuster,  2T0 ;  statement  of  with 
regard  to  Senator  Douglas,  512. 

It. 

Rains,  Gen.,  one  of  Jackson's  Brigadiers,  5*74. 
Raleigh,  N.  C,  Convention  of  Southern  Gov- 
ernors at,  329  ;  State  Eights  Convention  at,  435. 
Randolph,  George  W.,  one  of  the  Virginia 

Commissioners  to  President  Lincoln,  452. 

Randolph,  John,  of  Roanoke,  opposes  the  intro- 
duction of  Slavery  into  the  North- West  Territoiy,  52; 
109;  110  ;  154;  his  opinion  on  the  Cuba  question,  268. 

Reagan,  John  H.,  of  Texas,  elected  to  Congress, 
339  ;  a  member  of  Davis's  Cabinet,  429. 

Realf,  Richard,  John  Brown's  Sec.  of  State,  287. 

Bebellion  Record,  The,  in  relation  to  Belmont,  597. 

Rector,  Gov.  Henry  M.,  of  Ark.,  341. 

Redpath,  James,  on  John  Brown,  282-3  ;  289. 

Reed,  Dr.,  of  lad.,  delegate  to  the  Democratic 
Convention ;  favors  the  Slave-Trade,  816. 

Reeder,  Andrew  H.,  appointed  Governor  of 
Kansas,  236 ;  his  soundness  on  the  Slavery  question  as- 
serted by  The  Union,  236 ;  has  a  census  taken,  and  or- 
ders an  election,  237 ;  sets  aside  fraudulent  returns, 
239 ;  is  superseded  by  Shannon,  240  ;  chosen  delegate 
to  Congress,  240;  Congressional  action  thereon,  241. 

Redd,  Gen.,  attacks  Osawatomie,  284. 

Religion,  and  the  Slave-Trade,  27;  117  to  121. 

Res  ac  a  de  la  Palm  a,  battle  of,  187. 

"Resolutions  op  '98,"  extracts  from,  83-84; 
indorsed  by  the  Democratic  Convention  of  1S52,  222; 
alluded  to  by  Davis  in  one  of  his  Messages,  497. 

Reynolds,  Gen.,  attacked  by  Gen.  Lee  at  Cheat 
Mountain,  526;  superseded  by  Gen.  Milroy,  527. 

Reynolds,  John, 'his  letter  to  Jeff.  Davis,  512. 

Reynolds,  Thomas  C,  i-s  elected  Lieut.  Govern- 
or of  Missouri,  488  ;  his  proclamation,  576;  533. 

Rhett,  Robert  B.,  of  S.  C,  333  ;  remarks  in 
the  Convention,  345 ;  his  motion  for  a  Convention  of 
slaveholding  States,  414. 

Rhode  Island,  slave  population  m  1790  ;  troops 
furnished  during  the  Revolution,  36;  37;  first  manu- 
mission socicty  in,  107;  emancipates  her  slaves,  103; 
legislative  attempts  against  Abolition,  125;  300;  State 
election  of  1860,  326;  State  troops  proceed  to  Washing- 
ton under  Gov.  Sprague,  469. 

Richardson,  Col.  J.  B.,  at  Bull  Run,539  ;  549. 

Richardson,  ¥m.  A.,  of  111.,  reports  bill  organ- 
izing Nebraska,  225 ;  233 ;  moves  an  amendment,  234. 

Richmond,  Va.,  Breckinridge  Convention  at,  318; 
the  focus  of  Disunion  intrigues,  451 ;  rejoices  over  fall 
of  Sumter,  453;  made  the  Confederate  capital,  493. 

Richmond  Enquirer,  The,  copies  Jackson's  letter 
in  reply  to  Gilmer's,  159 ;  Federal  song  from,  268'. 

Richmond  Examiner,  The,  urges  the  capture  of 
"Washington  Cit)-,  470. 

Richmond  Whig,  The,  citation  from,  123  ;  451. 

Richmond,  The,  U.  S.  Ship,  almost  destroyed  by 

Hollins's  Ram,  603. 

Rich  Mountain,  Va.,  battle  of,  522-3. 
Rivas,  surrender  of  Walker  at,  276. 
Robinson,  Dr.  A.  C,  speech  at  Baltimore,  464. 


Robinson,  Gov.,  of  Kansas,  his  house  destroyed 

by  Border  Ruffians,  244 

Rocliesttr  Union,  The,  on  causes  of  secession,  396. 

Rodney,  Cesar  A.,  of  Del,  52;  107. 

Rollins,  James  S.,  of  Mo.,  Russell  to,  80,  555. 

Roman  Catholics,  with  regard  to  Slavery,  118. 

Romney,  Va.,  surprised  by  the  Federals,  527. 

Root,  Joseph  M.,  of  Ohio,  resolve  by,  193. 

Rosecrans,  Gen.,  wins  the  battle  of  Rich  Moun- 
tain, 522;  captures  Pcgram,  523;  attacks  Floyd  at  Car- 
nifex  Ferry,  525 ;  attempts  to  surprise  the  Rebels  at 
Gauley  Mount,  526. 

Rousseau,  Louis  H.,of  Ky.,  speech  of,  494-5. 

Ruatan,  Island  of,  Walker  lands  there,  277. 

Rufpin,  Edmund,  of  Va.,  speech  of,  at  Colum- 
bia, S.  C,  335-6;  fires  the  first  shot  at  Sumter. 

Ruffin,  Mr.,  of  N.  C,  in  '  Peace  Conference,'  402. 

Runnels,  Hardin  R.,  of  Texas,  beaten  for  Gov- 
ernor, by  Houston,  339. 

Rusk,  Thomas  J.,  of  Texas,  on  Nebraska,  226. 

Russell,  Col.  ¥m.  H.,  of  Mo.,  to  Rollins,  80. 

Russell,  Lieut.,  destroys  schooner  Judah,  602. 

Russell,  Majors,  and  Waddell,  their  compli- 
city in  the  Bailey  defalcations,  410. 

Russell,  Wm.  H.,  of  The  Londv  Times,  his  opin- 
ion of  the  Carolinians,  451 ;  his  estimate  of  the  Union 
forces  before  Bull  Run,  550 ;  citation  from,  632.. 

Russellville,  Ky.,  Secession  Convent'n  at,  617. 

Russia  mediates  between  Great  Britain  and  the 
IT.  S.,  with  respect  to  captured  slaves,  176. 

Rust,  Albert,  of  Ark.,  proposition  of,  386. 

Rutledge,  John  I.,  on  the  Constitution,  44-5. 

Rynders,  Capt.,  of  N.  Y.,  a  delegate  to  the 
Charleston  Convention ;  favors  the  Slave  Trade,  316. 


s. 

Saloman,  Col.,  routed  at  "Wilson's  Creek,  579. 
Samuels,  Mr.,  of  Iowa,  his  resolves  in  the  Dem. 
Convention,  310;  312. 

Sanders,  Geo.  N.,  of  Ky.,  joins  the  Rebels,  342. 
Sandusky,  Ohio,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  218. 
Sanford,  Gen.  Chas.  W.,  his  testimony  as  to 
Patterson's  movements,  etc.,  536  to  538. 

San  Jacinto,  battle  of,  150. 
San  Jacinto,  The,  takes  Mason  and  Slidell,  666. 
Santa  Fe,  expedition  from  Texas  to,  151. 
Santa  Rosa  Island,  map  of,  601 ;  the  Rebel 

attack  on  the  Zouaves  there,  602. 

Saulsbury,  Mr.,  of  Del.,  declines  to  withdraw 
from  the  Charleston  Convention,  315;  pleads  for  "con- 
ciliation" in  the  Senate,  373. 

Savannah,  The  Privateer,  captured  by  the 
brig  Perry,  5US;  disposal  of  her  crew,  etc.,  599. 

Scarytown.  Va.,  Federals  repulsed  at,  524. 

Schenck,  Gen.  Robert  C,  of  Ohio,  189;  ad- 
vances to  Vienna,  533-4. 

Schoepf,  Gen.,  defeats  the  Rebels  at  Wild-Cat, 
616 ;  his  retreat  from  fancied  foes,  617. 

Schofield,  Major,  Adjutant  to  Gen.  Lyon,  579. 

Scott,  Mr.,  delegate  from  Missouri,  74;  75;  89. 

Scott,  Dred,  account  of  his  case,  251  to  253 ; 
Judge  Taney's  decision,  253  to  257;  Judge  "Wayne's 
opinion,  257;  Judge  Nelson's,  Judge  Gorier' s,  257; 
Judge  Daniel's,  257-8;  Judge  Campbell's,  Judge  Cat- 
ron's, 258;  Col.  Benton's  views,  259;  Webster's,  260; 
Judge  McLean's  opinion,  260;  Judge  Curtis' s,  260  to 
265 ;  Buchanan's  views,  264  ;  306  to  309 ;  allusion  to,  381. 

Scott,  Lieut.-Col.,  defeated  by  Atchison,  587. 

Scott,  Rev.  Orange,  126. 

Scott,  T.  Parkin,  presides  at  Baltimore,  442. 

Scott,  Gen.  Winfield,  ordered  to  Charleston 
by  Jackson,  94;  nominated  for  President,  223;  vote 
cast  for  him,  224  ;  421 ;  his  advice  as  to  Fort  Sumter, 
436 ;  orders  Pennsylvania  troops  home  again,  466;  470; 


646  THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


515 ;  529 ;  orders  an  advance  into  Virginia,  583 ;  sends 
Gen.  Sanford  to  Gen.  Patterson,  536;  directs  the  move- 
ment on  Centerville,  539  ;  dispatch  to  Gen.  Patterson, 
539;  The  Timen's  account  of  a  conversation  with, 
547  ;  Blair's  strictures  on,  54S-9  ;  letter  to  The  National 
Intelligencer,  549 ;  his  culpable  neglect  to  send  suffi- 
cient forces  with  McDowell,  550  ;  556 ;  his  requisition 
on  Gen.  Fremont,  5ST;  removes  Fremont,  593;  is 
largely  to  be  blamed  for  the  Bull  Eun  disaster;  his 
comments  on  Patterson's  testimony,  618. 

Se  De  Kay,  report  of  losses  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Sedhon,  James  A.,  of  Va.,  report  in  the  1  Peace 
Conference,'  397-8 ;  vote  on  it,  399 ;  laid  on  table,  402. 

Semmes,  Capt.  Raphael,  the  Sumter,  602. 

Sergeant,  John,  of  Pa.,  appointed  to  the  Pana- 
ma Congress,  268-9. 

Seward,  Wm.  II.,  speech  of  March  lith,  1850, 
43;  129  ;  speech  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  199;  201 ;  231 ;  251 ; 
his  '  irrepressible  conflict'  speech,  301 ;  in  the  Chicago 
Convention,  321 ;  speech  at  Auburn,  I860,  327;  360;  his 
proposition  in  the  Committee  of  Thirteen,  383  ;  391 ; 
402;  a  member  of  President  Lincoln's  cabinet,  428; 
his  incredulity,  429 ;  his  correspondence  with  the  Kcbel 
Commissioners,  430  to  432;  letter  from  Judge  Campbell 
to,  433-4  ;  receives  a  final  letter  from  the  Commission- 
ers, 435-6;  replies  to  Gov.  Hicks"s  requests,  467;  see 
Appended  Nof-es,  632. 

Seymour,  Col.,  allusion  to,  512. 

Seymour,  Horatio,  at  the  Tweddle  Convention, 

883;  his  speech  there.  390-91;  396;  is  understood  to 

favor  an  adhesion  to  '*  the  South,"  43S-9. 
Siiadrack,  a  fugitive  slave,  215. 
Shambaugh,  Isaac  K,  on  Missouri,  590. 
Shannon,  Wilson,  of  Ohio,  appointed  Governor 

of  Kansas,  240 ;  his  speech  at  Westport,  Mo.,  240  ;  242  ; 

calls  out  5,000  men  to  reduce  Lawrence,  243. 
Shaw,  Henry,  vote  on  Missouri  Compromise,  80. 
Shawnee    Mission,   Kansas  Border  Ruffian 

Legislature  at,  239 ;  its  enactments  there,  239-40. 

Shays's  Insurrection,  20. 

Sherman,  Roger,  35  ;  remarks  in  debate  on  the 

Constitution,  430 ;  444;  445. 
Sherman,  John,  of  Ohio,  241 ;  for  Speaker,  304 

-5;  his 'Peace' proposition,  874;  564;  remarks,  566-7. 
Sherman.  Gen.  T.  W.,  commands  the  Port 

lioyal  Expedition.  604;  issues  a  proclamation,  606. 

Sherman,  Gen.  W.  T.,  in  Kentucky,  615. 

Sigel,  Col.  Franz,  beats  the  Rebels  at  Car- 
thage, Mo.,  575;  is  outranked  by  Gen.  Lyon,  576 ;  at- 
tacks the  enemy  at  Wilson's  Creek,  579  ;  581 ;  591 ;  593. 

Sims,  Thomas,  the  case  of,  215. 

Slack,  Gen.,  574;  wounded,  582. 

Slemmer,  Lieut.,  holds  Fort  Pickens,  412  ;  601. 

Slidell,  John,  of  La.,  373;  taken  by  Capt. 
Wilkes,  606;  rendered  up  to  Great  Britain,  60S. 

Sloane,  Rush  R.,  assists  fugitive  slaves,  218. 

Slocum,  Col.  H.  W.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Slocum,  Col.,  killed  at  Bull  Run,  545;  552. 

Smith,  Caleb  B.,  of  Ind.,  194;  reports  a  bill  to 
organize  Oregon,  197 ;  a  member  of  the  cabinet,  42S. 

Smith,  Gen.  E.  K.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Smith,  Gen.,  makes  a  feint  to  Columbus,  Ky.,  595. 

Smith,  Gerrit,  127;  forms  an  Abolition  Society 
at  Peterborough,  N.  Y.,  128. 

Smith,  Wm.  N.  H.,  supported  for  Speaker,  305. 

Snead,  Thos.  L.,  Jackson  to  Davis,  577. 

Socle,  Pierre,  at  the  Ostend  meeting,  etc.,  273. 

South  Carolina,  concurs  in  the  Declaration  of 
Independence,  35;  6lave  population  in  1790;  troops  fur- 
nished during  the  Revolution,  36;  37;  ratification  Con- 
vention meets,  1788,  43;  the  Cotton-Gin,  63-4;  Nullifi- 
cation inaugurated,  93;  is  satisfied  with  the  Compro- 
mise Tariff,  101 ;  103;  123;  mails  rifled  at  Charleston, 
128-9;  votes  for  Yan  Buren,  etc.,  154;  173;  treatment 
of  negro  6eamen,  179;  of  Mr.  Hoar's  mission  to, 
181;  1S5;  votes  against  unqualified  Secession  in  1851, 
211 ;  withdraws  from  the  Dem.  Convention,  314;  Seces- 
sion proceedings  of,  330  to  337;  Convention  called,  337; 
proceedings  of  the  Convention,  344  to  347 ;  Ordinance 
of  Secession,  and  vote  thereon,  346;  'Declaration  of 


Causes,'  etc..  346;  population  in  1860.  351;  407;  forti 
occupied  by  State  troops,  409;  410;  sends  Commis- 
sioners to  Washington,  411 ;  Col.  Hayne  sent,  412.  Sea 
Charleston,  Fort  Sumter,  etc. 

Spain,  her  traffic  iu  slaves,  27-8  ;  54;  the  Holy 

Alliance,  266.    See  Cuba,  Ostend,  etc. 
Sprague,  Gov.  Wm.,  of  R.  I.,  326;  469;  552. 
Squatter  Sovereign,  The,  citation  from,  237. 
Stanton,  Frederick  P.,  Sec'y  of  Kansas,  249. 
Staunton  Spectator,  The,  478. 
Star  of  the  West,  The,  attempts  to  relieve 

Sumter,  412 ;  seized  at  Indianola,  413. 

St.  Charles,  Mo.,  Lovejoy  mobbed  at,  137. 

Steadman,  Capt.,  of  S.  O,  Port  Royal,  605. 

Steedman,  Col.,  crosses  into  Virginia,  521. 

Stein,  G-en.,  one  of  Jackson's  Brigadiers,  574. 

Stephens,  Alex.  H.,  191;  233;  opposes  the  Ne- 
braska bill,  234;  Union  Speech  before  the  Legislature, 
342  to  344;  votes  against  Secession,  347;  elected 
V ice- President  of  the  Confederacy,  415;  speech  at  Sa- 
vannah, 416  to  418;  view  of  the  Confederacy,  438  ;  477. 

Stephens,  James,  vote  on  Mo.  Compromise,  801. 

Stevens,  Aaron  D.,  wounded  at  Harper's  Ferry, 
292 ;  294 ;  293 ;  is  executed,  299. 

Stevens,  Thaddeus,  speech  of,  569. 

St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  American  flag  lowered  at,  491. 

St.  Lawrence,  The,  sinks  the  Petrel,  599. 

St.  Louis,  whipping  of  suspected  Abolitionists 
at,  132 ;  Mclntosli  burned  at,  134 ;  Federal  property 
secured  at,  412;  Gov.  Jackson  obtains  control  of  the 
police  of,  489 ;  politics  of  the  city;  fight  between  the 
mob  and  the  soldiers,  490-91 ;  Fremont  fortifies  it,  584. 

St.  Louis  Democrat,  The,  allusion  to,  490. 

St  Louis  Observer,  The,  130 ;  extract  from,  131 ; 
removed  to  Alton,  134;  comments  from,  136;  its  press 
destroyed,  137 ;  the  editor  slain,  etc.,  141. 

St  Louis  Republican,  The,  citation  from,  131 ; 
stigmatizes  The  Observer,  136. 

Storrs,  Henry  R.,  vote  on  Mo.  Compromise,  80. 

Stone,  Gen.  Chas.  P.,  McClellan's  order  to,  620- 
21 ;  621 ;  622;  his  orders  to  Col.  Baker,  624. 

Stout,  Mr.,  of  Oregon,  tenders  a  minority  report 
in  the  Committee  of  Thirty-three,  387. 

Stringfellow,  Gen.,  a  Border  Ruffian,  243 ;  283. 

Stringham,  Com.  S.  H.,  599;  627. 

Stuart,  A.  H.  H.,  of  Ya.,  a  Commissioner  to 
President  Lincoln,  452;  his  letter  to  The  Staunton 
Spectator,  478 ;  allusion  to,  509. 

Stuart,  Lieut.-Col.,  (Rebel.)  at  Bull  Run,  543-4. 

Stuart,  Gen.  J.  E.  B.,  at  Dranesville,  626. 

Sturgis,  Major,  579  ;  in  the  battle  of  Wilson's 
Creek,  580  to  582;  tries  to  reenforce  Mulligan,  487. 

Sumner,  Charles,  229  ;  231 ;  assault  on,  299. 

Sumter,  The  Privateer,  escapes  out  of  the 
Mississippi;  is  blockaded  at  Gibraltar,  602. 

Sweeny,  Gen.,  persuades  Lyon  to  attack  the 

Kebels  at  Wilson's  Creek,  579. 

Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  215. 
T. 

Taggart,  Col.  John  H.,  at  Dranesville,  626. 
Tallot,  Lieut.,  seDt  to  Washington  by  Major 

Anderson,  443. 

Taliaferro,  Col.,  at  Carrick's  Ford,  523. 

Taliaferro,  Gen.,  commands  the  Rebels  at  Nor- 
folk, 473 ;  said  to  have  been  drunk,  476. 

Tallmadge,  Gen.  Js.,  of  N*.  Y.,  his  proviso,  74. 

Tammany  Hall,  pro-Slavery  meeting  at,  126. 

Taney,  Roger  Brooke,  defends  Rev.  Jacob 
Gruber,  109;  appointment  as  Chief  Justice,  252;  on 
Dred  Scott,  253  to  257;  the  decision  identical  with  Cal- 
houn's theories,  259  ;  Judge  Curtis*  s  reply  t^  261-2. 

Tappan,  Arthur,  114;  116;  126. 

Tappan,  Lewis,  his  house  mobbed,  126. 

Tassells,  an  Indian,  hung  in  Georgia,  106. 

Taylor,  Gen.  Zachary,  in  Texas,  186;  defeats 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


647 


the  Mexicans,  1ST ;  nominated  for  President,  and  elec- 
ted, 192;  vote  received,  193;  inaugurated,  198;  199; 
200;  201;  Special  Message,  202;  Annual  Message,  202; 
communicates  the  California  Constitution,  203;  his 
death,  20S;  proclamation  against  filibustering,  269. 

Taylor,  John"  W.,  of  jST.  Y.,  75 ;  his  speech  on 

the  Missouri  question,  77;  73. 

Tennessee,  slave  population  in  1790,  36;  with- 
draws from  the  Charleston  Convention,  818 ;  refuses  to 
secede,  349;  population  in  1S60,  351 ;  her  answer  to  the 
President's  call,  459;  progress  of  Secession  in,  4S1  to 
4S4;  vote  on  Secession ;  the  'conservative1  party,  481 ; 
makes  a  convention  with  the  Conlederacy,  4S2 ;  Ordi- 
nance of  Secession,  4S2-3 ;  vote  on  separation,  483  ;  496 ; 
reign  of  terror  in,  514.    See  East  Tennessee. 

Texas,  reasons  for  its  Annexation,  G8 :  histori- 
cal sketch  of,  147-8;  early  efforts  to  purchase  it,  149; 
revolution  in,  150-1 ;  Webster  opposes  the  Annexation 
of,  152-8;  further  efforts  to  acquire  it,  154-8;  Whigs  in 
Congress  protest  against  Annexation,  159  ;  Van  Buren 
and  Clay  oppose  it,  161-4;  Col.  Benton  on,  165;  in- 
fluence of  the  question  on  the  Presidential  election, 
166-S;  Calhoun  favors  Annexation,  169  to  171 ;  Con- 
gressional, 171  to  174;  Annexation  consummated, 
175;  admitted  into  the  Union,  135-6;  209;  withdraws 
from  the  Dem.  Convention,  315;  Houston  and  Runnells, 
339;  secession  of,  and  vote  thereon,  343 ;  population  in 
1860,351;  373;  Twiggs's  treason,  etc.,  413 ;  514-15. 

Thayer,  James  S.,  in  Tweddle  Hall,  392-  3  ;  396. 
Theodora,  The,  conveys  Mason  and  Slidell,  606. 
Thomas,  Adj't  Gen.,  accompanies  Gen.  Cameron 

on  his  Western  tour,  590;  615. 

Thomas,  Col.,  (Rebel,)  killed  at  Bull  Run,  543. 
Thomas,  Francis,  replies  to  Mr.  May,  564. 
Thomas,  Gen.,  crosses  the  Potomac,  235. 
Thomas.  Jesse  B.,  of  111.,  on  Missouri,  79. 
Thomas,  Philip  Francis,  appointed  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury,  411 ;  resigns,  412. 

Thompson,  Jeff.,  574;  is  defeated  at  Frederick- 
town,  Mo.,  591. 

Thompson,  Jacob,  fraud  discovered  in  his  De- 
partment, 410;  advises  the  traitors  of  the  Star  of  the 
West's  departure ;  his  resignation,  412 ;  435. 

Thompson,  Judge  James,  of  Pa.,  speaks  in  favor 

of  the  Fugitive  Slave  Law,  212. 

Thompson,  George,  127. 

Tipton,  Mo.,  Gen.  Fremont  is  visited  by  Gen. 

Cameron  and  suite  at,  590. 
Titus,  Col.,  of  Fla.,  a  Border  Ruffian,  243. 
Tod,  Gov.  David,  of  Ohio,  chosen  President  of 

the  Douglas  Convention,  318. 
Tompkins,  Lieut.  C.  H.,  dashes  into  Fairfax,  533. 
Toombs,  Robert,  of  da.,  382;  his  dispatch  to 

Georgia,  3S4;  3SS;  a  member  of  Davis's  Cabinet,  429. 
Topeka,  Kansas,  Free-State  Convention  at,  240; 

the  Legislature  at,  dispersed,  244. 
Toucey,  Isaac,  in  the  Dem.  Convention,  317. 
Townsend,  Col.  F.,  at  Little  Bethel,  529-30. 
Travis,  Col.,  put  to  death  in  Texas,  150. 
Trenholm,  Mr.,  of  S.  C,  offers  resolves  favoring 

*  cooperation,'  333-4. 
Trent,  The,  Mason  and  Slidell  abstracted  from, 

606;  Secretary  Welles  on  the  seizure,  606;  Great  Brit- 
ain's course,  607-S. 
Trescott,  Wm.  H.,  Garnett's  letter  to.  479-80. 
Troup,  Gov.,  of  Ga.,  sympathizes  with  the  Nul- 

lifiers,  100,  his  treatment  of  the  Indians,  103. 
True  American,  The,  on  the  President's  call,  457. 
Trumbull,  Lyman,  of  111.,  307;  568;  offers  an 

amendment  to  the  Confiscation  bill,  569. 
Truxillo,  landing  and  death  of  Walker  at,  277. 
Tuck,  Amos,  of  N.  H.,  a  member  of  the  '  Peace 

Conference,' 393;  resolutions  of,  399;  404. 
Turrill,  Joel,  of  N.  Y.,  145. 
Tuscarora,  U.  S.  Gunboat,  blockades  the 

Sumter,  602 ;  blockades  the  Nashville,  603. 
Tyler,  Col.,  routed  in  "West  Virginia,  525. 
Tyler,  Gen.,  at  Bull  Run,  539;  541-2. 


Tyler,  John,  sketch  of  his  political  life.  154  to 
156;  169;  174;  185;  Chairman  of  the  'Peace  Confer- 
ence,' 397;  402. 

Twiggs,  Gen.,  surrenders  in  Texas,  413  ;  442. 


TT. 

Union  Humane  Society,  The,  112. 
Unitarians,  The,  and  Slavery,  121. 
United  States  Telegraph,  The,  143. 
Universalists,  The,  and  Slavery,  121. 
Upton,  Mr.,  of  Va.,  in  XXXVIIth  Congress,  559. 
Utica,  N.  Y.,  Abolitionists  dispersed  at,  127. 
Utica  Observer,  The,  on  the  President's  call,  455-6. 


v. 

Vallandigham,  C.  L.,  of  Ohio,  catechises  old 
Brown,  293;  his  opinion  of  Brown,  294;  his  'Peace' 
proposition,  3S4-5;  remarks  at  the  Extra  Session,  cen- 
suring the  Administration,  561 ;  moves  provisos  to 
the  Army  Appropriation  bill,  etc.,  561 ;  562;  615;  629. 

Van  Buren,  John,  on  Fugitive  Slave  Act,  213. 

Van  Buren,  Martin,  influences  causing  his  de- 
feat in  the  Baltimore  Convention  of  1844.  69;  supports 
the  Tariff  of  1S2S,  91;  supplants  Calhoun  as  Vice-Presi- 
dent in  1332,  93 ;  allusion  to,  130 ;  makes  an  offer  to  Mex- 
ico for  Texas,  149;  his  reply  to  Gen.  Hunt,  151;  is  beat- 
en by  Gen.  Harrison,  154;  156  ;  159;  hisivplv  to  Wm. 
H.  Hammet,  161;  162;  163;  165  ;  letter  to  Waterbury 
and  others,  190 ;  nominated  for  President  by  the  Free- 
Soilers,  191 ;  to  Minister  Van  Ness,  269 ;  426. 

Vandever,  Mr.,  of  Iowa,  offers  a  resolution,  568. 

Vermont,  slave  population  of,  in  1790,  36;  326. 

Verplanck,  Gulian  C,  his  Tariff  bill,  101. 

Victor,  O.  J.,  reference  to  his  "  History  of  the 
Southern  Rebellion,"  350. 

Vienna,  Va,,  the  affair  at,  533-4 ;  reoccupied  by 
our  forces,  620. 

Vincennes,  U.  S.  Ship,  runs  aground,  603. 

Virginia,  17 ;  feeble  colonial  growth,  natural 
advantages  of,  etc.,  28;  negroes  first  introduced,  29; 
slave  population  of,  in  1790;  troops  furnished  during 
the  Revolution,  36;  her  territorial  claims,  37  :  her  deed 
of  cession  to  the  Confederation,  33;  legislative  resolves 
of  1739,84;  sympathizes  with  South  Carolina  in  her 
Nullification  defeat,  100;  first  Abolition  Society  in,  107; 
Convention  of  1829, 103  to  111 ;  resolution  of  the  Legis- 
lature on  the  suppression  of  Abolition,  123  ;  relations 
with  the  District  of  Columbia,  142;  Resolutions  of  '93 
and '99  indorsed  by  the  Democratic  Convention  of  1852, 
222;  withdrawal  of  delegates  from  the  Charleston  Con- 
vention, 31S;  the  position  of  Letcher  as  Governor,  340; 
State  unable  to  secede,  34S-9;  population  in  1S60,  351; 
Convention  of  to  ratify  the  Federal  Constitution,  357 ; 
calls  the  'Peace'  Conference,  396-7 ;  sends  new  Commis- 
sioners to  President  Lincoln,  452;  the  President's  reply 
to  the  Commissioners,  452 ;  Secession  of  the  State,  and 
the  Convention's  vote  thereon,  452;  her  answer  to  the 
President's  call  for  troops,  459;  emissaries  of,  sent  to- 
Baltimore,  462 ;  State  troops  seize  Harper's  Ferry,  462 ; 
she  threatens  Western  Maryland,  468;  commences 
hostilities  before  she  is  fairly  out  of  the  Union,  473; 
allusion  to  the  Convention  of,  486;  enters  into  a  Con- 
vention with  the  Southern  Confederacy,  477;  reign  of 
terror  in;  the  'situation'  considered  by  Messrs.  Stuart 
and  Mason,  478-9 ;  popular  vote  on  the  Ordinance  of 
Secession,  479;  M.  R.  H.  Garnett  on  Virginia  and 
"West  Virginia,  479-SO ;  sends  no  delegates  to  the  Ken- 
tucky 'Peace'  Convention,  495;  allusion  to  her  Dis- 
union, 510;  Convention  between  the  State  and  the 
Confederacy,  516;  Letcher  calls  out  the  militia  to  repel 
Federal  invasion,  516-17;  admitted  into  the  Confed- 
eracy, and  Gen.  Lee  placed  in  command  of  the  Confed- 
erate forces,  518;  boundary  between  West  and  Old 
Virginia,  527 ;  the  President's  Message  with  regard  to, 
557.  See  West  Virginia,  Norfolk,  Bethel,  Bull 
Run,  etc. 

Voyages,  Ocean,  by  8th  Census,  23 


648 


THE   AMERICAN  CONFLICT. 


w. 

Wade,  B.  F.,  of  Ohio,  231 ;  232;  speech,  315-6. 
"Walker,  Mr.,  of  Wise,  172  ;  195. 
Walker,  Robert  J.,  Governor  of  Kansas,  249. 
Walker.  L.  P.,  of  Ala.,  312  ;  313 ;  withdraws  at 

Charleston,  314 ;  speech  after  fall  of  Sumter,  458 ;  632. 
Walker,  William,  his  invasion  of  Nicaragua, 

and  his  death,  276-7. 

Wallace,  Col.  Lewis,  535. 

Walworth,  R.  H.,  at  Twedclle  Hall,  393-4. 

Washbcrne,  Mr.,  of  III,  305;  560. 

Washington,  George,  letter  to  Laurens,  19 ;  42  ; 
43;  letters  to  Lafayette,  51 ;  81;  82;  83  ;  his  fair  deal- 
ing with  the  Indians,  102;  254;  his  Foreign  Policy,  264 ; 
citation  from  his  Farewell  Address,  266 ;  allusion  to,  515. 

Washington,  Col.  John  A.,  captured  by  Brown's 

men,  290 ;  293 ;  killed  at  Cheat  Mountain,  526. 
Washington  City,  407 ;  frauds  of  Floyd  andBaily 

at,  410-11;  arrival  of  Col.  Hayne  at,  412;  inauguration 
of  President  Lincoln  at,  421-2;  the  dark  days  at,  470. 

Washington  Star,  The,  citation  from,  329. 

Waul,  T.  N.,  beaten  for  Congress,  339. 

Wayne,  Judge,  of  Ga.,  on  Bred  Scott,  259. 

Webster,  Daniel,  78  ;  his  reply  to  Hayne,  86- 
7;  101;  speech  at  Niblo's  Garden,  152  to  154;  155; 
192;  202;  speech  at  Abingdon,  199;  205-6;  207;  on  the 
Fugitive  Slave  Law.  220-21;  223;  260;  271 ;  letter  from 
Channin*;  to,  353;  370;  speech  at  Buffalo,  404  ;  511. 

Weed,  Thurlow,  editorial  by,  360-61. 

Weightman,  Col.,  killed  at  Wilson's  Creek,  582. 

Weston,  Mo.,  a  man  tarred  and  feathered  at,  239. 

Weston  Reporter,  The,  (Mo.,)  citation  from,  238. 

Westport,  Mo.,  Border  Ruffian  resolves  at,  239. 

Wentz,  Lieut.-Col.,  killed  at  Belmont,  597. 

Wesley,  John,  32 ;  70;  255,  501. 

West  Virginia,  479  ;  480  :  population  in  1860, 
480;  refuses  to  secede,  etc.,  518;  Pierpont  chosen  Gov- 
ernor of,  519 ;  Letcher's  Message,  519 ;  Federal  troops 
enter  the  State;  Porterfield's  Address,  521;  battle  of 
Philippi,  521-2 ;  of  Iiich  Mountain,  522-3 ;  Cheat  Moun- 
tain, 523  ;  Carnifex  Ferry,  525;  Guyandotte  destroyed, 
526;  boundary  between  West  and  Old  Virginia,  527. 

Wheeling,  Va,  meeting  and  Convention  at,  518. 

Wheeling  Intelligencer,  The,  citation  from,  522. 

Whitney,  Eli,  53;  early  life,  etc.,  58-9;  goes  to 
Georgia,  60;  invents  the  Cotton-Gin,  61;  letter  to  Ful- 
ton, 65;  his  death,  66. 

White,  J.  W.,  letter  from  T.  A.  Andrews  to,  367. 

White,  Lieut. -Col.,  at  Carnifte  Ferry,  525. 

White,  Major  Frank  J.,  591-2. 

Whitfield,  John  W.,  237;  240;  241;  sacks 
and  burns  Osawatomie,  245. 

Whittier,  John  G.,  poem  by,  630. 


Wigfall,  Lewis  T.,  of  Texas,  373 ;  448. 

Wilcox,  Col.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Wild  Cat,  Ky.,  Rebels  defeated  at,  615-16. 

Wilkes,  Capt.,  seizes  Mason  and  Slidell,  606-7. 

Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  fugitive-slave  case  at,  216. 

Williams,  Euphemia,  the  case  of,  216. 

Williams,  Col.  John  S.,  at  Piketon,  Ky.,  616. 

Wilmot,  David,  of  Pa.,  189;  319. 

Wilson,  Senator,  of  Mass.,  309;  571-2. 

Wilson's  Zouaves,  at  Santa  Rosa  Island,  602. 

Wilson's  Creek,  battle  of,  578  to  582. 

Wintiirop,  Major  Theo.,  killed  at  Bethel,  531. 

Winchester  Virginian,  The,  J.  M.  Mason  to,  478-9. 

Wise,  Henry  A.,  his  prescription  for  Abolition- 
ists, 123;  144;  146;  his  speech  in  the  House,  1842, 
158;  opinion  of  John  Brown,  293;  294;  329;  com- 
mands the  Rebels  in  West  Virginia,  522;  524;  out- 
ranked by  Floyd,  etc.,  525. 

AVISCONSIN,  215;  300;  301. 

Wistar,  Lieut.-Col.,  at  Ball's  Bluff,  623. 

Witherspoon,  Rev.  T.  S.,  128. 

Wool,  Gen.,  succeeds  Gen.  Butler,  531. 

Wood,  Col.  A  M.,  wounded  at  Bull  Run,  545. 

Woodward,  Judge  Geo.  W.,  speech  at  the  Phil- 
adelphia 'Peace'  meeting,  363  to  365;  406;  438. 

Worcester,  Mass.,  mob  violence  at,  126. 

Wrentham,  Mass.,  Abolition  petition  from,  144. 

Wright,  Col.  J.  V.,  killed  at  Belmont,  597-8. 

Wright,  Silas,  91;  nominated  for  Vice-Presi- 
dent, 164;  nominated  for  Governor  of  New  York,  166. 

Wyandot.  Kansas,  Convention  at,  250. 


Yancey,  Wm.  L.,  his  non-interference  resolve 
in  the  Convention  of  1843, 192;  allusion  to,  259;  with- 
draws from  the  Charleston  Convention,  314. 

Yates,  Edward,  on  Slavery,  70. 
Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  their  in- 
terview with  the  President,  466-7 ;  allusion,  472. 


z. 

Zagonyi,  Major,  his  speech  to  his  soldiers, 
591-2 ;  his  gallant  charge  into  Springfield,  592. 

Zeigler,  Col.,  orders  the  houses  of  Secessionists 
at  Guyandotte  to  be  burnt,  526. 

Zollicoffer,  Gen.,  occupies  Cumberland  Gap; 
his  dispatch  to  Magoffin,  613 ;  captures  Barboursville, 
Ky. ;  his  depredations  on  the  Kentuckians,  614;  at- 
tacks, and  is  driven  from,  Wild-Cat,  615. 


End  of  Yol.  I. 


WfELLS  BIIWRY  INC. 
ALTHAM,  MASS. 
AUG.  1958 


